Let-ter 1

_To Mrs. Saville, Eng-land._


St. Peters-burgh, Dec. 11th, 17—.


You will re-joice to hear that no dis-aster has ac-com-pan-ied the
com-mence-ment of an en-ter-prise which you have re-garded with such evil
fore-bod-ings.  I ar-rived here yes-ter-day, and my first task is to as-sure
my dear sis-ter of my wel-fare and in-creas-ing con-fid-ence in the suc-cess
of my un-der-tak-ing.

I am already far north of Lon-don, and as I walk in the streets of
Peters-burgh, I feel a cold north-ern breeze play upon my cheeks, which
braces my nerves and fills me with de-light.  Do you un-der-stand this
feel-ing?  This breeze, which has trav-elled from the re-gions to-wards
which I am ad-van-cing, gives me a fore-taste of those icy climes.
In-spir-ited by this wind of prom-ise, my day-dreams be-come more fer-vent
and vivid.  I try in vain to be per-suaded that the pole is the seat of
frost and des-ol-a-tion; it ever presents it-self to my ima-gin-a-tion as the
re-gion of beauty and de-light.  There, Mar-garet, the sun is for ever
vis-ible, its broad disk just skirt-ing the ho-ri-zon and dif-fus-ing a
per-petual splend-our.  There—for with your leave, my sis-ter, I will put
some trust in pre-ced-ing nav-ig-at-ors—there snow and frost are ban-ished;
and, sail-ing over a calm sea, we may be waf-ted to a land sur-pass-ing in
won-ders and in beauty every re-gion hitherto dis-covered on the hab-it-able
globe.  Its pro-duc-tions and fea-tures may be without ex-ample, as the
phe-nom-ena of the heav-enly bod-ies un-doubtedly are in those un-dis-covered
solitudes.  What may not be ex-pec-ted in a coun-try of eternal light?  I
may there dis-cover the won-drous power which at-tracts the needle and may
reg-u-late a thou-sand ce-les-tial ob-ser-va-tions that re-quire only this
voy-age to render their seem-ing ec-cent-ri-cit-ies con-sist-ent for ever.  I
shall sa-ti-ate my ar-dent curi-os-ity with the sight of a part of the world
never be-fore vis-ited, and may tread a land never be-fore im-prin-ted by
the foot of man. These are my en-tice-ments, and they are suf-fi-cient to
con-quer all fear of danger or death and to in-duce me to com-mence this
la-bor-i-ous voy-age with the joy a child feels when he em-barks in a little
boat, with his hol-i-day mates, on an ex-ped-i-tion of dis-cov-ery up his
nat-ive river. But sup-pos-ing all these con-jec-tures to be false, you
can-not con-test the in-es-tim-able be-ne-fit which I shall con-fer on all
man-kind, to the last gen-er-a-tion, by dis-cov-er-ing a pas-sage near the pole
to those coun-tries, to reach which at present so many months are
re-quis-ite; or by as-cer-tain-ing the secret of the mag-net, which, if at
all pos-sible, can only be ef-fected by an un-der-tak-ing such as mine.

These re-flec-tions have dis-pelled the agit-a-tion with which I began my
let-ter, and I feel my heart glow with an en-thu-si-asm which el-ev-ates me
to heaven, for noth-ing con-trib-utes so much to tran-quil-lise the mind as
a steady pur-pose—a point on which the soul may fix its in-tel-lec-tual
eye.  This ex-ped-i-tion has been the fa-vour-ite dream of my early years. I
have read with ar-dour the ac-counts of the vari-ous voy-ages which have
been made in the pro-spect of ar-riv-ing at the North Pa-cific Ocean
through the seas which sur-round the pole.  You may re-mem-ber that a
his-tory of all the voy-ages made for pur-poses of dis-cov-ery com-posed the
whole of our good Uncle Tho-mas’ lib-rary.  My edu-ca-tion was neg-lected,
yet I was pas-sion-ately fond of read-ing.  These volumes were my study
day and night, and my fa-mili-ar-ity with them in-creased that re-gret which
I had felt, as a child, on learn-ing that my father’s dy-ing in-junc-tion
had for-bid-den my uncle to al-low me to em-bark in a sea-far-ing life.

These vis-ions faded when I per-used, for the first time, those po-ets
whose ef-fu-sions en-tranced my soul and lif-ted it to heaven.  I also
be-came a poet and for one year lived in a para-dise of my own cre-ation;
I ima-gined that I also might ob-tain a niche in the temple where the
names of Homer and Shakespeare are con-sec-rated.  You are well
ac-quain-ted with my fail-ure and how heav-ily I bore the dis-ap-point-ment.
But just at that time I in-her-ited the for-tune of my cousin, and my
thoughts were turned into the chan-nel of their earlier bent.

Six years have passed since I re-solved on my present un-der-tak-ing.  I
can, even now, re-mem-ber the hour from which I ded-ic-ated my-self to this
great en-ter-prise.  I com-menced by in-ur-ing my body to hard-ship.  I
ac-com-pan-ied the whale-fish-ers on sev-eral ex-ped-i-tions to the North Sea;
I vol-un-tar-ily en-dured cold, fam-ine, thirst, and want of sleep; I of-ten
worked harder than the com-mon sail-ors dur-ing the day and de-voted my
nights to the study of math-em-at-ics, the the-ory of medi-cine, and those
branches of phys-ical sci-ence from which a naval ad-ven-turer might de-rive
the greatest prac-tical ad-vant-age.  Twice I ac-tu-ally hired my-self as an
un-der-mate in a Green-land whaler, and ac-quit-ted my-self to ad-mir-a-tion. I
must own I felt a little proud when my cap-tain offered me the second
dig-nity in the ves-sel and en-treated me to re-main with the greatest
earn-est-ness, so valu-able did he con-sider my ser-vices.

And now, dear Mar-garet, do I not de-serve to ac-com-plish some great pur-pose?
My life might have been passed in ease and lux-ury, but I pre-ferred glory to
every en-tice-ment that wealth placed in my path. Oh, that some en-cour-aging
voice would an-swer in the af-firm-at-ive! My cour-age and my res-ol-u-tion is
firm; but my hopes fluc-tu-ate, and my spir-its are of-ten de-pressed. I am
about to pro-ceed on a long and dif-fi-cult voy-age, the emer-gen-cies of which
will de-mand all my forti-tude: I am re-quired not only to raise the spir-its
of oth-ers, but some-times to sus-tain my own, when theirs are fail-ing.

This is the most fa-vour-able period for trav-el-ling in Rus-sia.  They fly
quickly over the snow in their sledges; the mo-tion is pleas-ant, and, in
my opin-ion, far more agree-able than that of an Eng-lish stage-coach.  The
cold is not ex-cess-ive, if you are wrapped in furs—a dress which I have
already ad-op-ted, for there is a great dif-fer-ence between walk-ing the
deck and re-main-ing seated mo-tion-less for hours, when no ex-er-cise
pre-vents the blood from ac-tu-ally freez-ing in your veins.  I have no
am-bi-tion to lose my life on the post-road between St. Peters-burgh and
Archangel.

I shall de-part for the lat-ter town in a fort-night or three weeks; and my
in-ten-tion is to hire a ship there, which can eas-ily be done by pay-ing the
in-sur-ance for the owner, and to en-gage as many sail-ors as I think ne-ces-sary
among those who are ac-cus-tomed to the whale-fish-ing. I do not in-tend to
sail un-til the month of June; and when shall I re-turn? Ah, dear sis-ter, how
can I an-swer this ques-tion? If I suc-ceed, many, many months, per-haps years,
will pass be-fore you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again soon,
or never.

Farewell, my dear, ex-cel-lent Mar-garet. Heaven shower down bless-ings on you,
and save me, that I may again and again testify my grat-it-ude for all your
love and kind-ness.

Your af-fec-tion-ate brother,

R. Walton






Let-ter 2




_To Mrs. Saville, Eng-land._


Archangel, 28th March, 17—.


How slowly the time passes here, en-com-passed as I am by frost and snow!
Yet a second step is taken to-wards my en-ter-prise.  I have hired a
ves-sel and am oc-cu-pied in col-lect-ing my sail-ors; those whom I have
already en-gaged ap-pear to be men on whom I can de-pend and are cer-tainly
pos-sessed of daunt-less cour-age.

But I have one want which I have never yet been able to sat-isfy, and the
ab-sence of the ob-ject of which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no
friend, Mar-garet: when I am glow-ing with the en-thu-si-asm of suc-cess, there
will be none to par-ti-cip-ate my joy; if I am as-sailed by dis-ap-point-ment, no
one will en-deav-our to sus-tain me in de-jec-tion. I shall com-mit my thoughts
to pa-per, it is true; but that is a poor me-dium for the com-mu-nic-a-tion of
feel-ing. I de-sire the com-pany of a man who could sym-path-ise with me, whose
eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me ro-mantic, my dear sis-ter, but I
bit-terly feel the want of a friend. I have no one near me, gentle yet
cour-ageous, pos-sessed of a cul-tiv-ated as well as of a ca-pa-cious mind, whose
tastes are like my own, to ap-prove or amend my plans. How would such a
friend re-pair the faults of your poor brother! I am too ar-dent in ex-e-cu-tion
and too im-pa-tient of dif-fi-culties. But it is a still greater evil to me
that I am self-edu-cated: for the first four-teen years of my life I ran wild
on a com-mon and read noth-ing but our Uncle Tho-mas’ books of voy-ages.
At that age I be-came ac-quain-ted with the cel-eb-rated po-ets of our own
coun-try; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to de-rive its
most im-port-ant be-ne-fits from such a con-vic-tion that I per-ceived the
ne-ces-sity of be-com-ing ac-quain-ted with more lan-guages than that of my nat-ive
coun-try. Now I am twenty-eight and am in real-ity more il-lit-er-ate than many
school-boys of fif-teen. It is true that I have thought more and that my
day-dreams are more ex-ten-ded and mag-ni-fi-cent, but they want (as the paint-ers
call it) _keep-ing;_ and I greatly need a friend who would have sense
enough not to des-pise me as ro-mantic, and af-fec-tion enough for me to
en-deav-our to reg-u-late my mind.

Well, these are use-less com-plaints; I shall cer-tainly find no friend on the
wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among mer-chants and sea-men. Yet
some feel-ings, un-al-lied to the dross of hu-man nature, beat even in these
rugged bos-oms. My lieu-ten-ant, for in-stance, is a man of won-der-ful cour-age
and en-ter-prise; he is madly de-sirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase
more char-ac-ter-ist-ic-ally, of ad-vance-ment in his pro-fes-sion. He is an
Eng-lish-man, and in the midst of na-tional and pro-fes-sional pre-ju-dices,
un-softened by cul-tiv-a-tion, re-tains some of the noblest en-dow-ments of
hu-man-ity. I first be-came ac-quain-ted with him on board a whale ves-sel;
find-ing that he was un-em-ployed in this city, I eas-ily en-gaged him to as-sist
in my en-ter-prise.

The mas-ter is a per-son of an ex-cel-lent dis-pos-i-tion and is re-mark-able in the
ship for his gen-tle-ness and the mild-ness of his dis-cip-line. This
cir-cum-stance, ad-ded to his well-known in-teg-rity and daunt-less cour-age, made
me very de-sirous to en-gage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years
spent un-der your gentle and fem-in-ine foster-age, has so re-fined the
ground-work of my char-ac-ter that I can-not over-come an in-tense dis-taste to
the usual bru-tal-ity ex-er-cised on board ship: I have never be-lieved it to be
ne-ces-sary, and when I heard of a mar-iner equally noted for his kind-li-ness
of heart and the re-spect and obed-i-ence paid to him by his crew, I felt
my-self pe-cu-li-arly for-tu-nate in be-ing able to se-cure his ser-vices. I heard
of him first in rather a ro-mantic man-ner, from a lady who owes to him the
hap-pi-ness of her life. This, briefly, is his story. Some years ago he loved
a young Rus-sian lady of mod-er-ate for-tune, and hav-ing amassed a con-sid-er-able
sum in prize-money, the father of the girl con-sen-ted to the match. He saw
his mis-tress once be-fore the destined ce-re-mony; but she was bathed in
tears, and throw-ing her-self at his feet, en-treated him to spare her,
con-fess-ing at the same time that she loved an-other, but that he was poor,
and that her father would never con-sent to the union. My gen-er-ous friend
re-as-sured the sup-pli-ant, and on be-ing in-formed of the name of her lover,
in-stantly aban-doned his pur-suit. He had already bought a farm with his
money, on which he had de-signed to pass the re-mainder of his life; but he
be-stowed the whole on his rival, to-gether with the re-mains of his
prize-money to pur-chase stock, and then him-self so-li-cited the young
wo-man’s father to con-sent to her mar-riage with her lover. But the old
man de-cidedly re-fused, think-ing him-self bound in hon-our to my friend, who,
when he found the father in-ex-or-able, quit-ted his coun-try, nor re-turned
un-til he heard that his former mis-tress was mar-ried ac-cord-ing to her
in-clin-a-tions. “What a noble fel-low!” you will ex-claim. He is
so; but then he is wholly un-educated: he is as si-lent as a Turk, and a kind
of ig-nor-ant care-less-ness at-tends him, which, while it renders his con-duct
the more as-ton-ish-ing, de-tracts from the in-terest and sym-pathy which
oth-er-wise he would com-mand.

Yet do not sup-pose, be-cause I com-plain a little or be-cause I can
con-ceive a con-sol-a-tion for my toils which I may never know, that I am
waver-ing in my res-ol-u-tions.  Those are as fixed as fate, and my voy-age
is only now delayed un-til the weather shall per-mit my em-bark-a-tion.  The
winter has been dread-fully severe, but the spring prom-ises well, and it
is con-sidered as a re-mark-ably early sea-son, so that per-haps I may sail
sooner than I ex-pec-ted.  I shall do noth-ing rashly:  you know me
suf-fi-ciently to con-fide in my prudence and con-sid-er-ate-ness whenever the
safety of oth-ers is com-mit-ted to my care.

I can-not de-scribe to you my sen-sa-tions on the near pro-spect of my
un-der-tak-ing.  It is im-possible to com-mu-nic-ate to you a con-cep-tion of
the trem-bling sen-sa-tion, half pleas-ur-able and half fear-ful, with which
I am pre-par-ing to de-part.  I am go-ing to un-ex-plored re-gions, to “the
land of mist and snow,” but I shall kill no al-batross; there-fore do not
be alarmed for my safety or if I should come back to you as worn and
woe-ful as the “An-cient Mar-iner.”  You will smile at my al-lu-sion, but I
will dis-close a secret.  I have of-ten at-trib-uted my at-tach-ment to, my
pas-sion-ate en-thu-si-asm for, the dan-ger-ous mys-ter-ies of ocean to that
pro-duc-tion of the most ima-gin-at-ive of mod-ern po-ets.  There is some-thing
at work in my soul which I do not un-der-stand.  I am prac-tic-ally
in-dus-tri-ous—painstak-ing, a work-man to ex-ecute with per-sever-ance and
la-bour—but be-sides this there is a love for the mar-vel-lous, a be-lief
in the mar-vel-lous, in-ter-twined in all my pro-jects, which hur-ries me out
of the com-mon path-ways of men, even to the wild sea and un-vis-ited
re-gions I am about to ex-plore.

But to re-turn to dearer con-sid-er-a-tions. Shall I meet you again, after
hav-ing tra-versed im-mense seas, and re-turned by the most south-ern cape of
Africa or Amer-ica?  I dare not ex-pect such suc-cess, yet I can-not bear to
look on the re-verse of the pic-ture.  Continue for the present to write to
me by every op-por-tun-ity: I may re-ceive your let-ters on some oc-ca-sions when
I need them most to sup-port my spir-its.  I love you very ten-derly. 
Re-mem-ber me with af-fec-tion, should you never hear from me again.

Your af-fec-tion-ate brother,
  Robert Walton






Let-ter 3




_To Mrs. Saville, Eng-land._


July 7th, 17—.


My dear Sister,

I write a few lines in haste to say that I am safe—and well ad-vanced
on my voy-age.  This let-ter will reach Eng-land by a mer-chant-man now on
its home-ward voy-age from Archangel; more for-tu-nate than I, who may not
see my nat-ive land, per-haps, for many years.  I am, how-ever, in good
spir-its:  my men are bold and ap-par-ently firm of pur-pose, nor do the
float-ing sheets of ice that con-tinu-ally pass us, in-dic-at-ing the dangers
of the re-gion to-wards which we are ad-van-cing, ap-pear to dis-may them. We
have already reached a very high lat-it-ude; but it is the height of
sum-mer, and al-though not so warm as in Eng-land, the south-ern gales,
which blow us speedily to-wards those shores which I so ar-dently de-sire
to at-tain, breathe a de-gree of renov-at-ing warmth which I had not
ex-pec-ted.

No in-cid-ents have hitherto be-fallen us that would make a fig-ure in a
let-ter.  One or two stiff gales and the spring-ing of a leak are
ac-ci-dents which ex-per-i-enced nav-ig-at-ors scarcely re-mem-ber to re-cord, and
I shall be well con-tent if noth-ing worse hap-pen to us dur-ing our voy-age.

Adieu, my dear Mar-garet.  Be as-sured that for my own sake, as well as
yours, I will not rashly en-counter danger.  I will be cool,
per-sever-ing, and prudent.

But suc-cess _shall_ crown my en-deav-ours.  Where-fore not?  Thus far I
have gone, tra-cing a se-cure way over the path-less seas, the very stars
them-selves be-ing wit-nesses and testi-mon-ies of my tri-umph.  Why not
still pro-ceed over the un-tamed yet obed-i-ent ele-ment?  What can stop the
de-term-ined heart and re-solved will of man?

My swell-ing heart in-vol-un-tar-ily pours it-self out thus.  But I must
fin-ish.  Heaven bless my be-loved sis-ter!

R.W.






Let-ter 4




_To Mrs. Saville, Eng-land._


August 5th, 17—.


So strange an ac-ci-dent has happened to us that I can-not for-bear
re-cord-ing it, al-though it is very prob-able that you will see me be-fore
these pa-pers can come into your pos-ses-sion.

Last Monday (July 31st) we were nearly sur-roun-ded by ice, which closed
in the ship on all sides, scarcely leav-ing her the sea-room in which
she floated.  Our situ-ation was some-what dan-ger-ous, es-pe-cially as we
were com-passed round by a very thick fog.  We ac-cord-ingly lay to,
hop-ing that some change would take place in the at-mo-sphere and weather.

About two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we be-held, stretched out
in every dir-ec-tion, vast and ir-reg-u-lar plains of ice, which seemed to
have no end.  Some of my com-rades groaned, and my own mind began to
grow watch-ful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight sud-denly
at-trac-ted our at-ten-tion and di-ver-ted our so-li-citude from our own
situ-ation.  We per-ceived a low car-riage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by
dogs, pass on to-wards the north, at the dis-tance of half a mile; a
be-ing which had the shape of a man, but ap-par-ently of gi-gantic stature,
sat in the sledge and guided the dogs.  We watched the rapid pro-gress
of the trav-el-ler with our tele-scopes un-til he was lost among the
dis-tant in-equal-it-ies of the ice.

This ap-pear-ance ex-cited our un-qual-i-fied won-der. We were, as we be-lieved,
many hun-dred miles from any land; but this ap-par-i-tion seemed to de-note that
it was not, in real-ity, so dis-tant as we had sup-posed. Shut in, how-ever, by
ice, it was im-possible to fol-low his track, which we had ob-served with the
greatest at-ten-tion.

About two hours after this oc-cur-rence we heard the ground sea, and be-fore
night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, how-ever, lay to un-til the
morn-ing, fear-ing to en-counter in the dark those large loose masses which
float about after the break-ing up of the ice. I profited of this time to
rest for a few hours.

In the morn-ing, how-ever, as soon as it was light, I went upon deck and
found all the sail-ors busy on one side of the ves-sel, ap-par-ently
talk-ing to someone in the sea.  It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we
had seen be-fore, which had drif-ted to-wards us in the night on a large
frag-ment of ice.  Only one dog re-mained alive; but there was a hu-man
be-ing within it whom the sail-ors were per-suad-ing to enter the ves-sel.
He was not, as the other trav-el-ler seemed to be, a sav-age in-hab-it-ant of
some un-dis-covered is-land, but a European.  When I ap-peared on deck the
mas-ter said, “Here is our cap-tain, and he will not al-low you to per-ish
on the open sea.”

On per-ceiv-ing me, the stranger ad-dressed me in Eng-lish, al-though with a
for-eign ac-cent.  “Be-fore I come on board your ves-sel,” said he,
“will you have the kind-ness to in-form me whither you are bound?”

You may con-ceive my as-ton-ish-ment on hear-ing such a ques-tion ad-dressed
to me from a man on the brink of de-struc-tion and to whom I should have
sup-posed that my ves-sel would have been a re-source which he would not
have ex-changed for the most pre-cious wealth the earth can af-ford.  I
replied, how-ever, that we were on a voy-age of dis-cov-ery to-wards the
north-ern pole.

Upon hear-ing this he ap-peared sat-is-fied and con-sen-ted to come on board.
Good God!  Mar-garet, if you had seen the man who thus ca-pit-u-lated for
his safety, your sur-prise would have been bound-less.  His limbs were
nearly frozen, and his body dread-fully ema-ci-ated by fa-tigue and
suf-fer-ing.  I never saw a man in so wretched a con-di-tion.  We at-temp-ted
to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quit-ted the fresh
air he fain-ted.  We ac-cord-ingly brought him back to the deck and
re-stored him to an-im-a-tion by rub-bing him with brandy and for-cing him to
swal-low a small quant-ity.  As soon as he showed signs of life we
wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chim-ney of the
kit-chen stove.  By slow de-grees he re-covered and ate a little soup,
which re-stored him won-der-fully.

Two days passed in this man-ner be-fore he was able to speak, and I of-ten
feared that his suf-fer-ings had de-prived him of un-der-stand-ing.  When he
had in some meas-ure re-covered, I re-moved him to my own cabin and
at-ten-ded on him as much as my duty would per-mit.  I never saw a more
in-ter-est-ing creature:  his eyes have gen-er-ally an ex-pres-sion of
wild-ness, and even mad-ness, but there are mo-ments when, if any-one
per-forms an act of kind-ness to-wards him or does him any the most
tri-fling ser-vice, his whole coun-ten-ance is lighted up, as it were, with
a beam of be-ne-vol-ence and sweet-ness that I never saw equalled.  But he
is gen-er-ally mel-an-choly and des-pair-ing, and some-times he gnashes his
teeth, as if im-pa-tient of the weight of woes that op-presses him.

When my guest was a little re-covered I had great trouble to keep off
the men, who wished to ask him a thou-sand ques-tions; but I would not
al-low him to be tor-men-ted by their idle curi-os-ity, in a state of body
and mind whose res-tor-a-tion evid-ently de-pended upon en-tire re-pose.
Once, how-ever, the lieu-ten-ant asked why he had come so far upon the ice
in so strange a vehicle.

His coun-ten-ance in-stantly as-sumed an as-pect of the deep-est gloom, and
he replied, “To seek one who fled from me.”

“And did the man whom you pur-sued travel in the same fash-ion?”

“Yes.”

“Then I fancy we have seen him, for the day be-fore we picked you up we
saw some dogs draw-ing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice.”

This aroused the stranger’s at-ten-tion, and he asked a mul-ti-tude of
ques-tions con-cern-ing the route which the dæ-mon, as he called him, had
pur-sued.  Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, “I have,
doubt-less, ex-cited your curi-os-ity, as well as that of these good
people; but you are too con-sid-er-ate to make in-quir-ies.”

“Cer-tainly; it would in-deed be very im-per-tin-ent and in-hu-man in me to
trouble you with any in-quis-it-ive-ness of mine.”

“And yet you res-cued me from a strange and per-il-ous situ-ation; you have
be-ne-vol-ently re-stored me to life.”

Soon after this he in-quired if I thought that the break-ing up of the
ice had des-troyed the other sledge.  I replied that I could not an-swer
with any de-gree of cer-tainty, for the ice had not broken un-til near
mid-night, and the trav-el-ler might have ar-rived at a place of safety
be-fore that time; but of this I could not judge.

From this time a new spirit of life an-im-ated the de-cay-ing frame of the
stranger. He mani-fes-ted the greatest eager-ness to be upon deck to watch for
the sledge which had be-fore ap-peared; but I have per-suaded him to re-main in
the cabin, for he is far too weak to sus-tain the raw-ness of the at-mo-sphere.
I have prom-ised that someone should watch for him and give him in-stant
no-tice if any new ob-ject should ap-pear in sight.

Such is my journal of what relates to this strange oc-cur-rence up to the
present day.  The stranger has gradu-ally im-proved in health but is very
si-lent and ap-pears un-easy when any-one ex-cept my-self enters his cabin.
Yet his man-ners are so con-cili-at-ing and gentle that the sail-ors are all
in-ter-ested in him, al-though they have had very little com-mu-nic-a-tion
with him.  For my own part, I be-gin to love him as a brother, and his
con-stant and deep grief fills me with sym-pathy and com-pas-sion.  He must
have been a noble creature in his bet-ter days, be-ing even now in wreck
so at-tract-ive and ami-able.

I said in one of my let-ters, my dear Mar-garet, that I should find no friend
on the wide ocean; yet I have found a man who, be-fore his spirit had been
broken by misery, I should have been happy to have pos-sessed as the brother
of my heart.

I shall con-tinue my journal con-cern-ing the stranger at in-ter-vals,
should I have any fresh in-cid-ents to re-cord.




August 13th, 17—.


My af-fec-tion for my guest in-creases every day.  He ex-cites at once my
ad-mir-a-tion and my pity to an as-ton-ish-ing de-gree.  How can I see so
noble a creature des-troyed by misery without feel-ing the most poignant
grief?  He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cul-tiv-ated, and
when he speaks, al-though his words are culled with the choicest art,
yet they flow with rapid-ity and un-par-alleled elo-quence.

He is now much re-covered from his ill-ness and is con-tinu-ally on the deck,
ap-par-ently watch-ing for the sledge that pre-ceded his own. Yet, al-though
un-happy, he is not so ut-terly oc-cu-pied by his own misery but that he
in-terests him-self deeply in the pro-jects of oth-ers. He has fre-quently
con-versed with me on mine, which I have com-mu-nic-ated to him without
dis-guise. He entered at-tent-ively into all my ar-gu-ments in fa-vour of my
even-tual suc-cess and into every minute de-tail of the meas-ures I had taken
to se-cure it. I was eas-ily led by the sym-pathy which he evinced to use the
lan-guage of my heart, to give ut-ter-ance to the burn-ing ar-dour of my soul
and to say, with all the fer-vour that warmed me, how gladly I would
sac-ri-fice my for-tune, my ex-ist-ence, my every hope, to the fur-ther-ance of my
en-ter-prise. One man’s life or death were but a small price to pay for
the ac-quire-ment of the know-ledge which I sought, for the domin-ion I should
ac-quire and trans-mit over the ele-mental foes of our race. As I spoke, a
dark gloom spread over my listener’s coun-ten-ance. At first I
per-ceived that he tried to sup-press his emo-tion; he placed his hands be-fore
his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as I be-held tears trickle
fast from between his fin-gers; a groan burst from his heav-ing breast. I
paused; at length he spoke, in broken ac-cents: “Un-happy man! Do you
share my mad-ness? Have you drunk also of the in-tox-ic-at-ing draught? Hear me;
let me re-veal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!”

Such words, you may ima-gine, strongly ex-cited my curi-os-ity; but the
par-oxysm of grief that had seized the stranger over-came his weakened
powers, and many hours of re-pose and tran-quil con-ver-sa-tion were
ne-ces-sary to re-store his com-pos-ure.

Hav-ing conquered the vi-ol-ence of his feel-ings, he ap-peared to des-pise
him-self for be-ing the slave of pas-sion; and quelling the dark tyranny of
des-pair, he led me again to con-verse con-cern-ing my-self per-son-ally. He asked
me the his-tory of my earlier years. The tale was quickly told, but it
awakened vari-ous trains of re-flec-tion. I spoke of my de-sire of find-ing a
friend, of my thirst for a more in-tim-ate sym-pathy with a fel-low mind than
had ever fallen to my lot, and ex-pressed my con-vic-tion that a man could
boast of little hap-pi-ness who did not en-joy this bless-ing.

“I agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are
un-fash-ioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, bet-ter, dearer than
ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to
per-fec-tion-ate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend, the most
noble of hu-man creatures, and am en-titled, there-fore, to judge re-spect-ing
friend-ship. You have hope, and the world be-fore you, and have no cause for
des-pair. But I—I have lost everything and can-not be-gin life
anew.”

As he said this his coun-ten-ance be-came ex-press-ive of a calm, settled
grief that touched me to the heart.  But he was si-lent and presently
re-tired to his cabin.

Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he
does the beau-ties of nature.  The starry sky, the sea, and every sight
af-forded by these won-der-ful re-gions seem still to have the power of
el-ev-at-ing his soul from earth.  Such a man has a double ex-ist-ence:  he
may suf-fer misery and be over-whelmed by dis-ap-point-ments, yet when he
has re-tired into him-self, he will be like a ce-les-tial spirit that has a
halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ven-tures.

Will you smile at the en-thu-si-asm I ex-press con-cern-ing this di-vine
wan-derer?  You would not if you saw him.  You have been tutored and
re-fined by books and re-tire-ment from the world, and you are there-fore
some-what fas-ti-di-ous; but this only renders you the more fit to
ap-pre-ci-ate the ex-traordin-ary mer-its of this won-der-ful man.  So-me-times I
have en-deav-oured to dis-cover what qual-ity it is which he pos-sesses that
el-ev-ates him so im-meas-ur-ably above any other per-son I ever knew.  I
be-lieve it to be an in-tu-it-ive dis-cern-ment, a quick but never-fail-ing
power of judg-ment, a pen-et-ra-tion into the causes of things, un-equalled
for clear-ness and pre-ci-sion; add to this a fa-cil-ity of ex-pres-sion and a
voice whose var-ied in-ton-a-tions are soul-sub-du-ing mu-sic.




August 19th, 17—.


Yes-ter-day the stranger said to me, “You may eas-ily per-ceive, Cap-tain
Walton, that I have suffered great and un-par-alleled mis-for-tunes.  I had
de-term-ined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with
me, but you have won me to al-ter my de-term-in-a-tion.  You seek for
know-ledge and wis-dom, as I once did; and I ar-dently hope that the
grat-i-fic-a-tion of your wishes may not be a ser-pent to sting you, as mine
has been.  I do not know that the re-la-tion of my dis-asters will be
use-ful to you; yet, when I re-flect that you are pur-su-ing the same
course, ex-pos-ing your-self to the same dangers which have rendered me
what I am, I ima-gine that you may de-duce an apt moral from my tale, one
that may dir-ect you if you suc-ceed in your un-der-tak-ing and con-sole you
in case of fail-ure.  Pre-pare to hear of oc-cur-rences which are usu-ally
deemed mar-vel-lous.  Were we among the tamer scenes of nature I might
fear to en-counter your un-be-lief, per-haps your ri-dicule; but many things
will ap-pear pos-sible in these wild and mys-ter-i-ous re-gions which would
pro-voke the laughter of those un-ac-quain-ted with the ever-var-ied powers
of nature; nor can I doubt but that my tale con-veys in its series
in-ternal evid-ence of the truth of the events of which it is com-posed.”

You may eas-ily ima-gine that I was much grat-i-fied by the offered
com-mu-nic-a-tion, yet I could not en-dure that he should re-new his grief by
a re-cital of his mis-for-tunes.  I felt the greatest eager-ness to hear
the prom-ised nar-rat-ive, partly from curi-os-ity and partly from a strong
de-sire to ameli-or-ate his fate if it were in my power.  I ex-pressed
these feel-ings in my an-swer.

“I thank you,” he replied, “for your sym-pathy, but it is
use-less; my fate is nearly ful-filled.  I wait but for one event, and then I
shall re-pose in peace.  I un-der-stand your feel-ing,” con-tin-ued he,
per-ceiv-ing that I wished to in-ter-rupt him; “but you are mis-taken, my
friend, if thus you will al-low me to name you; noth-ing can al-ter my
des-tiny; listen to my his-tory, and you will per-ceive how ir-re-voc-ably it is
de-term-ined.”

He then told me that he would com-mence his nar-rat-ive the next day when I
should be at leis-ure. This prom-ise drew from me the warmest thanks. I have
re-solved every night, when I am not im-per-at-ively oc-cu-pied by my du-ties, to
re-cord, as nearly as pos-sible in his own words, what he has re-lated dur-ing
the day. If I should be en-gaged, I will at least make notes. This
ma-nu-script will doubt-less af-ford you the greatest pleas-ure; but to me, who
know him, and who hear it from his own lips—with what in-terest and
sym-pathy shall I read it in some fu-ture day! Even now, as I com-mence my
task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lus-trous eyes dwell on me
with all their mel-an-choly sweet-ness; I see his thin hand raised in
an-im-a-tion, while the lin-ea-ments of his face are ir-ra-di-ated by the soul
within. Strange and har-row-ing must be his story, fright-ful the storm which
em-braced the gal-lant ves-sel on its course and wrecked it—thus!





Chapter 1

I am by birth a Genevese, and my fam-ily is one of the most
dis-tin-guished of that re-pub-lic.  My an-cest-ors had been for many years
coun-sel-lors and syn-dics, and my father had filled sev-eral pub-lic
situ-ations with hon-our and repu-ta-tion.  He was re-spec-ted by all who
knew him for his in-teg-rity and in-defatig-able at-ten-tion to pub-lic
busi-ness.  He passed his younger days per-petu-ally oc-cu-pied by the
af-fairs of his coun-try; a vari-ety of cir-cum-stances had pre-ven-ted his
mar-ry-ing early, nor was it un-til the de-cline of life that he be-came a
hus-band and the father of a fam-ily.

As the cir-cum-stances of his mar-riage il-lus-trate his char-ac-ter, I can-not
re-frain from re-lat-ing them.  One of his most in-tim-ate friends was a
mer-chant who, from a flour-ish-ing state, fell, through nu-mer-ous
mis-chances, into poverty.  This man, whose name was Beaufort, was of a
proud and un-bend-ing dis-pos-i-tion and could not bear to live in poverty
and ob-li-vion in the same coun-try where he had formerly been
dis-tin-guished for his rank and mag-ni-fi-cence.  Hav-ing paid his debts,
there-fore, in the most hon-our-able man-ner, he re-treated with his
daugh-ter to the town of Lu-cerne, where he lived un-known and in
wretched-ness.  My father loved Beaufort with the truest friend-ship and
was deeply grieved by his re-treat in these un-for-tu-nate cir-cum-stances.
He bit-terly de-plored the false pride which led his friend to a con-duct
so little worthy of the af-fec-tion that united them.  He lost no time in
en-deav-our-ing to seek him out, with the hope of per-suad-ing him to be-gin
the world again through his credit and as-sist-ance.

Beaufort had taken ef-fec-tual meas-ures to con-ceal him-self, and it was ten
months be-fore my father dis-covered his abode. Over-joyed at this dis-cov-ery,
he hastened to the house, which was situ-ated in a mean street near the
Reuss. But when he entered, misery and des-pair alone wel-comed him. Beaufort
had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his for-tunes, but
it was suf-fi-cient to provide him with susten-ance for some months, and in
the mean-time he hoped to pro-cure some re-spect-able em-ploy-ment in a
mer-chant’s house. The in-ter-val was, con-sequently, spent in in-ac-tion;
his grief only be-came more deep and rank-ling when he had leis-ure for
re-flec-tion, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end
of three months he lay on a bed of sick-ness, in-cap-able of any ex-er-tion.

His daugh-ter at-ten-ded him with the greatest ten-der-ness, but she saw
with des-pair that their little fund was rap-idly de-creas-ing and that
there was no other pro-spect of sup-port.  But Caroline Beaufort
pos-sessed a mind of an un-com-mon mould, and her cour-age rose to sup-port
her in her ad-versity.  She pro-cured plain work; she plaited straw and
by vari-ous means con-trived to earn a pit-tance scarcely suf-fi-cient to
sup-port life.

Several months passed in this man-ner.  Her father grew worse; her time
was more en-tirely oc-cu-pied in at-tend-ing him; her means of sub-sist-ence
de-creased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leav-ing
her an orphan and a beg-gar.  This last blow over-came her, and she knelt
by Beaufort’s coffin weep-ing bit-terly, when my father entered the
cham-ber.  He came like a pro-tect-ing spirit to the poor girl, who
com-mit-ted her-self to his care; and after the in-ter-ment of his friend he
con-duc-ted her to Geneva and placed her un-der the pro-tec-tion of a
re-la-tion.  Two years after this event Caroline be-came his wife.

There was a con-sid-er-able dif-fer-ence between the ages of my par-ents, but
this cir-cum-stance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of de-voted
af-fec-tion.  There was a sense of justice in my father’s up-right mind
which rendered it ne-ces-sary that he should ap-prove highly to love
strongly.  Per-haps dur-ing former years he had suffered from the
late-dis-covered un-wor-thi-ness of one be-loved and so was dis-posed to set
a greater value on tried worth.  There was a show of grat-it-ude and
wor-ship in his at-tach-ment to my mother, dif-fer-ing wholly from the
dot-ing fond-ness of age, for it was in-spired by rev-er-ence for her
vir-tues and a de-sire to be the means of, in some de-gree, re-com-pens-ing
her for the sor-rows she had en-dured, but which gave in-ex-press-ible grace
to his be-ha-viour to her.  Everything was made to yield to her wishes
and her con-veni-ence.  He strove to shel-ter her, as a fair exotic is
sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to sur-round her
with all that could tend to ex-cite pleas-ur-able emo-tion in her soft and
be-ne-vol-ent mind.  Her health, and even the tran-quil-lity of her hitherto
con-stant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through.  Dur-ing
the two years that had elapsed pre-vi-ous to their mar-riage my father had
gradu-ally re-lin-quished all his pub-lic func-tions; and im-me-di-ately after
their union they sought the pleas-ant cli-mate of Italy, and the change
of scene and in-terest at-tend-ant on a tour through that land of won-ders,
as a res-tor-at-ive for her weakened frame.

From Italy they vis-ited Ger-many and France. I, their eld-est child, was born
at Naples, and as an in-fant ac-com-pan-ied them in their rambles. I re-mained
for sev-eral years their only child. Much as they were at-tached to each
other, they seemed to draw in-ex-haust-ible stores of af-fec-tion from a very
mine of love to be-stow them upon me. My mother’s tender caresses and
my father’s smile of be-ne-vol-ent pleas-ure while re-gard-ing me are my
first re-col-lec-tions. I was their plaything and their idol, and some-thing
bet-ter—their child, the in-no-cent and help-less creature be-stowed on
them by Heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose fu-ture lot it was in
their hands to dir-ect to hap-pi-ness or misery, ac-cord-ing as they ful-filled
their du-ties to-wards me. With this deep con-scious-ness of what they owed
to-wards the be-ing to which they had given life, ad-ded to the act-ive spirit
of ten-der-ness that an-im-ated both, it may be ima-gined that while dur-ing
every hour of my in-fant life I re-ceived a les-son of pa-tience, of char-ity,
and of self-con-trol, I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but
one train of en-joy-ment to me.

For a long time I was their only care. My mother had much de-sired to have a
daugh-ter, but I con-tin-ued their single off-spring. When I was about five
years old, while mak-ing an ex-cur-sion bey-ond the fron-ti-ers of Italy, they
passed a week on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their be-ne-vol-ent
dis-pos-i-tion of-ten made them enter the cot-tages of the poor. This, to my
mother, was more than a duty; it was a ne-ces-sity, a
pas-sion—re-mem-ber-ing what she had suffered, and how she had been
re-lieved—for her to act in her turn the guard-ian an-gel to the
af-flic-ted. Dur-ing one of their walks a poor cot in the fold-ings of a vale
at-trac-ted their no-tice as be-ing sin-gu-larly dis-con-sol-ate, while the num-ber
of half-clothed chil-dren gathered about it spoke of pen-ury in its worst
shape. One day, when my father had gone by him-self to Milan, my mother,
ac-com-pan-ied by me, vis-ited this abode. She found a peas-ant and his wife,
hard work-ing, bent down by care and la-bour, dis-trib-ut-ing a scanty meal to
five hungry babes. Among these there was one which at-trac-ted my mother far
above all the rest. She ap-peared of a dif-fer-ent stock. The four oth-ers were
dark-eyed, hardy little vag-rants; this child was thin and very fair. Her
hair was the bright-est liv-ing gold, and des-pite the poverty of her
cloth-ing, seemed to set a crown of dis-tinc-tion on her head. Her brow was
clear and ample, her blue eyes cloud-less, and her lips and the mould-ing of
her face so ex-press-ive of sens-ib-il-ity and sweet-ness that none could be-hold
her without look-ing on her as of a dis-tinct spe-cies, a be-ing heaven-sent,
and bear-ing a ce-les-tial stamp in all her fea-tures.

The peas-ant wo-man, per-ceiv-ing that my mother fixed eyes of won-der and
ad-mir-a-tion on this lovely girl, eagerly com-mu-nic-ated her his-tory. She was
not her child, but the daugh-ter of a Mil-anese no-ble-man. Her mother was a
Ger-man and had died on giv-ing her birth. The in-fant had been placed with
these good people to nurse: they were bet-ter off then. They had not been
long mar-ried, and their eld-est child was but just born. The father of their
charge was one of those Itali-ans nursed in the memory of the an-tique glory
of Italy—one among the _s-chiavi ognor fre-menti,_ who ex-er-ted
him-self to ob-tain the liberty of his coun-try. He be-came the vic-tim of its
weak-ness. Whether he had died or still lingered in the dun-geons of Aus-tria
was not known. His prop-erty was con-fis-cated; his child be-came an orphan and
a beg-gar. She con-tin-ued with her foster par-ents and bloomed in their rude
abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.

When my father re-turned from Milan, he found play-ing with me in the hall of
our villa a child fairer than pic-tured cherub—a creature who seemed
to shed ra-di-ance from her looks and whose form and mo-tions were lighter
than the chamois of the hills. The ap-par-i-tion was soon ex-plained. With his
per-mis-sion my mother pre-vailed on her rus-tic guard-i-ans to yield their
charge to her. They were fond of the sweet orphan. Her pres-ence had seemed
a bless-ing to them, but it would be un-fair to her to keep her in poverty
and want when Provid-ence af-forded her such power-ful pro-tec-tion. They
con-sul-ted their vil-lage priest, and the res-ult was that El-iza-beth Lavenza
be-came the in-mate of my par-ents’ house—my more than
sis-ter—the beau-ti-ful and ad-ored com-pan-ion of all my oc-cu-pa-tions and
my pleas-ures.

Every-one loved El-iza-beth.  The pas-sion-ate and al-most rev-er-en-tial
at-tach-ment with which all re-garded her be-came, while I shared it, my
pride and my de-light.  On the even-ing pre-vi-ous to her be-ing brought to
my home, my mother had said play-fully, “I have a pretty present for my
Victor—to-mor-row he shall have it.”  And when, on the mor-row, she
presen-ted El-iza-beth to me as her prom-ised gift, I, with child-ish
ser-i-ous-ness, in-ter-preted her words lit-er-ally and looked upon El-iza-beth
as mine—mine to pro-tect, love, and cher-ish.  All praises be-stowed on
her I re-ceived as made to a pos-ses-sion of my own.  We called each other
fa-mil-iarly by the name of cousin.  No word, no ex-pres-sion could body
forth the kind of re-la-tion in which she stood to me—my more than
sis-ter, since till death she was to be mine only.





Chapter 2

We were brought up to-gether; there was not quite a year dif-fer-ence in
our ages.  I need not say that we were strangers to any spe-cies of
dis-union or dis-pute.  Har-mony was the soul of our com-pan-ion-ship, and
the di-versity and con-trast that sub-sisted in our char-ac-ters drew us
nearer to-gether.  El-iza-beth was of a calmer and more con-cen-trated
dis-pos-i-tion; but, with all my ar-dour, I was cap-able of a more in-tense
ap-plic-a-tion and was more deeply smit-ten with the thirst for know-ledge.
She busied her-self with fol-low-ing the aer-ial cre-ations of the po-ets;
and in the majestic and won-drous scenes which sur-roun-ded our Swiss
home —the sub-lime shapes of the moun-tains, the changes of the sea-sons,
tem-pest and calm, the si-lence of winter, and the life and tur-bu-lence of
our Alpine sum-mers—she found ample scope for ad-mir-a-tion and de-light.
While my com-pan-ion con-tem-plated with a ser-i-ous and sat-is-fied spirit the
mag-ni-fi-cent ap-pear-ances of things, I de-lighted in in-vest-ig-at-ing their
causes.  The world was to me a secret which I de-sired to di-vine.
Curi-os-ity, earn-est re-search to learn the hid-den laws of nature,
glad-ness akin to rap-ture, as they were un-fol-ded to me, are among the
earli-est sen-sa-tions I can re-mem-ber.

On the birth of a second son, my ju-nior by seven years, my par-ents gave
up en-tirely their wan-der-ing life and fixed them-selves in their nat-ive
coun-try. We pos-sessed a house in Geneva, and a _cam-pag-ne_ on Bel-rive,
the east-ern shore of the lake, at the dis-tance of rather more than a
league from the city. We resided prin-cip-ally in the lat-ter, and the
lives of my par-ents were passed in con-sid-er-able se-clu-sion. It was my
tem-per to avoid a crowd and to at-tach my-self fer-vently to a few. I was
in-dif-fer-ent, there-fore, to my school-fel-lows in gen-eral; but I united
my-self in the bonds of the closest friend-ship to one among them. Henry
Cler-val was the son of a mer-chant of Geneva. He was a boy of sin-gu-lar
tal-ent and fancy. He loved en-ter-prise, hard-ship, and even danger for
its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chiv-alry and ro-mance.  He
com-posed heroic songs and began to write many a tale of en-chant-ment and
knightly ad-ven-ture. He tried to make us act plays and to enter into
mas-quer-ades, in which the char-ac-ters were drawn from the her-oes of
Ron-ces-valles, of the Round Table of King Ar-thur, and the chiv-al-rous
train who shed their blood to re-deem the holy sep-ulchre from the hands
of the in-fi-dels.

No hu-man be-ing could have passed a hap-pier child-hood than my-self.  My
par-ents were pos-sessed by the very spirit of kind-ness and in-dul-gence.
We felt that they were not the tyr-ants to rule our lot ac-cord-ing to
their caprice, but the agents and cre-at-ors of all the many de-lights
which we en-joyed.  When I mingled with other fam-il-ies I dis-tinctly
dis-cerned how pe-cu-li-arly for-tu-nate my lot was, and grat-it-ude as-sisted
the de-vel-op-ment of fi-lial love.

My tem-per was some-times vi-ol-ent, and my pas-sions vehe-ment; but by some
law in my tem-per-at-ure they were turned not to-wards child-ish pur-suits
but to an eager de-sire to learn, and not to learn all things
in-dis-crim-in-ately.  I con-fess that neither the struc-ture of lan-guages,
nor the code of gov-ern-ments, nor the polit-ics of vari-ous states
pos-sessed at-trac-tions for me.  It was the secrets of heaven and earth
that I de-sired to learn; and whether it was the out-ward sub-stance of
things or the in-ner spirit of nature and the mys-ter-i-ous soul of man
that oc-cu-pied me, still my in-quir-ies were dir-ec-ted to the meta-phys-ical,
or in its highest sense, the phys-ical secrets of the world.

Mean-while Cler-val oc-cu-pied him-self, so to speak, with the moral
re-la-tions of things.  The busy stage of life, the vir-tues of her-oes,
and the ac-tions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was
to be-come one among those whose names are re-cor-ded in story as the
gal-lant and ad-ven-tur-ous be-ne-fact-ors of our spe-cies.  The saintly soul
of El-iza-beth shone like a shrine-ded-ic-ated lamp in our peace-ful home.
Her sym-pathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of
her ce-les-tial eyes, were ever there to bless and an-im-ate us.  She was
the liv-ing spirit of love to soften and at-tract; I might have be-come
sul-len in my study, rough through the ar-dour of my nature, but that
she was there to sub-due me to a semb-lance of her own gen-tle-ness.  And
Cler-val—could aught ill en-trench on the noble spirit of Cler-val?  Yet
he might not have been so per-fectly hu-mane, so thought-ful in his
gen-er-os-ity, so full of kind-ness and ten-der-ness amidst his pas-sion for
ad-ven-tur-ous ex-ploit, had she not un-fol-ded to him the real love-li-ness of
be-ne-fi-cence and made the do-ing good the end and aim of his soar-ing
am-bi-tion.

I feel ex-quis-ite pleas-ure in dwell-ing on the re-col-lec-tions of child-hood,
be-fore mis-for-tune had tain-ted my mind and changed its bright vis-ions of
ex-tens-ive use-ful-ness into gloomy and nar-row re-flec-tions upon self. Besides,
in draw-ing the pic-ture of my early days, I also re-cord those events which
led, by in-sens-ible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would
ac-count to my-self for the birth of that pas-sion which af-ter-wards ruled my
des-tiny I find it arise, like a moun-tain river, from ig-noble and al-most
for-got-ten sources; but, swell-ing as it pro-ceeded, it be-came the tor-rent
which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.

Nat-ural philo-sophy is the genius that has reg-u-lated my fate; I de-sire,
there-fore, in this nar-ra-tion, to state those facts which led to my
pre-dilec-tion for that sci-ence. When I was thir-teen years of age we all went
on a party of pleas-ure to the baths near Thonon; the in-clem-ency of the
weather ob-liged us to re-main a day con-fined to the inn. In this house I
chanced to find a volume of the works of Cor-nelius Agrippa. I opened it
with apathy; the the-ory which he at-tempts to demon-strate and the won-der-ful
facts which he relates soon changed this feel-ing into en-thu-si-asm. A new
light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bound-ing with joy, I com-mu-nic-ated my
dis-cov-ery to my father. My father looked care-lessly at the title page of my
book and said, “Ah! Cor-nelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste
your time upon this; it is sad trash.”

If, in-stead of this re-mark, my father had taken the pains to ex-plain to me
that the prin-ciples of Agrippa had been en-tirely ex-ploded and that a mod-ern
sys-tem of sci-ence had been in-tro-duced which pos-sessed much greater powers
than the an-cient, be-cause the powers of the lat-ter were chi-mer-ical, while
those of the former were real and prac-tical, un-der such cir-cum-stances I
should cer-tainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have con-ten-ted my
ima-gin-a-tion, warmed as it was, by re-turn-ing with greater ar-dour to my
former stud-ies. It is even pos-sible that the train of my ideas would never
have re-ceived the fatal im-pulse that led to my ruin. But the curs-ory glance
my father had taken of my volume by no means as-sured me that he was
ac-quain-ted with its con-tents, and I con-tin-ued to read with the greatest
avid-ity.

When I re-turned home my first care was to pro-cure the whole works of this
au-thor, and af-ter-wards of Paracelsus and Al-bertus Mag-nus. I read and
stud-ied the wild fan-cies of these writers with de-light; they ap-peared to me
treas-ures known to few be-sides my-self. I have de-scribed my-self as al-ways
hav-ing been im-bued with a fer-vent long-ing to pen-et-rate the secrets of
nature. In spite of the in-tense la-bour and won-der-ful dis-cov-er-ies of mod-ern
philo-soph-ers, I al-ways came from my stud-ies dis-con-ten-ted and un-sat-is-fied.
Sir Isaac New-ton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child pick-ing
up shells be-side the great and un-ex-plored ocean of truth. Those of his
suc-cessors in each branch of nat-ural philo-sophy with whom I was ac-quain-ted
ap-peared even to my boy’s ap-pre-hen-sions as tyros en-gaged in the same
pur-suit.

The un-taught peas-ant be-held the ele-ments around him and was ac-quain-ted
with their prac-tical uses.  The most learned philo-sopher knew little
more.  He had par-tially un-veiled the face of Nature, but her im-mor-tal
lin-ea-ments were still a won-der and a mys-tery.  He might dis-sect,
ana-tom-ise, and give names; but, not to speak of a fi-nal cause, causes
in their sec-ond-ary and ter-tiary grades were ut-terly un-known to him.  I
had gazed upon the for-ti-fic-a-tions and im-ped-i-ments that seemed to keep
hu-man be-ings from en-ter-ing the cit-adel of nature, and rashly and
ig-nor-antly I had re-pined.

But here were books, and here were men who had pen-et-rated deeper and knew
more. I took their word for all that they averred, and I be-came their
dis-ciple. It may ap-pear strange that such should arise in the eight-eenth
cen-tury; but while I fol-lowed the routine of edu-ca-tion in the schools of
Geneva, I was, to a great de-gree, self-taught with re-gard to my fa-vour-ite
stud-ies. My father was not sci-entific, and I was left to struggle with a
child’s blind-ness, ad-ded to a stu-dent’s thirst for know-ledge.
Under the guid-ance of my new pre-cept-ors I entered with the greatest
di-li-gence into the search of the philo-sopher’s stone and the elixir
of life; but the lat-ter soon ob-tained my un-di-vided at-ten-tion. Wealth was an
in-ferior ob-ject, but what glory would at-tend the dis-cov-ery if I could
ban-ish dis-ease from the hu-man frame and render man in-vul-ner-able to any but
a vi-ol-ent death!

Nor were these my only vis-ions. The rais-ing of ghosts or dev-ils was a
prom-ise lib-er-ally ac-cor-ded by my fa-vour-ite au-thors, the ful-fil-ment of which
I most eagerly sought; and if my in-cant-a-tions were al-ways un-suc-cess-ful, I
at-trib-uted the fail-ure rather to my own in-ex-per-i-ence and mis-take than to a
want of skill or fi-del-ity in my in-struct-ors. And thus for a time I was
oc-cu-pied by ex-ploded sys-tems, ming-ling, like an un-adept, a thou-sand
con-tra-dict-ory the-or-ies and flounder-ing des-per-ately in a very slough of
mul-ti-far-i-ous know-ledge, guided by an ar-dent ima-gin-a-tion and child-ish
reas-on-ing, till an ac-ci-dent again changed the cur-rent of my ideas.

When I was about fif-teen years old we had re-tired to our house near
Bel-rive, when we wit-nessed a most vi-ol-ent and ter-rible thun-der-storm. It
ad-vanced from be-hind the moun-tains of Jura, and the thun-der burst at once
with fright-ful loud-ness from vari-ous quar-ters of the heav-ens. I re-mained,
while the storm las-ted, watch-ing its pro-gress with curi-os-ity and de-light.
As I stood at the door, on a sud-den I be-held a stream of fire is-sue from an
old and beau-ti-ful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so
soon as the dazzling light van-ished, the oak had dis-ap-peared, and noth-ing
re-mained but a blas-ted stump. When we vis-ited it the next morn-ing, we found
the tree shattered in a sin-gu-lar man-ner. It was not splintered by the
shock, but en-tirely re-duced to thin rib-bons of wood. I never be-held
any-thing so ut-terly des-troyed.

Be-fore this I was not un-ac-quain-ted with the more ob-vi-ous laws of
elec-tri-city.  On this oc-ca-sion a man of great re-search in nat-ural
philo-sophy was with us, and ex-cited by this cata-strophe, he entered on
the ex-plan-a-tion of a the-ory which he had formed on the sub-ject of
elec-tri-city and gal-van-ism, which was at once new and as-ton-ish-ing to me.
All that he said threw greatly into the shade Cor-nelius Agrippa,
Al-bertus Mag-nus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my ima-gin-a-tion; but by
some fatal-ity the over-throw of these men dis-in-clined me to pur-sue my
ac-cus-tomed stud-ies.  It seemed to me as if noth-ing would or could ever
be known.  All that had so long en-gaged my at-ten-tion sud-denly grew
despic-able.  By one of those caprices of the mind which we are per-haps
most sub-ject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former
oc-cu-pa-tions, set down nat-ural his-tory and all its pro-geny as a de-formed
and abort-ive cre-ation, and en-ter-tained the greatest dis-dain for a
would-be sci-ence which could never even step within the threshold of
real know-ledge.  In this mood of mind I betook my-self to the
math-em-at-ics and the branches of study ap-per-tain-ing to that sci-ence as
be-ing built upon se-cure found-a-tions, and so worthy of my con-sid-er-a-tion.

Thus strangely are our souls con-struc-ted, and by such slight lig-a-ments
are we bound to prosper-ity or ruin.  When I look back, it seems to me
as if this al-most mi-ra-cu-lous change of in-clin-a-tion and will was the
im-me-di-ate sug-ges-tion of the guard-ian an-gel of my life—the last ef-fort
made by the spirit of pre-ser-va-tion to avert the storm that was even
then hanging in the stars and ready to en-velop me.  Her vic-tory was
an-nounced by an un-usual tran-quil-lity and glad-ness of soul which
fol-lowed the re-lin-quish-ing of my an-cient and lat-terly tor-ment-ing
stud-ies.  It was thus that I was to be taught to as-so-ci-ate evil with
their pro-sec-u-tion, hap-pi-ness with their dis-reg-ard.

It was a strong ef-fort of the spirit of good, but it was in-ef-fec-tual.
Destiny was too po-tent, and her im-mut-able laws had de-creed my ut-ter and
ter-rible de-struc-tion.





Chapter 3

When I had at-tained the age of sev-en-teen my par-ents re-solved that I
should be-come a stu-dent at the uni-ver-sity of In-gol-stadt.  I had
hitherto at-ten-ded the schools of Geneva, but my father thought it
ne-ces-sary for the com-ple-tion of my edu-ca-tion that I should be made
ac-quain-ted with other cus-toms than those of my nat-ive coun-try.  My
de-par-ture was there-fore fixed at an early date, but be-fore the day
re-solved upon could ar-rive, the first mis-for-tune of my life
oc-curred—an omen, as it were, of my fu-ture misery.

El-iza-beth had caught the scar-let fever; her ill-ness was severe, and she was
in the greatest danger. Dur-ing her ill-ness many ar-gu-ments had been urged to
per-suade my mother to re-frain from at-tend-ing upon her. She had at first
yiel-ded to our en-treat-ies, but when she heard that the life of her
fa-vour-ite was men-aced, she could no longer con-trol her anxi-ety. She
at-ten-ded her sickbed; her watch-ful at-ten-tions tri-umphed over the ma-lig-nity
of the dis-tem-per—El-iza-beth was saved, but the con-sequences of this
im-prudence were fatal to her pre-server. On the third day my mother
sickened; her fever was ac-com-pan-ied by the most alarm-ing symp-toms, and the
looks of her med-ical at-tend-ants pro-gnost-ic-ated the worst event. On her
deathbed the forti-tude and be-nig-nity of this best of wo-men did not desert
her. She joined the hands of El-iza-beth and my-self. “My
chil-dren,” she said, “my firmest hopes of fu-ture hap-pi-ness were
placed on the pro-spect of your union. This ex-pect-a-tion will now be the
con-sol-a-tion of your father. El-iza-beth, my love, you must sup-ply my place to
my younger chil-dren. Alas! I re-gret that I am taken from you; and, happy
and be-loved as I have been, is it not hard to quit you all? But these are
not thoughts be-fit-ting me; I will en-deav-our to resign my-self cheer-fully to
death and will in-dulge a hope of meet-ing you in an-other world.”

She died calmly, and her coun-ten-ance ex-pressed af-fec-tion even in death.
I need not de-scribe the feel-ings of those whose dearest ties are rent
by that most ir-re-par-able evil, the void that presents it-self to the
soul, and the des-pair that is ex-hib-ited on the coun-ten-ance.  It is so
long be-fore the mind can per-suade it-self that she whom we saw every day
and whose very ex-ist-ence ap-peared a part of our own can have de-par-ted
for ever—that the bright-ness of a be-loved eye can have been
ex-tin-guished and the sound of a voice so fa-mil-iar and dear to the ear
can be hushed, never more to be heard.  These are the re-flec-tions of
the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the real-ity of the
evil, then the ac-tual bit-ter-ness of grief com-mences.  Yet from whom has
not that rude hand rent away some dear con-nec-tion?  And why should I
de-scribe a sor-row which all have felt, and must feel?  The time at
length ar-rives when grief is rather an in-dul-gence than a ne-ces-sity; and
the smile that plays upon the lips, al-though it may be deemed a
sac-ri-lege, is not ban-ished.  My mother was dead, but we had still
du-ties which we ought to per-form; we must con-tinue our course with the
rest and learn to think ourselves for-tu-nate whilst one re-mains whom the
spoiler has not seized.

My de-par-ture for In-gol-stadt, which had been de-ferred by these events,
was now again de-term-ined upon.  I ob-tained from my father a res-pite of
some weeks.  It ap-peared to me sac-ri-lege so soon to leave the re-pose,
akin to death, of the house of mourn-ing and to rush into the thick of
life.  I was new to sor-row, but it did not the less alarm me.  I was
un-will-ing to quit the sight of those that re-mained to me, and above
all, I de-sired to see my sweet El-iza-beth in some de-gree con-soled.

She in-deed veiled her grief and strove to act the com-forter to us all.
She looked stead-ily on life and as-sumed its du-ties with cour-age and
zeal.  She de-voted her-self to those whom she had been taught to call
her uncle and cous-ins.  Never was she so en-chant-ing as at this time,
when she re-called the sun-shine of her smiles and spent them upon us.
She for-got even her own re-gret in her en-deav-ours to make us for-get.

The day of my de-par-ture at length ar-rived.  Cler-val spent the last
even-ing with us.  He had en-deav-oured to per-suade his father to per-mit
him to ac-com-pany me and to be-come my fel-low stu-dent, but in vain.  His
father was a nar-row-minded trader and saw idle-ness and ruin in the
as-pir-a-tions and am-bi-tion of his son.  Henry deeply felt the mis-for-tune
of be-ing de-barred from a lib-eral edu-ca-tion.  He said little, but when
he spoke I read in his kind-ling eye and in his an-im-ated glance a
re-strained but firm re-solve not to be chained to the miser-able de-tails
of com-merce.

We sat late.  We could not tear ourselves away from each other nor
per-suade ourselves to say the word “Farewell!”  It was said, and we
re-tired un-der the pre-tence of seek-ing re-pose, each fancy-ing that the
other was de-ceived; but when at morn-ing’s dawn I des-cen-ded to the
car-riage which was to con-vey me away, they were all there—my father
again to bless me, Cler-val to press my hand once more, my El-iza-beth to
re-new her en-treat-ies that I would write of-ten and to be-stow the last
fem-in-ine at-ten-tions on her play-mate and friend.

I threw my-self into the chaise that was to con-vey me away and in-dulged in
the most mel-an-choly re-flec-tions.  I, who had ever been sur-roun-ded by
ami-able com-pan-ions, con-tinu-ally en-gaged in en-deav-our-ing to be-stow mu-tual
pleas-ure—I was now alone.  In the uni-ver-sity whither I was go-ing I
must form my own friends and be my own pro-tector.  My life had hitherto
been re-mark-ably se-cluded and do-mestic, and this had given me in-vin-cible
re-pug-nance to new coun-ten-ances.  I loved my broth-ers, El-iza-beth, and
Cler-val; these were “old fa-mil-iar faces,” but I be-lieved my-self
totally un-fit-ted for the com-pany of strangers.  Such were my re-flec-tions as
I com-menced my jour-ney; but as I pro-ceeded, my spir-its and hopes rose.  I
ar-dently de-sired the ac-quis-i-tion of know-ledge.  I had of-ten, when at home,
thought it hard to re-main dur-ing my youth cooped up in one place and had
longed to enter the world and take my sta-tion among other hu-man be-ings. 
Now my de-sires were com-plied with, and it would, in-deed, have been folly to
re-pent.

I had suf-fi-cient leis-ure for these and many other re-flec-tions dur-ing my
jour-ney to In-gol-stadt, which was long and fa-tiguing.  At length the
high white steeple of the town met my eyes.  I alighted and was
con-duc-ted to my sol-it-ary apart-ment to spend the even-ing as I pleased.

The next morn-ing I de-livered my let-ters of in-tro-duc-tion and paid a visit to
some of the prin-cipal pro-fess-ors.  Chance—or rather the evil
in-flu-ence, the An-gel of De-struc-tion, which as-ser-ted om-ni-po-tent sway over me
from the mo-ment I turned my re-luct-ant steps from my father’s
door—led me first to M. Kr-empe, pro-fessor of nat-ural philo-sophy.  He
was an un-couth man, but deeply im-bued in the secrets of his sci-ence. He
asked me sev-eral ques-tions con-cern-ing my pro-gress in the dif-fer-ent branches
of sci-ence ap-per-tain-ing to nat-ural philo-sophy.  I replied care-lessly, and
partly in con-tempt, men-tioned the names of my al-chem-ists as the prin-cipal
au-thors I had stud-ied.  The pro-fessor stared.  “Have you,” he
said, “really spent your time in study-ing such non-sense?”

I replied in the af-firm-at-ive.  “Every minute,” con-tin-ued M. Kr-empe with
warmth, “every in-stant that you have wasted on those books is ut-terly
and en-tirely lost.  You have burdened your memory with ex-ploded sys-tems
and use-less names.  Good God!  In what desert land have you lived,
where no one was kind enough to in-form you that these fan-cies which you
have so greed-ily im-bibed are a thou-sand years old and as musty as they
are an-cient?  I little ex-pec-ted, in this en-lightened and sci-entific
age, to find a dis-ciple of Al-bertus Mag-nus and Paracelsus.  My dear
sir, you must be-gin your stud-ies en-tirely anew.”

So say-ing, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of sev-eral books
treat-ing of nat-ural philo-sophy which he de-sired me to pro-cure, and
dis-missed me after men-tion-ing that in the be-gin-ning of the fol-low-ing
week he in-ten-ded to com-mence a course of lec-tures upon nat-ural
philo-sophy in its gen-eral re-la-tions, and that M. Wald-man, a fel-low
pro-fessor, would lec-ture upon chem-istry the al-tern-ate days that he
omit-ted.

I re-turned home not dis-ap-poin-ted, for I have said that I had long
con-sidered those au-thors use-less whom the pro-fessor rep-rob-ated; but I
re-turned not at all the more in-clined to re-cur to these stud-ies in any
shape.  M. Kr-empe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a
re-puls-ive coun-ten-ance; the teacher, there-fore, did not pre-pos-sess me in
fa-vour of his pur-suits.  In rather a too philo-soph-ical and con-nec-ted a
strain, per-haps, I have given an ac-count of the con-clu-sions I had come
to con-cern-ing them in my early years.  As a child I had not been
con-tent with the res-ults prom-ised by the mod-ern pro-fess-ors of nat-ural
sci-ence.  With a con-fu-sion of ideas only to be ac-coun-ted for by my
ex-treme youth and my want of a guide on such mat-ters, I had retrod the
steps of know-ledge along the paths of time and ex-changed the
dis-cov-er-ies of re-cent in-quirers for the dreams of for-got-ten al-chem-ists.
Besides, I had a con-tempt for the uses of mod-ern nat-ural philo-sophy.
It was very dif-fer-ent when the mas-ters of the sci-ence sought
im-mor-tal-ity and power; such views, al-though fu-tile, were grand; but now
the scene was changed.  The am-bi-tion of the in-quirer seemed to limit
it-self to the an-ni-hil-a-tion of those vis-ions on which my in-terest in
sci-ence was chiefly foun-ded.  I was re-quired to ex-change chi-meras of
bound-less grandeur for real-it-ies of little worth.

Such were my re-flec-tions dur-ing the first two or three days of my
res-id-ence at In-gol-stadt, which were chiefly spent in be-com-ing
ac-quain-ted with the loc-al-it-ies and the prin-cipal res-id-ents in my new
abode.  But as the en-su-ing week com-menced, I thought of the in-form-a-tion
which M. Kr-empe had given me con-cern-ing the lec-tures.  And al-though I
could not con-sent to go and hear that little con-ceited fel-low de-liver
sen-tences out of a pul-pit, I re-col-lec-ted what he had said of M.
Wald-man, whom I had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.

Partly from curi-os-ity and partly from idle-ness, I went into the lec-tur-ing
room, which M. Wald-man entered shortly after. This pro-fessor was very
un-like his col-league. He ap-peared about fifty years of age, but with an
as-pect ex-press-ive of the greatest be-ne-vol-ence; a few grey hairs covered his
temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. His per-son
was short but re-mark-ably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard.
He began his lec-ture by a re-capit-u-la-tion of the his-tory of chem-istry and
the vari-ous im-prove-ments made by dif-fer-ent men of learn-ing, pro-noun-cing
with fer-vour the names of the most dis-tin-guished dis-cover-ers. He then took
a curs-ory view of the present state of the sci-ence and ex-plained many of
its ele-ment-ary terms. After hav-ing made a few pre-par-at-ory ex-per-i-ments, he
con-cluded with a pan-egyric upon mod-ern chem-istry, the terms of which I
shall never for-get:

“The an-cient teach-ers of this sci-ence,” said he,
“prom-ised im-possib-il-it-ies and per-formed noth-ing. The mod-ern mas-ters
prom-ise very little; they know that metals can-not be trans-muted and that
the elixir of life is a chi-mera but these philo-soph-ers, whose hands seem
only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the mi-cro-scope or
cru-cible, have in-deed per-formed mir-acles. They pen-et-rate into the re-cesses
of nature and show how she works in her hid-ing-places. They as-cend into the
heav-ens; they have dis-covered how the blood cir-cu-lates, and the nature of
the air we breathe. They have ac-quired new and al-most un-lim-ited powers;
they can com-mand the thun-ders of heaven, mimic the earth-quake, and even
mock the in-vis-ible world with its own shad-ows.”

Such were the pro-fessor’s words—rather let me say such the words of
the fate—enounced to des-troy me.  As he went on I felt as if my soul
were grap-pling with a palp-able en-emy; one by one the vari-ous keys were
touched which formed the mech-an-ism of my be-ing; chord after chord was
soun-ded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one con-cep-tion,
one pur-pose.  So much has been done, ex-claimed the soul of
Franken-stein—more, far more, will I achieve; tread-ing in the steps
already marked, I will pi-on-eer a new way, ex-plore un-known powers, and
un-fold to the world the deep-est mys-ter-ies of cre-ation.

I closed not my eyes that night.  My in-ternal be-ing was in a state of
in-sur-rec-tion and tur-moil; I felt that or-der would thence arise, but I
had no power to pro-duce it.  By de-grees, after the morn-ing’s dawn,
sleep came.  I awoke, and my yes-ternight’s thoughts were as a dream.
There only re-mained a res-ol-u-tion to re-turn to my an-cient stud-ies and to
de-vote my-self to a sci-ence for which I be-lieved my-self to pos-sess a
nat-ural tal-ent.  On the same day I paid M. Wald-man a visit.  His
man-ners in private were even more mild and at-tract-ive than in pub-lic,
for there was a cer-tain dig-nity in his mien dur-ing his lec-ture which in
his own house was re-placed by the greatest af-fabil-ity and kind-ness.  I
gave him pretty nearly the same ac-count of my former pur-suits as I had
given to his fel-low pro-fessor.  He heard with at-ten-tion the little
nar-ra-tion con-cern-ing my stud-ies and smiled at the names of Cor-nelius
Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the con-tempt that M. Kr-empe had
ex-hib-ited. He said that “These were men to whose in-defatig-able zeal
mod-ern philo-soph-ers were in-debted for most of the found-a-tions of their
know-ledge.  They had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names
and ar-range in con-nec-ted clas-si-fic-a-tions the facts which they in a
great de-gree had been the in-stru-ments of bring-ing to light.  The
la-bours of men of genius, how-ever er-ro-neously dir-ec-ted, scarcely ever
fail in ul-ti-mately turn-ing to the solid ad-vant-age of man-kind.”  I
listened to his state-ment, which was de-livered without any pre-sump-tion
or af-fect-a-tion, and then ad-ded that his lec-ture had re-moved my
pre-ju-dices against mod-ern chem-ists; I ex-pressed my-self in meas-ured
terms, with the mod-esty and de-fer-ence due from a youth to his
in-structor, without let-ting es-cape (in-ex-per-i-ence in life would have
made me ashamed) any of the en-thu-si-asm which stim-u-lated my in-ten-ded
la-bours.  I re-ques-ted his ad-vice con-cern-ing the books I ought to
pro-cure.

“I am happy,” said M. Wald-man, “to have gained a
dis-ciple; and if your ap-plic-a-tion equals your abil-ity, I have no doubt of
your suc-cess. Chem-istry is that branch of nat-ural philo-sophy in which the
greatest im-prove-ments have been and may be made; it is on that ac-count that
I have made it my pe-cu-liar study; but at the same time, I have not
neg-lected the other branches of sci-ence. A man would make but a very sorry
chem-ist if he at-ten-ded to that de-part-ment of hu-man know-ledge alone. If your
wish is to be-come really a man of sci-ence and not merely a petty
ex-per-i-ment-al-ist, I should ad-vise you to ap-ply to every branch of nat-ural
philo-sophy, in-clud-ing math-em-at-ics.”

He then took me into his labor-at-ory and ex-plained to me the uses of his
vari-ous ma-chines, in-struct-ing me as to what I ought to pro-cure and
prom-ising me the use of his own when I should have ad-vanced far enough in
the sci-ence not to de-range their mech-an-ism. He also gave me the list of
books which I had re-ques-ted, and I took my leave.

Thus ended a day mem-or-able to me; it de-cided my fu-ture des-tiny.





Chapter 4

From this day nat-ural philo-sophy, and par-tic-u-larly chem-istry, in the
most com-pre-hens-ive sense of the term, be-came nearly my sole oc-cu-pa-tion.
I read with ar-dour those works, so full of genius and dis-crim-in-a-tion,
which mod-ern in-quirers have writ-ten on these sub-jects.  I at-ten-ded the
lec-tures and cul-tiv-ated the ac-quaint-ance of the men of sci-ence of the
uni-ver-sity, and I found even in M. Kr-empe a great deal of sound sense
and real in-form-a-tion, com-bined, it is true, with a re-puls-ive
physiognomy and man-ners, but not on that ac-count the less valu-able.  In
M. Wald-man I found a true friend.  His gen-tle-ness was never tinged by
dog-mat-ism, and his in-struc-tions were given with an air of frank-ness and
good nature that ban-ished every idea of ped-antry.  In a thou-sand ways
he smoothed for me the path of know-ledge and made the most ab-struse
in-quir-ies clear and fa-cile to my ap-pre-hen-sion.  My ap-plic-a-tion was at
first fluc-tu-at-ing and un-cer-tain; it gained strength as I pro-ceeded and
soon be-came so ar-dent and eager that the stars of-ten dis-ap-peared in the
light of morn-ing whilst I was yet en-gaged in my labor-at-ory.

As I ap-plied so closely, it may be eas-ily con-ceived that my pro-gress
was rapid.  My ar-dour was in-deed the as-ton-ish-ment of the stu-dents, and
my pro-fi-ciency that of the mas-ters.  Pro-fessor Kr-empe of-ten asked me,
with a sly smile, how Cor-nelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Wald-man
ex-pressed the most heart-felt ex-ulta-tion in my pro-gress.  Two years
passed in this man-ner, dur-ing which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was
en-gaged, heart and soul, in the pur-suit of some dis-cov-er-ies which I
hoped to make.  None but those who have ex-per-i-enced them can con-ceive
of the en-tice-ments of sci-ence.  In other stud-ies you go as far as
oth-ers have gone be-fore you, and there is noth-ing more to know; but in
a sci-entific pur-suit there is con-tinual food for dis-cov-ery and won-der.
A mind of mod-er-ate ca-pa-city which closely pur-sues one study must
in-fal-libly ar-rive at great pro-fi-ciency in that study; and I, who
con-tinu-ally sought the at-tain-ment of one ob-ject of pur-suit and was
solely wrapped up in this, im-proved so rap-idly that at the end of two
years I made some dis-cov-er-ies in the im-prove-ment of some chem-ical
in-stru-ments, which pro-cured me great es-teem and ad-mir-a-tion at the
uni-ver-sity.  When I had ar-rived at this point and had be-come as well
ac-quain-ted with the the-ory and prac-tice of nat-ural philo-sophy as
de-pended on the les-sons of any of the pro-fess-ors at In-gol-stadt, my
res-id-ence there be-ing no longer con-du-cive to my im-prove-ments, I thought
of re-turn-ing to my friends and my nat-ive town, when an in-cid-ent
happened that pro-trac-ted my stay.

One of the phe-nom-ena which had pe-cu-li-arly at-trac-ted my at-ten-tion was
the struc-ture of the hu-man frame, and, in-deed, any an-imal en-dued with
life.  Whence, I of-ten asked my-self, did the prin-ciple of life pro-ceed?
It was a bold ques-tion, and one which has ever been con-sidered as a
mys-tery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of be-com-ing
ac-quain-ted, if cow-ardice or care-less-ness did not re-strain our
in-quir-ies.  I re-volved these cir-cum-stances in my mind and de-term-ined
thence-forth to ap-ply my-self more par-tic-u-larly to those branches of
nat-ural philo-sophy which re-late to physiology.  Un-less I had been
an-im-ated by an al-most su-per-nat-ural en-thu-si-asm, my ap-plic-a-tion to this
study would have been irk-some and al-most in-tol-er-able.  To ex-am-ine the
causes of life, we must first have re-course to death.  I be-came
ac-quain-ted with the sci-ence of ana-tomy, but this was not suf-fi-cient; I
must also ob-serve the nat-ural de-cay and cor-rup-tion of the hu-man body.
In my edu-ca-tion my father had taken the greatest pre-cau-tions that my
mind should be im-pressed with no su-per-nat-ural hor-rors.  I do not ever
re-mem-ber to have trembled at a tale of su-per-sti-tion or to have feared
the ap-par-i-tion of a spirit.  Dark-ness had no ef-fect upon my fancy, and
a church-yard was to me merely the re-cept-acle of bod-ies de-prived of
life, which, from be-ing the seat of beauty and strength, had be-come
food for the worm.  Now I was led to ex-am-ine the cause and pro-gress of
this de-cay and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and
char-nel-houses.  My at-ten-tion was fixed upon every ob-ject the most
in-sup-port-able to the del-ic-acy of the hu-man feel-ings.  I saw how the
fine form of man was de-graded and wasted; I be-held the cor-rup-tion of
death suc-ceed to the bloom-ing cheek of life; I saw how the worm
in-her-ited the won-ders of the eye and brain.  I paused, ex-amin-ing and
ana-lys-ing all the minu-tiae of caus-a-tion, as ex-em-pli-fied in the change
from life to death, and death to life, un-til from the midst of this
dark-ness a sud-den light broke in upon me—a light so bril-liant and
won-drous, yet so simple, that while I be-came dizzy with the im-mens-ity
of the pro-spect which it il-lus-trated, I was sur-prised that among so
many men of genius who had dir-ec-ted their in-quir-ies to-wards the same
sci-ence, that I alone should be re-served to dis-cover so as-ton-ish-ing a
secret.

Re-mem-ber, I am not re-cord-ing the vis-ion of a mad-man.  The sun does not
more cer-tainly shine in the heav-ens than that which I now af-firm is
true.  Some mir-acle might have pro-duced it, yet the stages of the
dis-cov-ery were dis-tinct and prob-able.  After days and nights of
in-cred-ible la-bour and fa-tigue, I suc-ceeded in dis-cov-er-ing the cause of
gen-er-a-tion and life; nay, more, I be-came my-self cap-able of be-stow-ing
an-im-a-tion upon life-less mat-ter.

The as-ton-ish-ment which I had at first ex-per-i-enced on this dis-cov-ery
soon gave place to de-light and rap-ture.  After so much time spent in
pain-ful la-bour, to ar-rive at once at the sum-mit of my de-sires was the
most grat-i-fy-ing con-sum-ma-tion of my toils.  But this dis-cov-ery was so
great and over-whelm-ing that all the steps by which I had been
pro-gress-ively led to it were ob-lit-er-ated, and I be-held only the res-ult.
What had been the study and de-sire of the wisest men since the cre-ation
of the world was now within my grasp.  Not that, like a ma-gic scene, it
all opened upon me at once:  the in-form-a-tion I had ob-tained was of a
nature rather to dir-ect my en-deav-ours so soon as I should point them
to-wards the ob-ject of my search than to ex-hibit that ob-ject already
ac-com-plished.  I was like the Ar-a-bian who had been bur-ied with the dead
and found a pas-sage to life, aided only by one glim-mer-ing and seem-ingly
in-ef-fec-tual light.

I see by your eager-ness and the won-der and hope which your eyes
ex-press, my friend, that you ex-pect to be in-formed of the secret with
which I am ac-quain-ted; that can-not be; listen pa-tiently un-til the end
of my story, and you will eas-ily per-ceive why I am re-served upon that
sub-ject.  I will not lead you on, un-guarded and ar-dent as I then was,
to your de-struc-tion and in-fal-lible misery.  Learn from me, if not by my
pre-cepts, at least by my ex-ample, how dan-ger-ous is the ac-quire-ment of
know-ledge and how much hap-pier that man is who be-lieves his nat-ive town
to be the world, than he who as-pires to be-come greater than his nature
will al-low.

When I found so as-ton-ish-ing a power placed within my hands, I hes-it-ated
a long time con-cern-ing the man-ner in which I should em-ploy it.
Al-though I pos-sessed the ca-pa-city of be-stow-ing an-im-a-tion, yet to
pre-pare a frame for the re-cep-tion of it, with all its in-tric-a-cies of
fibres, muscles, and veins, still re-mained a work of in-con-ceiv-able
dif-fi-culty and la-bour.  I doubted at first whether I should at-tempt the
cre-ation of a be-ing like my-self, or one of sim-pler or-gan-iz-a-tion; but my
ima-gin-a-tion was too much ex-al-ted by my first suc-cess to per-mit me to
doubt of my abil-ity to give life to an an-imal as com-plex and won-der-ful
as man.  The ma-ter-i-als at present within my com-mand hardly ap-peared
ad-equate to so ar-du-ous an un-der-tak-ing, but I doubted not that I should
ul-ti-mately suc-ceed.  I pre-pared my-self for a mul-ti-tude of re-verses; my
op-er-a-tions might be in-cess-antly baffled, and at last my work be
im-per-fect, yet when I con-sidered the im-prove-ment which every day takes
place in sci-ence and mech-an-ics, I was en-cour-aged to hope my present
at-tempts would at least lay the found-a-tions of fu-ture suc-cess.  Nor
could I con-sider the mag-nitude and com-plex-ity of my plan as any
ar-gu-ment of its im-prac-tic-ab-il-ity.  It was with these feel-ings that I
began the cre-ation of a hu-man be-ing.  As the minute-ness of the parts
formed a great hindrance to my speed, I re-solved, con-trary to my first
in-ten-tion, to make the be-ing of a gi-gantic stature, that is to say,
about eight feet in height, and pro-por-tion-ably large.  After hav-ing
formed this de-term-in-a-tion and hav-ing spent some months in suc-cess-fully
col-lect-ing and ar-ran-ging my ma-ter-i-als, I began.

No one can con-ceive the vari-ety of feel-ings which bore me on-wards, like
a hur-ricane, in the first en-thu-si-asm of suc-cess.  Life and death
ap-peared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and
pour a tor-rent of light into our dark world.  A new spe-cies would bless
me as its cre-ator and source; many happy and ex-cel-lent natures would
owe their be-ing to me.  No father could claim the grat-it-ude of his
child so com-pletely as I should de-serve theirs.  Pur-su-ing these
re-flec-tions, I thought that if I could be-stow an-im-a-tion upon life-less
mat-ter, I might in pro-cess of time (al-though I now found it im-possible)
re-new life where death had ap-par-ently de-voted the body to cor-rup-tion.

These thoughts sup-por-ted my spir-its, while I pur-sued my un-der-tak-ing
with un-re-mit-ting ar-dour.  My cheek had grown pale with study, and my
per-son had be-come ema-ci-ated with con-fine-ment.  So-me-times, on the very
brink of cer-tainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the
next day or the next hour might real-ise.  One secret which I alone
pos-sessed was the hope to which I had ded-ic-ated my-self; and the moon
gazed on my mid-night la-bours, while, with un-re-laxed and breath-less
eager-ness, I pur-sued nature to her hid-ing-places.  Who shall con-ceive
the hor-rors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the un-hal-lowed damps
of the grave or tor-tured the liv-ing an-imal to an-im-ate the life-less
clay?  My limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the re-mem-brance; but
then a res-ist-less and al-most frantic im-pulse urged me for-ward; I seemed
to have lost all soul or sen-sa-tion but for this one pur-suit.  It was
in-deed but a passing trance, that only made me feel with re-newed
acute-ness so soon as, the un-nat-ural stim-u-lus ceas-ing to op-er-ate, I had
re-turned to my old habits.  I col-lec-ted bones from char-nel-houses and
dis-turbed, with pro-fane fin-gers, the tre-mend-ous secrets of the hu-man
frame.  In a sol-it-ary cham-ber, or rather cell, at the top of the house,
and sep-ar-ated from all the other apart-ments by a gal-lery and stair-case,
I kept my work-shop of filthy cre-ation; my eye-balls were start-ing from
their sock-ets in at-tend-ing to the de-tails of my em-ploy-ment.  The
dis-sect-ing room and the slaughter-house fur-nished many of my ma-ter-i-als;
and of-ten did my hu-man nature turn with loath-ing from my oc-cu-pa-tion,
whilst, still urged on by an eager-ness which per-petu-ally in-creased, I
brought my work near to a con-clu-sion.

The sum-mer months passed while I was thus en-gaged, heart and soul, in
one pur-suit.  It was a most beau-ti-ful sea-son; never did the fields
be-stow a more plen-ti-ful har-vest or the vines yield a more lux-uri-ant
vin-tage, but my eyes were in-sens-ible to the charms of nature.  And the
same feel-ings which made me neg-lect the scenes around me caused me also
to for-get those friends who were so many miles ab-sent, and whom I had
not seen for so long a time.  I knew my si-lence dis-quieted them, and I
well re-membered the words of my father:  “I know that while you are
pleased with your-self you will think of us with af-fec-tion, and we shall
hear reg-u-larly from you.  You must par-don me if I re-gard any
in-ter-rup-tion in your cor-res-pond-ence as a proof that your other du-ties
are equally neg-lected.”

I knew well there-fore what would be my father’s feel-ings, but I could
not tear my thoughts from my em-ploy-ment, loath-some in it-self, but which
had taken an ir-res-ist-ible hold of my ima-gin-a-tion.  I wished, as it
were, to pro-cras-tin-ate all that re-lated to my feel-ings of af-fec-tion
un-til the great ob-ject, which swal-lowed up every habit of my nature,
should be com-pleted.

I then thought that my father would be un-just if he ascribed my neg-lect
to vice or fault-i-ness on my part, but I am now con-vinced that he was
jus-ti-fied in con-ceiv-ing that I should not be al-to-gether free from
blame.  A hu-man be-ing in per-fec-tion ought al-ways to pre-serve a calm and
peace-ful mind and never to al-low pas-sion or a trans-it-ory de-sire to
dis-turb his tran-quil-lity.  I do not think that the pur-suit of know-ledge
is an ex-cep-tion to this rule.  If the study to which you ap-ply your-self
has a tend-ency to weaken your af-fec-tions and to des-troy your taste for
those simple pleas-ures in which no al-loy can pos-sibly mix, then that
study is cer-tainly un-law-ful, that is to say, not be-fit-ting the hu-man
mind.  If this rule were al-ways ob-served; if no man al-lowed any pur-suit
what-so-ever to in-ter-fere with the tran-quil-lity of his do-mestic
af-fec-tions, Greece had not been en-slaved, Cæsar would have spared his
coun-try, Amer-ica would have been dis-covered more gradu-ally, and the
em-pires of Mex-ico and Peru had not been des-troyed.

But I for-get that I am mor-al-iz-ing in the most in-ter-est-ing part of my
tale, and your looks re-mind me to pro-ceed.

My father made no re-proach in his let-ters and only took no-tice of my
si-lence by in-quir-ing into my oc-cu-pa-tions more par-tic-u-larly than be-fore.
Winter, spring, and sum-mer passed away dur-ing my la-bours; but I did not
watch the blos-som or the ex-pand-ing leaves—sights which be-fore al-ways
yiel-ded me su-preme de-light—so deeply was I en-grossed in my
oc-cu-pa-tion. The leaves of that year had withered be-fore my work drew near
to a close, and now every day showed me more plainly how well I had
suc-ceeded. But my en-thu-si-asm was checked by my anxi-ety, and I ap-peared
rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other
un-whole-some trade than an artist oc-cu-pied by his fa-vour-ite em-ploy-ment.
Every night I was op-pressed by a slow fever, and I be-came nervous to a most
pain-ful de-gree; the fall of a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fel-low
creatures as if I had been guilty of a crime. So-me-times I grew alarmed at
the wreck I per-ceived that I had be-come; the en-ergy of my pur-pose alone
sus-tained me: my la-bours would soon end, and I be-lieved that ex-er-cise and
amuse-ment would then drive away in-cip-i-ent dis-ease; and I prom-ised my-self
both of these when my cre-ation should be com-plete.





Chapter 5

It was on a dreary night of Novem-ber that I be-held the ac-com-plish-ment
of my toils.  With an anxi-ety that al-most amoun-ted to agony, I
col-lec-ted the in-stru-ments of life around me, that I might in-fuse a
spark of be-ing into the life-less thing that lay at my feet.  It was
already one in the morn-ing; the rain pattered dis-mally against the
panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glim-mer of the
half-ex-tin-guished light, I saw the dull yel-low eye of the creature
open; it breathed hard, and a con-vuls-ive mo-tion agit-ated its limbs.

How can I de-scribe my emo-tions at this cata-strophe, or how de-lin-eate
the wretch whom with such in-fin-ite pains and care I had en-deav-oured to
form?  His limbs were in pro-por-tion, and I had se-lec-ted his fea-tures as
beau-ti-ful.  Beau-ti-ful!  Great God!  His yel-low skin scarcely covered
the work of muscles and ar-ter-ies be-neath; his hair was of a lus-trous
black, and flow-ing; his teeth of a pearly white-ness; but these
lux-uri-ances only formed a more hor-rid con-trast with his wa-tery eyes,
that seemed al-most of the same col-our as the dun-white sock-ets in which
they were set, his shriv-elled com-plex-ion and straight black lips.

The dif-fer-ent ac-ci-dents of life are not so change-able as the feel-ings
of hu-man nature.  I had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
pur-pose of in-fus-ing life into an in-an-im-ate body.  For this I had
de-prived my-self of rest and health.  I had de-sired it with an ar-dour
that far ex-ceeded mod-er-a-tion; but now that I had fin-ished, the beauty
of the dream van-ished, and breath-less hor-ror and dis-gust filled my
heart.  Un-able to en-dure the as-pect of the be-ing I had cre-ated, I
rushed out of the room and con-tin-ued a long time tra-vers-ing my
bed-cham-ber, un-able to com-pose my mind to sleep.  At length las-sit-ude
suc-ceeded to the tu-mult I had be-fore en-dured, and I threw my-self on the
bed in my clothes, en-deav-our-ing to seek a few mo-ments of for-get-ful-ness.
But it was in vain; I slept, in-deed, but I was dis-turbed by the wild-est
dreams.  I thought I saw El-iza-beth, in the bloom of health, walk-ing in
the streets of In-gol-stadt.  De-lighted and sur-prised, I em-braced her,
but as I im-prin-ted the first kiss on her lips, they be-came livid with
the hue of death; her fea-tures ap-peared to change, and I thought that I
held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud en-vel-oped her
form, and I saw the grave-worms crawl-ing in the folds of the flan-nel.
I star-ted from my sleep with hor-ror; a cold dew covered my fore-head, my
teeth chattered, and every limb be-came con-vulsed; when, by the dim and
yel-low light of the moon, as it forced its way through the win-dow
shut-ters, I be-held the wretch—the miser-able mon-ster whom I had
cre-ated.  He held up the cur-tain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they
may be called, were fixed on me.  His jaws opened, and he muttered some
in-ar-tic-u-late sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks.  He might have
spoken, but I did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seem-ingly to
de-tain me, but I es-caped and rushed down-stairs.  I took refuge in the
court-yard be-long-ing to the house which I in-hab-ited, where I re-mained
dur-ing the rest of the night, walk-ing up and down in the greatest
agit-a-tion, listen-ing at-tent-ively, catch-ing and fear-ing each sound as if
it were to an-nounce the ap-proach of the de-moni-acal corpse to which I
had so miser-ably given life.

Oh!  No mor-tal could sup-port the hor-ror of that coun-ten-ance.  A mummy
again en-dued with an-im-a-tion could not be so hideous as that wretch.  I
had gazed on him while un-fin-ished; he was ugly then, but when those
muscles and joints were rendered cap-able of mo-tion, it be-came a thing
such as even Dante could not have con-ceived.

I passed the night wretchedly.  So-me-times my pulse beat so quickly and
hardly that I felt the pal-pit-a-tion of every artery; at oth-ers, I nearly
sank to the ground through lan-guor and ex-treme weak-ness.  Mingled with
this hor-ror, I felt the bit-ter-ness of dis-ap-point-ment; dreams that had
been my food and pleas-ant rest for so long a space were now be-come a
hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the over-throw so com-plete!

Morn-ing, dis-mal and wet, at length dawned and dis-covered to my
sleep-less and aching eyes the church of In-gol-stadt, its white steeple
and clock, which in-dic-ated the sixth hour.  The porter opened the gates
of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I is-sued into
the streets, pa-cing them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the
wretch whom I feared every turn-ing of the street would present to my
view.  I did not dare re-turn to the apart-ment which I in-hab-ited, but
felt im-pelled to hurry on, al-though drenched by the rain which poured
from a black and com-fort-less sky.

I con-tin-ued walk-ing in this man-ner for some time, en-deav-our-ing by
bod-ily ex-er-cise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind.  I
tra-versed the streets without any clear con-cep-tion of where I was or
what I was do-ing.  My heart pal-pit-ated in the sick-ness of fear, and I
hur-ried on with ir-reg-u-lar steps, not dar-ing to look about me:
  
  Like one who, on a lonely road,
  Doth walk in fear and dread,
  And, hav-ing once turned round, walks on,
  And turns no more his head;
  Be-cause he knows a fright-ful fiend
  Doth close be-hind him tread.
  
  [Col-eridge’s “An-cient Mar-iner.”]



Continu-ing thus, I came at length op-pos-ite to the inn at which the vari-ous
di-li-gences and car-riages usu-ally stopped. Here I paused, I knew not why;
but I re-mained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was com-ing
to-wards me from the other end of the street. As it drew nearer I ob-served
that it was the Swiss di-li-gence; it stopped just where I was stand-ing, and
on the door be-ing opened, I per-ceived Henry Cler-val, who, on see-ing me,
in-stantly sprung out. “My dear Franken-stein,” ex-claimed he,
“how glad I am to see you! How for-tu-nate that you should be here at
the very mo-ment of my alight-ing!”

Noth-ing could equal my de-light on see-ing Cler-val; his pres-ence brought back
to my thoughts my father, El-iza-beth, and all those scenes of home so dear
to my re-col-lec-tion. I grasped his hand, and in a mo-ment for-got my hor-ror
and mis-for-tune; I felt sud-denly, and for the first time dur-ing many months,
calm and se-rene joy. I wel-comed my friend, there-fore, in the most cor-dial
man-ner, and we walked to-wards my col-lege. Cler-val con-tin-ued talk-ing for
some time about our mu-tual friends and his own good for-tune in be-ing
per-mit-ted to come to In-gol-stadt. “You may eas-ily be-lieve,” said
he, “how great was the dif-fi-culty to per-suade my father that all
ne-ces-sary know-ledge was not com-prised in the noble art of book-keep-ing;
and, in-deed, I be-lieve I left him in-cred-u-lous to the last, for his con-stant
an-swer to my un-wear-ied en-treat-ies was the same as that of the Dutch
school-mas-ter in The Vi-car of Wake-field: ‘I have ten thou-sand flor-ins
a year without Greek, I eat heart-ily without Greek.’ But his
af-fec-tion for me at length over-came his dis-like of learn-ing, and he has
per-mit-ted me to un-der-take a voy-age of dis-cov-ery to the land of
know-ledge.”

“It gives me the greatest de-light to see you; but tell me how you left
my father, broth-ers, and El-iza-beth.”

“Very well, and very happy, only a little un-easy that they hear from
you so sel-dom.  By the by, I mean to lec-ture you a little upon their
ac-count my-self.  But, my dear Franken-stein,” con-tin-ued he, stop-ping
short and gaz-ing full in my face, “I did not be-fore re-mark how very ill
you ap-pear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watch-ing for
sev-eral nights.”

“You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply en-gaged in one
oc-cu-pa-tion that I have not al-lowed my-self suf-fi-cient rest, as you see;
but I hope, I sin-cerely hope, that all these em-ploy-ments are now at an
end and that I am at length free.”

I trembled ex-cess-ively; I could not en-dure to think of, and far less to
al-lude to, the oc-cur-rences of the pre-ced-ing night.  I walked with a
quick pace, and we soon ar-rived at my col-lege.  I then re-flec-ted, and
the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my
apart-ment might still be there, alive and walk-ing about.  I dreaded to
be-hold this mon-ster, but I feared still more that Henry should see him.
En-treat-ing him, there-fore, to re-main a few minutes at the bot-tom of the
stairs, I dar-ted up to-wards my own room.  My hand was already on the
lock of the door be-fore I re-col-lec-ted my-self.  I then paused, and a
cold shiv-er-ing came over me.  I threw the door for-cibly open, as
chil-dren are ac-cus-tomed to do when they ex-pect a spectre to stand in
wait-ing for them on the other side; but noth-ing ap-peared.  I stepped
fear-fully in:  the apart-ment was empty, and my bed-room was also freed
from its hideous guest.  I could hardly be-lieve that so great a good
for-tune could have be-fallen me, but when I be-came as-sured that my en-emy
had in-deed fled, I clapped my hands for joy and ran down to Cler-val.

We as-cen-ded into my room, and the ser-vant presently brought break-fast;
but I was un-able to con-tain my-self.  It was not joy only that pos-sessed
me; I felt my flesh tingle with ex-cess of sens-it-ive-ness, and my pulse
beat rap-idly.  I was un-able to re-main for a single in-stant in the same
place; I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
Cler-val at first at-trib-uted my un-usual spir-its to joy on his ar-rival,
but when he ob-served me more at-tent-ively, he saw a wild-ness in my eyes
for which he could not ac-count, and my loud, un-res-trained, heart-less
laughter frightened and as-ton-ished him.

“My dear Victor,” cried he, “what, for God’s sake,
is the mat-ter?  Do not laugh in that man-ner.  How ill you are!  What is the
cause of all this?”

“Do not ask me,” cried I, put-ting my hands be-fore my eyes, for I
thought I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can
tell. Oh, save me!  Save me!”  I ima-gined that the mon-ster seized me;
I struggled furi-ously and fell down in a fit.

Poor Cler-val!  What must have been his feel-ings?  A meet-ing, which he
an-ti-cip-ated with such joy, so strangely turned to bit-ter-ness.  But I
was not the wit-ness of his grief, for I was life-less and did not
re-cover my senses for a long, long time.

This was the com-mence-ment of a nervous fever which con-fined me for
sev-eral months.  Dur-ing all that time Henry was my only nurse.  I
af-ter-wards learned that, know-ing my father’s ad-vanced age and un-fit-ness
for so long a jour-ney, and how wretched my sick-ness would make
El-iza-beth, he spared them this grief by con-ceal-ing the ex-tent of my
dis-order.  He knew that I could not have a more kind and at-tent-ive
nurse than him-self; and, firm in the hope he felt of my re-cov-ery, he
did not doubt that, in-stead of do-ing harm, he per-formed the kind-est
ac-tion that he could to-wards them.

But I was in real-ity very ill, and surely noth-ing but the un-boun-ded and
un-re-mit-ting at-ten-tions of my friend could have re-stored me to life.
The form of the mon-ster on whom I had be-stowed ex-ist-ence was for ever
be-fore my eyes, and I raved in-cess-antly con-cern-ing him.  Doubt-less my
words sur-prised Henry; he at first be-lieved them to be the wan-der-ings
of my dis-turbed ima-gin-a-tion, but the per-tinacity with which I
con-tinu-ally re-curred to the same sub-ject per-suaded him that my dis-order
in-deed owed its ori-gin to some un-com-mon and ter-rible event.

By very slow de-grees, and with fre-quent re-lapses that alarmed and
grieved my friend, I re-covered.  I re-mem-ber the first time I be-came
cap-able of ob-serving out-ward ob-jects with any kind of pleas-ure, I
per-ceived that the fallen leaves had dis-ap-peared and that the young
buds were shoot-ing forth from the trees that shaded my win-dow.  It was
a di-vine spring, and the sea-son con-trib-uted greatly to my
con-vales-cence.  I felt also sen-ti-ments of joy and af-fec-tion re-vive in
my bosom; my gloom dis-ap-peared, and in a short time I be-came as
cheer-ful as be-fore I was at-tacked by the fatal pas-sion.

“Dearest Cler-val,” ex-claimed I, “how kind, how very good
you are to me. This whole winter, in-stead of be-ing spent in study, as you
prom-ised your-self, has been con-sumed in my sick room. How shall I ever
re-pay you? I feel the greatest re-morse for the dis-ap-point-ment of which I
have been the oc-ca-sion, but you will for-give me.”

“You will re-pay me en-tirely if you do not dis-com-pose your-self, but get
well as fast as you can; and since you ap-pear in such good spir-its, I
may speak to you on one sub-ject, may I not?”

I trembled. One sub-ject! What could it be? Could he al-lude to an ob-ject on
whom I dared not even think?

“Com-pose your-self,” said Cler-val, who ob-served my change of
col-our, “I will not men-tion it if it agit-ates you; but your father
and cousin would be very happy if they re-ceived a let-ter from you in your
own hand-writ-ing. They hardly know how ill you have been and are un-easy at
your long si-lence.”

“Is that all, my dear Henry?  How could you sup-pose that my first
thought would not fly to-wards those dear, dear friends whom I love and
who are so de-serving of my love?”

“If this is your present tem-per, my friend, you will per-haps be glad
to see a let-ter that has been ly-ing here some days for you; it is from
your cousin, I be-lieve.”





Chapter 6

Cler-val then put the fol-low-ing let-ter into my hands.  It was from my
own El-iza-beth:

“My dearest Cousin,

“You have been ill, very ill, and even the con-stant let-ters of dear
kind Henry are not suf-fi-cient to re-as-sure me on your ac-count.  You are
for-bid-den to write—to hold a pen; yet one word from you, dear Victor,
is ne-ces-sary to calm our ap-pre-hen-sions.  For a long time I have thought
that each post would bring this line, and my per-sua-sions have
re-strained my uncle from un-der-tak-ing a jour-ney to In-gol-stadt.  I have
pre-ven-ted his en-coun-ter-ing the in-con-veni-ences and per-haps dangers of so
long a jour-ney, yet how of-ten have I re-gret-ted not be-ing able to
per-form it my-self!  I fig-ure to my-self that the task of at-tend-ing on
your sickbed has de-volved on some mer-cen-ary old nurse, who could never
guess your wishes nor min-is-ter to them with the care and af-fec-tion of
your poor cousin.  Yet that is over now:  Cler-val writes that in-deed
you are get-ting bet-ter.  I eagerly hope that you will con-firm this
in-tel-li-gence soon in your own hand-writ-ing.

“Get well—and re-turn to us.  You will find a happy, cheer-ful home and
friends who love you dearly.  Your father’s health is vig-or-ous, and he
asks but to see you, but to be as-sured that you are well; and not a
care will ever cloud his be-ne-vol-ent coun-ten-ance.  How pleased you would
be to re-mark the im-prove-ment of our Ern-est!  He is now six-teen and full
of activ-ity and spirit.  He is de-sirous to be a true Swiss and to enter
into for-eign ser-vice, but we can-not part with him, at least un-til his
elder brother re-turns to us.  My uncle is not pleased with the idea of
a mil-it-ary ca-reer in a dis-tant coun-try, but Ern-est never had your
powers of ap-plic-a-tion.  He looks upon study as an odi-ous fet-ter; his
time is spent in the open air, climb-ing the hills or row-ing on the
lake.  I fear that he will be-come an idler un-less we yield the point
and per-mit him to enter on the pro-fes-sion which he has se-lec-ted.

“Little al-ter-a-tion, ex-cept the growth of our dear chil-dren, has taken
place since you left us.  The blue lake and snow-clad moun-tains—they
never change; and I think our pla-cid home and our con-ten-ted hearts are
reg-u-lated by the same im-mut-able laws.  My tri-fling oc-cu-pa-tions take up
my time and amuse me, and I am re-war-ded for any ex-er-tions by see-ing
none but happy, kind faces around me.  Since you left us, but one
change has taken place in our little house-hold.  Do you re-mem-ber on
what oc-ca-sion Justine Mor-itz entered our fam-ily?  Prob-ably you do not;
I will re-late her his-tory, there-fore in a few words.  Ma-dame Mor-itz,
her mother, was a widow with four chil-dren, of whom Justine was the
third.  This girl had al-ways been the fa-vour-ite of her father, but
through a strange per-versity, her mother could not en-dure her, and
after the death of M. Mor-itz, treated her very ill.  My aunt ob-served
this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, pre-vailed on her mother
to al-low her to live at our house.  The re-pub-lican in-sti-tu-tions of our
coun-try have pro-duced sim-pler and hap-pier man-ners than those which
pre-vail in the great mon-arch-ies that sur-round it.  Hence there is less
dis-tinc-tion between the sev-eral classes of its in-hab-it-ants; and the
lower or-ders, be-ing neither so poor nor so des-pised, their man-ners are
more re-fined and moral.  A ser-vant in Geneva does not mean the same
thing as a ser-vant in France and Eng-land.  Justine, thus re-ceived in
our fam-ily, learned the du-ties of a ser-vant, a con-di-tion which, in our
for-tu-nate coun-try, does not in-clude the idea of ig-nor-ance and a
sac-ri-fice of the dig-nity of a hu-man be-ing.

“Justine, you may re-mem-ber, was a great fa-vour-ite of yours; and I
re-col-lect you once re-marked that if you were in an ill hu-mour, one
glance from Justine could dis-sip-ate it, for the same reason that
Ari-osto gives con-cern-ing the beauty of An-gel-ica—she looked so
frank-hearted and happy.  My aunt con-ceived a great at-tach-ment for her,
by which she was in-duced to give her an edu-ca-tion su-per-ior to that
which she had at first in-ten-ded.  This be-ne-fit was fully re-paid;
Justine was the most grate-ful little creature in the world:  I do not
mean that she made any pro-fes-sions I never heard one pass her lips, but
you could see by her eyes that she al-most ad-ored her pro-tectress.
Al-though her dis-pos-i-tion was gay and in many re-spects in-con-sid-er-ate,
yet she paid the greatest at-ten-tion to every ges-ture of my aunt.  She
thought her the model of all ex-cel-lence and en-deav-oured to im-it-ate her
phras-eo-logy and man-ners, so that even now she of-ten re-minds me of her.

“When my dearest aunt died every one was too much oc-cu-pied in their own
grief to no-tice poor Justine, who had at-ten-ded her dur-ing her ill-ness
with the most anxious af-fec-tion.  Poor Justine was very ill; but other
tri-als were re-served for her.

“One by one, her broth-ers and sis-ter died; and her mother, with the
ex-cep-tion of her neg-lected daugh-ter, was left child-less.  The
con-science of the wo-man was troubled; she began to think that the
deaths of her fa-vour-ites was a judge-ment from heaven to chas-tise her
par-ti-al-ity.  She was a Ro-man Cath-olic; and I be-lieve her con-fessor
con-firmed the idea which she had con-ceived.  Ac-cord-ingly, a few months
after your de-par-ture for In-gol-stadt, Justine was called home by her
re-pent-ant mother.  Poor girl!  She wept when she quit-ted our house; she
was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given soft-ness
and a win-ning mild-ness to her man-ners, which had be-fore been re-mark-able
for vi-va-city.  Nor was her res-id-ence at her mother’s house of a nature
to re-store her gaiety.  The poor wo-man was very va-cil-lat-ing in her
re-pent-ance.  She some-times begged Justine to for-give her un-kind-ness,
but much of-tener ac-cused her of hav-ing caused the deaths of her
broth-ers and sis-ter.  Per-petual fret-ting at length threw Ma-dame Mor-itz
into a de-cline, which at first in-creased her ir-rit-ab-il-ity, but she is
now at peace for ever.  She died on the first ap-proach of cold weather,
at the be-gin-ning of this last winter.  Justine has just re-turned to us;
and I as-sure you I love her ten-derly.  She is very clever and gentle,
and ex-tremely pretty; as I men-tioned be-fore, her mien and her
ex-pres-sion con-tinu-ally re-mind me of my dear aunt.

“I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling
Wil-liam.  I wish you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with
sweet laugh-ing blue eyes, dark eye-lashes, and curl-ing hair.  When he
smiles, two little dimples ap-pear on each cheek, which are rosy with
health.  He has already had one or two little _wives,_ but Louisa Biron
is his fa-vour-ite, a pretty little girl of five years of age.

“Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be in-dulged in a little
gos-sip con-cern-ing the good people of Geneva.  The pretty Miss Mans-field
has already re-ceived the con-grat-u-lat-ory vis-its on her ap-proach-ing
mar-riage with a young Eng-lish-man, John Mel-bourne, Esq.  Her ugly
sis-ter, Manon, mar-ried M. Duvil-lard, the rich banker, last au-tumn. Your
fa-vour-ite schoolfel-low, Louis Manoir, has suffered sev-eral mis-for-tunes
since the de-par-ture of Cler-val from Geneva.  But he has already
re-covered his spir-its, and is re-por-ted to be on the point of mar-ry-ing a
lively pretty French-wo-man, Ma-dame Tav-ernier.  She is a widow, and much
older than Manoir; but she is very much ad-mired, and a fa-vour-ite with
every-body.

“I have writ-ten my-self into bet-ter spir-its, dear cousin; but my anxi-ety
re-turns upon me as I con-clude.  Write, dearest Victor,—one line—one
word will be a bless-ing to us.  Ten thou-sand thanks to Henry for his
kind-ness, his af-fec-tion, and his many let-ters; we are sin-cerely
grate-ful.  Adieu!  my cousin; take care of your-self; and, I en-treat
you, write!

“El-iza-beth Lavenza.


“Geneva, March 18th, 17—.”



“Dear, dear El-iza-beth!” I ex-claimed, when I had read her
let-ter: “I will write in-stantly and re-lieve them from the anxi-ety
they must feel.” I wrote, and this ex-er-tion greatly fa-tigued me; but
my con-vales-cence had com-menced, and pro-ceeded reg-u-larly. In an-other
fort-night I was able to leave my cham-ber.

One of my first du-ties on my re-cov-ery was to in-tro-duce Cler-val to the
sev-eral pro-fess-ors of the uni-ver-sity.  In do-ing this, I un-der-went a
kind of rough us-age, ill be-fit-ting the wounds that my mind had
sus-tained.  Ever since the fatal night, the end of my la-bours, and the
be-gin-ning of my mis-for-tunes, I had con-ceived a vi-ol-ent an-ti-pathy even
to the name of nat-ural philo-sophy.  When I was oth-er-wise quite re-stored
to health, the sight of a chem-ical in-stru-ment would re-new all the agony
of my nervous symp-toms.  Henry saw this, and had re-moved all my
ap-par-atus from my view.  He had also changed my apart-ment; for he
per-ceived that I had ac-quired a dis-like for the room which had
pre-vi-ously been my labor-at-ory.  But these cares of Cler-val were made of
no avail when I vis-ited the pro-fess-ors.  M. Wald-man in-flic-ted tor-ture
when he praised, with kind-ness and warmth, the as-ton-ish-ing pro-gress I
had made in the sci-ences.  He soon per-ceived that I dis-liked the
sub-ject; but not guess-ing the real cause, he at-trib-uted my feel-ings to
mod-esty, and changed the sub-ject from my im-prove-ment, to the sci-ence
it-self, with a de-sire, as I evid-ently saw, of draw-ing me out.  What
could I do?  He meant to please, and he tor-men-ted me.  I felt as if he
had placed care-fully, one by one, in my view those in-stru-ments which
were to be af-ter-wards used in put-ting me to a slow and cruel death.  I
writhed un-der his words, yet dared not ex-hibit the pain I felt.
Cler-val, whose eyes and feel-ings were al-ways quick in dis-cern-ing the
sen-sa-tions of oth-ers, de-clined the sub-ject, al-leging, in ex-cuse, his
total ig-nor-ance; and the con-ver-sa-tion took a more gen-eral turn.  I
thanked my friend from my heart, but I did not speak.  I saw plainly
that he was sur-prised, but he never at-temp-ted to draw my secret from
me; and al-though I loved him with a mix-ture of af-fec-tion and rev-er-ence
that knew no bounds, yet I could never per-suade my-self to con-fide in
him that event which was so of-ten present to my re-col-lec-tion, but which
I feared the de-tail to an-other would only im-press more deeply.

M. Kr-empe was not equally do-cile; and in my con-di-tion at that time, of
al-most in-sup-port-able sens-it-ive-ness, his harsh blunt en-co-mi-ums gave me even
more pain than the be-ne-vol-ent ap-prob-a-tion of M. Wald-man. “D—n
the fel-low!” cried he; “why, M. Cler-val, I as-sure you he has
out-stript us all. Ay, stare if you please; but it is nev-er-the-less true. A
young-ster who, but a few years ago, be-lieved in Cor-nelius Agrippa as firmly
as in the gos-pel, has now set him-self at the head of the uni-ver-sity; and if
he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of coun-ten-ance.—Ay,
ay,” con-tin-ued he, ob-serving my face ex-press-ive of suf-fer-ing,
“M. Franken-stein is mod-est; an ex-cel-lent qual-ity in a young man.
Young men should be dif-fid-ent of them-selves, you know, M. Cler-val: I was
my-self when young; but that wears out in a very short time.”

M. Kr-empe had now com-menced an eu-logy on him-self, which hap-pily turned
the con-ver-sa-tion from a sub-ject that was so an-noy-ing to me.

Cler-val had never sym-path-ised in my tastes for nat-ural sci-ence; and his
lit-er-ary pur-suits differed wholly from those which had oc-cu-pied me.  He
came to the uni-ver-sity with the design of mak-ing him-self com-plete
mas-ter of the ori-ental lan-guages, and thus he should open a field for
the plan of life he had marked out for him-self.  Re-solved to pur-sue no
in-glori-ous ca-reer, he turned his eyes to-ward the East, as af-ford-ing
scope for his spirit of en-ter-prise.  The Per-sian, Ar-abic, and Sanskrit
lan-guages en-gaged his at-ten-tion, and I was eas-ily in-duced to enter on
the same stud-ies.  Idle-ness had ever been irk-some to me, and now that I
wished to fly from re-flec-tion, and hated my former stud-ies, I felt
great re-lief in be-ing the fel-low-pu-pil with my friend, and found not
only in-struc-tion but con-sol-a-tion in the works of the ori-ent-al-ists.  I
did not, like him, at-tempt a crit-ical know-ledge of their dia-lects, for
I did not con-tem-plate mak-ing any other use of them than tem-por-ary
amuse-ment.  I read merely to un-der-stand their mean-ing, and they well
re-paid my la-bours.  Their mel-an-choly is sooth-ing, and their joy
el-ev-at-ing, to a de-gree I never ex-per-i-enced in study-ing the au-thors of
any other coun-try.  When you read their writ-ings, life ap-pears to
con-sist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns
of a fair en-emy, and the fire that con-sumes your own heart.  How
dif-fer-ent from the manly and hero-ical po-etry of Greece and Rome!

Sum-mer passed away in these oc-cu-pa-tions, and my re-turn to Geneva was
fixed for the lat-ter end of au-tumn; but be-ing delayed by sev-eral
ac-ci-dents, winter and snow ar-rived, the roads were deemed im-pass-able,
and my jour-ney was re-tarded un-til the en-su-ing spring.  I felt this
delay very bit-terly; for I longed to see my nat-ive town and my be-loved
friends.  My re-turn had only been delayed so long, from an
un-will-ing-ness to leave Cler-val in a strange place, be-fore he had be-come
ac-quain-ted with any of its in-hab-it-ants.  The winter, how-ever, was spent
cheer-fully; and al-though the spring was un-com-monly late, when it came
its beauty com-pensated for its dilat-or-i-ness.

The month of May had already com-menced, and I ex-pec-ted the let-ter daily
which was to fix the date of my de-par-ture, when Henry pro-posed a
ped-es-trian tour in the en-virons of In-gol-stadt, that I might bid a
per-sonal farewell to the coun-try I had so long in-hab-ited.  I ac-ceded
with pleas-ure to this pro-pos-i-tion:  I was fond of ex-er-cise, and Cler-val
had al-ways been my fa-vour-ite com-pan-ion in the ramble of this nature
that I had taken among the scenes of my nat-ive coun-try.

We passed a fort-night in these per-am-bu-la-tions:  my health and spir-its
had long been re-stored, and they gained ad-di-tional strength from the
sa-lu-bri-ous air I breathed, the nat-ural in-cid-ents of our pro-gress, and
the con-ver-sa-tion of my friend.  Study had be-fore se-cluded me from the
in-ter-course of my fel-low-creatures, and rendered me un-so-cial; but
Cler-val called forth the bet-ter feel-ings of my heart; he again taught
me to love the as-pect of nature, and the cheer-ful faces of chil-dren.
Ex-cel-lent friend!  how sin-cerely you did love me, and en-deav-our to
el-ev-ate my mind un-til it was on a level with your own.  A selfish
pur-suit had cramped and nar-rowed me, un-til your gen-tle-ness and
af-fec-tion warmed and opened my senses; I be-came the same happy creature
who, a few years ago, loved and be-loved by all, had no sor-row or care.
When happy, in-an-im-ate nature had the power of be-stow-ing on me the most
de-light-ful sen-sa-tions.  A se-rene sky and verd-ant fields filled me with
ec-stasy.  The present sea-son was in-deed di-vine; the flowers of spring
bloomed in the hedges, while those of sum-mer were already in bud.  I
was un-dis-turbed by thoughts which dur-ing the pre-ced-ing year had pressed
upon me, not-with-stand-ing my en-deav-ours to throw them off, with an
in-vin-cible bur-den.

Henry re-joiced in my gaiety, and sin-cerely sym-path-ised in my feel-ings: he
ex-er-ted him-self to amuse me, while he ex-pressed the sen-sa-tions that filled
his soul. The re-sources of his mind on this oc-ca-sion were truly
as-ton-ish-ing: his con-ver-sa-tion was full of ima-gin-a-tion; and very of-ten, in
im-it-a-tion of the Per-sian and Ar-abic writers, he in-ven-ted tales of won-der-ful
fancy and pas-sion. At other times he re-peated my fa-vour-ite poems, or drew
me out into ar-gu-ments, which he sup-por-ted with great in-genu-ity.

We re-turned to our col-lege on a Sunday af-ter-noon: the peas-ants were
dan-cing, and every one we met ap-peared gay and happy. My own spir-its were
high, and I bounded along with feel-ings of un-bridled joy and hil-ar-ity.





Chapter 7

On my re-turn, I found the fol-low-ing let-ter from my father:—

“My dear Victor,

“You have prob-ably waited im-pa-tiently for a let-ter to fix the date of
your re-turn to us; and I was at first temp-ted to write only a few
lines, merely men-tion-ing the day on which I should ex-pect you.  But
that would be a cruel kind-ness, and I dare not do it.  What would be
your sur-prise, my son, when you ex-pec-ted a happy and glad wel-come, to
be-hold, on the con-trary, tears and wretched-ness?  And how, Victor, can
I re-late our mis-for-tune?  Ab-sence can-not have rendered you cal-lous to
our joys and griefs; and how shall I in-flict pain on my long ab-sent
son?  I wish to pre-pare you for the woe-ful news, but I know it is
im-possible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words
which are to con-vey to you the hor-rible tid-ings.

“Wil-liam is dead!—that sweet child, whose smiles de-lighted and warmed
my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay!  Victor, he is murdered!

“I will not at-tempt to con-sole you; but will simply re-late the
cir-cum-stances of the trans-ac-tion.

“Last Thursday (May 7th), I, my niece, and your two broth-ers, went to
walk in Plain-pal-ais.  The even-ing was warm and se-rene, and we pro-longed
our walk farther than usual.  It was already dusk be-fore we thought of
re-turn-ing; and then we dis-covered that Wil-liam and Ern-est, who had gone
on be-fore, were not to be found.  We ac-cord-ingly res-ted on a seat un-til
they should re-turn.  Presently Ern-est came, and en-quired if we had seen
his brother; he said, that he had been play-ing with him, that Wil-liam
had run away to hide him-self, and that he vainly sought for him, and
af-ter-wards waited for a long time, but that he did not re-turn.

“This ac-count rather alarmed us, and we con-tin-ued to search for him
un-til night fell, when El-iza-beth con-jec-tured that he might have
re-turned to the house.  He was not there.  We re-turned again, with
torches; for I could not rest, when I thought that my sweet boy had
lost him-self, and was ex-posed to all the damps and dews of night;
El-iza-beth also suffered ex-treme an-guish.  About five in the morn-ing I
dis-covered my lovely boy, whom the night be-fore I had seen bloom-ing and
act-ive in health, stretched on the grass livid and mo-tion-less; the
print of the murder’s fin-ger was on his neck.

“He was con-veyed home, and the an-guish that was vis-ible in my
coun-ten-ance be-trayed the secret to El-iza-beth.  She was very earn-est to
see the corpse.  At first I at-temp-ted to pre-vent her but she per-sisted,
and en-ter-ing the room where it lay, hast-ily ex-amined the neck of the
vic-tim, and clasp-ing her hands ex-claimed, ‘O God!  I have murdered my
darling child!’

“She fain-ted, and was re-stored with ex-treme dif-fi-culty.  When she again
lived, it was only to weep and sigh.  She told me, that that same
even-ing Wil-liam had teased her to let him wear a very valu-able
mini-ature that she pos-sessed of your mother.  This pic-ture is gone, and
was doubt-less the tempta-tion which urged the mur-derer to the deed.  We
have no trace of him at present, al-though our ex-er-tions to dis-cover him
are un-re-mit-ted; but they will not re-store my be-loved Wil-liam!

“Come, dearest Victor; you alone can con-sole El-iza-beth.  She weeps
con-tinu-ally, and ac-cuses her-self un-justly as the cause of his death;
her words pierce my heart.  We are all un-happy; but will not that be an
ad-di-tional motive for you, my son, to re-turn and be our com-forter?
Your dear mother!  Alas, Victor!  I now say, Thank God she did not live
to wit-ness the cruel, miser-able death of her young-est darling!

“Come, Victor; not brood-ing thoughts of ven-geance against the as-sas-sin,
but with feel-ings of peace and gen-tle-ness, that will heal, in-stead of
fes-ter-ing, the wounds of our minds.  Enter the house of mourn-ing, my
friend, but with kind-ness and af-fec-tion for those who love you, and not
with hatred for your en-emies.

“Your af-fec-tion-ate and af-flic-ted father,

“Alphonse Franken-stein.



“Geneva, May 12th, 17—.”



Cler-val, who had watched my coun-ten-ance as I read this let-ter, was
sur-prised to ob-serve the des-pair that suc-ceeded the joy I at first
ex-pressed on re-ceiv-ing new from my friends.  I threw the let-ter on the
table, and covered my face with my hands.

“My dear Franken-stein,” ex-claimed Henry, when he per-ceived me
weep with bit-ter-ness, “are you al-ways to be un-happy?  My dear friend,
what has happened?”

I mo-tioned him to take up the let-ter, while I walked up and down the
room in the ex-tremest agit-a-tion.  Tears also gushed from the eyes of
Cler-val, as he read the ac-count of my mis-for-tune.

“I can of-fer you no con-sol-a-tion, my friend,” said he;
“your dis-aster is ir-re-par-able.  What do you in-tend to do?”

“To go in-stantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to or-der the horses.”

Dur-ing our walk, Cler-val en-deav-oured to say a few words of con-sol-a-tion;
he could only ex-press his heart-felt sym-pathy.  “Poor Wil-liam!” said he,
“dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his an-gel mother!  Who that had
seen him bright and joy-ous in his young beauty, but must weep over his
un-timely loss!  To die so miser-ably; to feel the mur-derer’s grasp!  How
much more a murdered that could des-troy ra-di-ant in-no-cence!  Poor little
fel-low! one only con-sol-a-tion have we; his friends mourn and weep, but
he is at rest. The pang is over, his suf-fer-ings are at an end for ever.
A sod cov-ers his gentle form, and he knows no pain.  He can no longer
be a sub-ject for pity; we must re-serve that for his miser-able
sur-viv-ors.”

Cler-val spoke thus as we hur-ried through the streets; the words
im-pressed them-selves on my mind and I re-membered them af-ter-wards in
solitude.  But now, as soon as the horses ar-rived, I hur-ried into a
cab-ri-olet, and bade farewell to my friend.

My jour-ney was very mel-an-choly. At first I wished to hurry on, for I longed
to con-sole and sym-path-ise with my loved and sor-row-ing friends; but when I
drew near my nat-ive town, I slackened my pro-gress. I could hardly sus-tain
the mul-ti-tude of feel-ings that crowded into my mind. I passed through
scenes fa-mil-iar to my youth, but which I had not seen for nearly six years.
How altered every thing might be dur-ing that time! One sud-den and
des-ol-at-ing change had taken place; but a thou-sand little cir-cum-stances
might have by de-grees worked other al-ter-a-tions, which, al-though they were
done more tran-quilly, might not be the less de-cis-ive. Fear over-came me; I
dared no ad-vance, dread-ing a thou-sand name-less evils that made me tremble,
al-though I was un-able to define them.

I re-mained two days at Lausanne, in this pain-ful state of mind. I
con-tem-plated the lake: the wa-ters were pla-cid; all around was calm; and the
snowy moun-tains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. By
de-grees the calm and heav-enly scene re-stored me, and I con-tin-ued my jour-ney
to-wards Geneva.

The road ran by the side of the lake, which be-came nar-rower as I
ap-proached my nat-ive town.  I dis-covered more dis-tinctly the black
sides of Jura, and the bright sum-mit of Mont Blanc.  I wept like a
child.  “Dear moun-tains! my own beau-ti-ful lake! how do you wel-come your
wan-derer?  Your sum-mits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and
pla-cid.  Is this to pro-gnost-ic-ate peace, or to mock at my un-hap-pi-ness?”

I fear, my friend, that I shall render my-self te-di-ous by dwell-ing on
these pre-lim-in-ary cir-cum-stances; but they were days of com-par-at-ive
hap-pi-ness, and I think of them with pleas-ure.  My coun-try, my be-loved
coun-try! who but a nat-ive can tell the de-light I took in again
be-hold-ing thy streams, thy moun-tains, and, more than all, thy lovely
lake!

Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again over-came me. Night also
closed around; and when I could hardly see the dark moun-tains, I felt still
more gloomily. The pic-ture ap-peared a vast and dim scene of evil, and I
foresaw ob-scurely that I was destined to be-come the most wretched of hu-man
be-ings. Alas! I proph-esied truly, and failed only in one single
cir-cum-stance, that in all the misery I ima-gined and dreaded, I did not
con-ceive the hun-dredth part of the an-guish I was destined to en-dure.

It was com-pletely dark when I ar-rived in the en-virons of Geneva; the gates
of the town were already shut; and I was ob-liged to pass the night at
Secheron, a vil-lage at the dis-tance of half a league from the city. The sky
was se-rene; and, as I was un-able to rest, I re-solved to visit the spot
where my poor Wil-liam had been murdered. As I could not pass through the
town, I was ob-liged to cross the lake in a boat to ar-rive at Plain-pal-ais.
Dur-ing this short voy-age I saw the light-ning play-ing on the sum-mit of Mont
Blanc in the most beau-ti-ful fig-ures. The storm ap-peared to ap-proach
rap-idly, and, on land-ing, I as-cen-ded a low hill, that I might ob-serve its
pro-gress. It ad-vanced; the heav-ens were clouded, and I soon felt the rain
com-ing slowly in large drops, but its vi-ol-ence quickly in-creased.

I quit-ted my seat, and walked on, al-though the dark-ness and storm
in-creased every minute, and the thun-der burst with a ter-rific crash
over my head.  It was echoed from Salêve, the Juras, and the Alps of
Sa-voy; vivid flashes of light-ning dazzled my eyes, il-lu-min-at-ing the
lake, mak-ing it ap-pear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an in-stant
every thing seemed of a pitchy dark-ness, un-til the eye re-covered it-self
from the pre-ced-ing flash.  The storm, as is of-ten the case in
Switzer-land, ap-peared at once in vari-ous parts of the heav-ens. The
most vi-ol-ent storm hung ex-actly north of the town, over the part of the
lake which lies between the promon-tory of Bel-rive and the vil-lage of
Copêt. Another storm en-lightened Jura with faint flashes; and an-other
darkened and some-times dis-closed the Môle, a peaked moun-tain to the
east of the lake.

While I watched the tem-pest, so beau-ti-ful yet ter-rific, I wandered on with
a hasty step. This noble war in the sky el-ev-ated my spir-its; I clasped my
hands, and ex-claimed aloud, “Wil-liam, dear an-gel! this is thy
fu-neral, this thy dirge!” As I said these words, I per-ceived in the
gloom a fig-ure which stole from be-hind a clump of trees near me; I stood
fixed, gaz-ing in-tently: I could not be mis-taken. A flash of light-ning
il-lu-min-ated the ob-ject, and dis-covered its shape plainly to me; its
gi-gantic stature, and the de-form-ity of its as-pect more hideous than be-longs
to hu-man-ity, in-stantly in-formed me that it was the wretch, the filthy
dæ-mon, to whom I had given life. What did he there? Could he be (I
shuddered at the con-cep-tion) the mur-derer of my brother? No sooner did that
idea cross my ima-gin-a-tion, than I be-came con-vinced of its truth; my teeth
chattered, and I was forced to lean against a tree for sup-port. The fig-ure
passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Noth-ing in hu-man shape could
have des-troyed the fair child. _He_ was the mur-derer! I could not
doubt it. The mere pres-ence of the idea was an ir-res-ist-ible proof of the
fact. I thought of pur-su-ing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for
an-other flash dis-covered him to me hanging among the rocks of the nearly
per-pen-dic-u-lar as-cent of Mont Salêve, a hill that bounds Plain-pal-ais on the
south. He soon reached the sum-mit, and dis-ap-peared.

I re-mained mo-tion-less.  The thun-der ceased; but the rain still
con-tin-ued, and the scene was en-vel-oped in an im-pen-et-rable dark-ness.  I
re-volved in my mind the events which I had un-til now sought to for-get:
the whole train of my pro-gress to-ward the cre-ation; the ap-pear-ance of
the works of my own hands at my bed-side; its de-par-ture.  Two years had
now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first re-ceived life; and
was this his first crime?  Alas!  I had turned loose into the world a
de-praved wretch, whose de-light was in carnage and misery; had he not
murdered my brother?

No one can con-ceive the an-guish I suffered dur-ing the re-mainder of the
night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air.  But I did not
feel the in-con-veni-ence of the weather; my ima-gin-a-tion was busy in
scenes of evil and des-pair.  I con-sidered the be-ing whom I had cast
among man-kind, and en-dowed with the will and power to ef-fect pur-poses
of hor-ror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light
of my own vam-pire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced
to des-troy all that was dear to me.

Day dawned; and I dir-ec-ted my steps to-wards the town.  The gates were
open, and I hastened to my father’s house.  My first thought was to
dis-cover what I knew of the mur-derer, and cause in-stant pur-suit to be
made.  But I paused when I re-flec-ted on the story that I had to tell. A
be-ing whom I my-self had formed, and en-dued with life, had met me at
mid-night among the pre-cip-ices of an in-ac-cess-ible moun-tain.  I
re-membered also the nervous fever with which I had been seized just at
the time that I dated my cre-ation, and which would give an air of
de-li-rium to a tale oth-er-wise so ut-terly im-prob-able.  I well knew that
if any other had com-mu-nic-ated such a re-la-tion to me, I should have
looked upon it as the rav-ings of in-san-ity.  Besides, the strange nature
of the an-imal would elude all pur-suit, even if I were so far cred-ited
as to per-suade my re-l-at-ives to com-mence it.  And then of what use would
be pur-suit?  Who could ar-rest a creature cap-able of scal-ing the
over-hanging sides of Mont Salêve?  These re-flec-tions de-term-ined me, and
I re-solved to re-main si-lent.

It was about five in the morn-ing when I entered my father’s house.  I
told the ser-vants not to dis-turb the fam-ily, and went into the lib-rary
to at-tend their usual hour of rising.

Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one in-delible trace, and I
stood in the same place where I had last em-braced my father be-fore my
de-par-ture for In-gol-stadt. Beloved and ven-er-able par-ent! He still re-mained
to me. I gazed on the pic-ture of my mother, which stood over the
man-tel-piece. It was an his-tor-ical sub-ject, painted at my father’s
de-sire, and rep-res-en-ted Caroline Beaufort in an agony of des-pair, kneel-ing
by the coffin of her dead father. Her garb was rus-tic, and her cheek pale;
but there was an air of dig-nity and beauty, that hardly per-mit-ted the
sen-ti-ment of pity. Below this pic-ture was a mini-ature of Wil-liam; and my
tears flowed when I looked upon it. While I was thus en-gaged, Ern-est
entered: he had heard me ar-rive, and hastened to wel-come me:
“Wel-come, my dearest Victor,” said he. “Ah! I wish you
had come three months ago, and then you would have found us all joy-ous and
de-lighted. You come to us now to share a misery which noth-ing can
al-le-vi-ate; yet your pres-ence will, I hope, re-vive our father, who seems
sink-ing un-der his mis-for-tune; and your per-sua-sions will in-duce poor
El-iza-beth to cease her vain and tor-ment-ing self-ac-cus-a-tions.—Poor
Wil-liam! he was our darling and our pride!”

Tears, un-res-trained, fell from my brother’s eyes; a sense of mor-tal
agony crept over my frame.  Be-fore, I had only ima-gined the
wretched-ness of my des-ol-ated home; the real-ity came on me as a new, and
a not less ter-rible, dis-aster.  I tried to calm Ern-est; I en-quired more
minutely con-cern-ing my father, and here I named my cousin.

“She most of all,” said Ern-est, “re-quires con-sol-a-tion; she ac-cused
her-self of hav-ing caused the death of my brother, and that made her
very wretched.  But since the mur-derer has been dis-covered—”

“The mur-derer dis-covered!  Good God! how can that be? who could at-tempt
to pur-sue him?  It is im-possible; one might as well try to over-take the
winds, or con-fine a moun-tain-stream with a straw.  I saw him too; he
was free last night!”

“I do not know what you mean,” replied my brother, in ac-cents of
won-der, “but to us the dis-cov-ery we have made com-pletes our misery.  No
one would be-lieve it at first; and even now El-iza-beth will not be
con-vinced, not-with-stand-ing all the evid-ence.  Indeed, who would credit
that Justine Mor-itz, who was so ami-able, and fond of all the fam-ily,
could sud-denly be-come so cap-able of so fright-ful, so ap-palling a crime?”

“Justine Mor-itz!  Poor, poor girl, is she the ac-cused?  But it is
wrong-fully; every one knows that; no one be-lieves it, surely, Ern-est?”

“No one did at first; but sev-eral cir-cum-stances came out, that have
al-most forced con-vic-tion upon us; and her own be-ha-viour has been so
con-fused, as to add to the evid-ence of facts a weight that, I fear,
leaves no hope for doubt.  But she will be tried today, and you will
then hear all.”

He then re-lated that, the morn-ing on which the murder of poor Wil-liam
had been dis-covered, Justine had been taken ill, and con-fined to her
bed for sev-eral days.  Dur-ing this in-ter-val, one of the ser-vants,
hap-pen-ing to ex-am-ine the ap-parel she had worn on the night of the
murder, had dis-covered in her pocket the pic-ture of my mother, which
had been judged to be the tempta-tion of the mur-derer.  The ser-vant
in-stantly showed it to one of the oth-ers, who, without say-ing a word to
any of the fam-ily, went to a ma-gis-trate; and, upon their de-pos-ition,
Justine was ap-pre-hen-ded.  On be-ing charged with the fact, the poor girl
con-firmed the sus-pi-cion in a great meas-ure by her ex-treme con-fu-sion of
man-ner.

This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and I replied
earn-estly, “You are all mis-taken; I know the mur-derer.  Justine, poor,
good Justine, is in-no-cent.”

At that in-stant my father entered.  I saw un-hap-pi-ness deeply im-pressed
on his coun-ten-ance, but he en-deav-oured to wel-come me cheer-fully; and,
after we had ex-changed our mourn-ful greet-ing, would have in-tro-duced
some other topic than that of our dis-aster, had not Ern-est ex-claimed,
“Good God, papa!  Victor says that he knows who was the mur-derer of
poor Wil-liam.”

“We do also, un-for-tu-nately,” replied my father, “for in-deed I had
rather have been for ever ig-nor-ant than have dis-covered so much
de-prav-ity and un-grat-it-ude in one I val-ued so highly.”

“My dear father, you are mis-taken; Justine is in-no-cent.”

“If she is, God for-bid that she should suf-fer as guilty.  She is to be
tried today, and I hope, I sin-cerely hope, that she will be ac-quit-ted.”

This speech calmed me.  I was firmly con-vinced in my own mind that
Justine, and in-deed every hu-man be-ing, was guilt-less of this murder.  I
had no fear, there-fore, that any cir-cum-stan-tial evid-ence could be
brought for-ward strong enough to con-vict her.  My tale was not one to
an-nounce pub-licly; its astound-ing hor-ror would be looked upon as
mad-ness by the vul-gar.  Did any one in-deed ex-ist, ex-cept I, the
cre-ator, who would be-lieve, un-less his senses con-vinced him, in the
ex-ist-ence of the liv-ing monu-ment of pre-sump-tion and rash ig-nor-ance
which I had let loose upon the world?

We were soon joined by El-iza-beth.  Time had altered her since I last
be-held her; it had en-dowed her with love-li-ness sur-pass-ing the beauty of
her child-ish years.  There was the same cand-our, the same vi-va-city, but
it was al-lied to an ex-pres-sion more full of sens-ib-il-ity and in-tel-lect.
She wel-comed me with the greatest af-fec-tion.  “Your ar-rival, my dear
cousin,” said she, “fills me with hope.  You per-haps will find some
means to jus-tify my poor guilt-less Justine.  Alas! who is safe, if she
be con-victed of crime?  I rely on her in-no-cence as cer-tainly as I do
upon my own.  Our mis-for-tune is doubly hard to us; we have not only
lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom I sin-cerely
love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate.  If she is con-demned, I
never shall know joy more.  But she will not, I am sure she will not;
and then I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little
Wil-liam.”

“She is in-no-cent, my El-iza-beth,” said I, “and that shall
be proved; fear noth-ing, but let your spir-its be cheered by the as-sur-ance
of her ac-quit-tal.”

“How kind and gen-er-ous you are! every one else be-lieves in her guilt,
and that made me wretched, for I knew that it was im-possible:  and to
see every one else pre-ju-diced in so deadly a man-ner rendered me
hope-less and des-pair-ing.”  She wept.

“Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she
is, as you be-lieve, in-no-cent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the
activ-ity with which I shall pre-vent the slight-est shadow of
par-ti-al-ity.”





Chapter 8

We passed a few sad hours un-til el-even o’clock, when the trial was to
com-mence.  My father and the rest of the fam-ily be-ing ob-liged to at-tend
as wit-nesses, I ac-com-pan-ied them to the court.  Dur-ing the whole of
this wretched mock-ery of justice I suffered liv-ing tor-ture.  It was to
be de-cided whether the res-ult of my curi-os-ity and law-less devices would
cause the death of two of my fel-low be-ings:  one a smil-ing babe full of
in-no-cence and joy, the other far more dread-fully murdered, with every
ag-grav-a-tion of in-famy that could make the murder mem-or-able in hor-ror.
Justine also was a girl of merit and pos-sessed qual-it-ies which prom-ised
to render her life happy; now all was to be ob-lit-er-ated in an
ig-no-mini-ous grave, and I the cause!  A thou-sand times rather would I
have con-fessed my-self guilty of the crime ascribed to Justine, but I
was ab-sent when it was com-mit-ted, and such a de-clar-a-tion would have
been con-sidered as the rav-ings of a mad-man and would not have
ex-culp-ated her who suffered through me.

The ap-pear-ance of Justine was calm.  She was dressed in mourn-ing, and
her coun-ten-ance, al-ways en-ga-ging, was rendered, by the solem-nity of her
feel-ings, ex-quis-itely beau-ti-ful.  Yet she ap-peared con-fid-ent in
in-no-cence and did not tremble, al-though gazed on and ex-ec-rated by
thou-sands, for all the kind-ness which her beauty might oth-er-wise have
ex-cited was ob-lit-er-ated in the minds of the spec-tat-ors by the
ima-gin-a-tion of the enorm-ity she was sup-posed to have com-mit-ted.  She
was tran-quil, yet her tran-quil-lity was evid-ently con-strained; and as
her con-fu-sion had be-fore been ad-duced as a proof of her guilt, she
worked up her mind to an ap-pear-ance of cour-age.  When she entered the
court she threw her eyes round it and quickly dis-covered where we were
seated.  A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly
re-covered her-self, and a look of sor-row-ful af-fec-tion seemed to at-test
her ut-ter guilt-less-ness.

The trial began, and after the ad-voc-ate against her had stated the
charge, sev-eral wit-nesses were called.  Several strange facts com-bined
against her, which might have staggered any-one who had not such proof
of her in-no-cence as I had.  She had been out the whole of the night on
which the murder had been com-mit-ted and to-wards morn-ing had been
per-ceived by a mar-ket-wo-man not far from the spot where the body of the
murdered child had been af-ter-wards found.  The wo-man asked her what she
did there, but she looked very strangely and only re-turned a con-fused
and un-in-tel-li-gible an-swer.  She re-turned to the house about eight
o’clock, and when one in-quired where she had passed the night, she
replied that she had been look-ing for the child and de-man-ded earn-estly
if any-thing had been heard con-cern-ing him.  When shown the body, she
fell into vi-ol-ent hys-ter-ics and kept her bed for sev-eral days.  The
pic-ture was then pro-duced which the ser-vant had found in her pocket;
and when El-iza-beth, in a fal-ter-ing voice, proved that it was the same
which, an hour be-fore the child had been missed, she had placed round
his neck, a mur-mur of hor-ror and in-dig-na-tion filled the court.

Justine was called on for her de-fence.  As the trial had pro-ceeded, her
coun-ten-ance had altered.  Sur-prise, hor-ror, and misery were strongly
ex-pressed.  So-me-times she struggled with her tears, but when she was
de-sired to plead, she col-lec-ted her powers and spoke in an aud-ible
al-though vari-able voice.

“God knows,” she said, “how en-tirely I am in-no-cent. But I
do not pre-tend that my prot-est-a-tions should ac-quit me; I rest my in-no-cence
on a plain and simple ex-plan-a-tion of the facts which have been ad-duced
against me, and I hope the char-ac-ter I have al-ways borne will in-cline my
judges to a fa-vour-able in-ter-pret-a-tion where any cir-cum-stance ap-pears
doubt-ful or sus-pi-cious.”

She then re-lated that, by the per-mis-sion of El-iza-beth, she had passed
the even-ing of the night on which the murder had been com-mit-ted at the
house of an aunt at Chêne, a vil-lage situ-ated at about a league from
Geneva.  On her re-turn, at about nine o’clock, she met a man who asked
her if she had seen any-thing of the child who was lost.  She was
alarmed by this ac-count and passed sev-eral hours in look-ing for him,
when the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was forced to re-main
sev-eral hours of the night in a barn be-long-ing to a cot-tage, be-ing
un-will-ing to call up the in-hab-it-ants, to whom she was well known.  Most
of the night she spent here watch-ing; to-wards morn-ing she be-lieved that
she slept for a few minutes; some steps dis-turbed her, and she awoke.
It was dawn, and she quit-ted her asylum, that she might again en-deav-our
to find my brother.  If she had gone near the spot where his body lay,
it was without her know-ledge.  That she had been be-wildered when
ques-tioned by the mar-ket-wo-man was not sur-pris-ing, since she had passed
a sleep-less night and the fate of poor Wil-liam was yet un-cer-tain.
Con-cern-ing the pic-ture she could give no ac-count.

“I know,” con-tin-ued the un-happy vic-tim, “how heav-ily and
fatally this one cir-cum-stance weighs against me, but I have no power of
ex-plain-ing it; and when I have ex-pressed my ut-ter ig-nor-ance, I am only left
to con-jec-ture con-cern-ing the prob-ab-il-it-ies by which it might have been
placed in my pocket. But here also I am checked. I be-lieve that I have no
en-emy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to des-troy me
wan-tonly. Did the mur-derer place it there? I know of no op-por-tun-ity
af-forded him for so do-ing; or, if I had, why should he have stolen the
jewel, to part with it again so soon?

“I com-mit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for
hope.  I beg per-mis-sion to have a few wit-nesses ex-amined con-cern-ing my
char-ac-ter, and if their testi-mony shall not over-weigh my sup-posed
guilt, I must be con-demned, al-though I would pledge my sal-va-tion on my
in-no-cence.”

Several wit-nesses were called who had known her for many years, and
they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they
sup-posed her guilty rendered them timor-ous and un-will-ing to come
for-ward.  El-iza-beth saw even this last re-source, her ex-cel-lent
dis-pos-i-tions and ir-re-proach-able con-duct, about to fail the ac-cused,
when, al-though vi-ol-ently agit-ated, she de-sired per-mis-sion to ad-dress
the court.

“I am,” said she, “the cousin of the un-happy child who
was murdered, or rather his sis-ter, for I was edu-cated by and have lived
with his par-ents ever since and even long be-fore his birth. It may
there-fore be judged in-de-cent in me to come for-ward on this oc-ca-sion, but
when I see a fel-low creature about to per-ish through the cow-ardice of her
pre-ten-ded friends, I wish to be al-lowed to speak, that I may say what I
know of her char-ac-ter. I am well ac-quain-ted with the ac-cused. I have lived
in the same house with her, at one time for five and at an-other for nearly
two years. Dur-ing all that period she ap-peared to me the most ami-able and
be-ne-vol-ent of hu-man creatures. She nursed Ma-dame Franken-stein, my aunt, in
her last ill-ness, with the greatest af-fec-tion and care and af-ter-wards
at-ten-ded her own mother dur-ing a te-di-ous ill-ness, in a man-ner that ex-cited
the ad-mir-a-tion of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my
uncle’s house, where she was be-loved by all the fam-ily. She was
warmly at-tached to the child who is now dead and ac-ted to-wards him like a
most af-fec-tion-ate mother. For my own part, I do not hes-it-ate to say that,
not-with-stand-ing all the evid-ence pro-duced against her, I be-lieve and rely
on her per-fect in-no-cence. She had no tempta-tion for such an ac-tion; as to
the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earn-estly de-sired it,
I should have will-ingly given it to her, so much do I es-teem and value
her.”

A mur-mur of ap-prob-a-tion fol-lowed El-iza-beth’s simple and power-ful
ap-peal, but it was ex-cited by her gen-er-ous in-ter-fer-ence, and not in
fa-vour of poor Justine, on whom the pub-lic in-dig-na-tion was turned with
re-newed vi-ol-ence, char-ging her with the black-est in-grat-it-ude.  She
her-self wept as El-iza-beth spoke, but she did not an-swer.  My own
agit-a-tion and an-guish was ex-treme dur-ing the whole trial.  I be-lieved
in her in-no-cence; I knew it.  Could the dæ-mon who had (I did not for a
minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have
be-trayed the in-no-cent to death and ig-no-miny?  I could not sus-tain the
hor-ror of my situ-ation, and when I per-ceived that the pop-u-lar voice and
the coun-ten-ances of the judges had already con-demned my un-happy vic-tim,
I rushed out of the court in agony.  The tor-tures of the ac-cused did
not equal mine; she was sus-tained by in-no-cence, but the fangs of
re-morse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.

I passed a night of un-mingled wretched-ness.  In the morn-ing I went to
the court; my lips and throat were parched.  I dared not ask the fatal
ques-tion, but I was known, and the of-ficer guessed the cause of my
visit.  The bal-lots had been thrown; they were all black, and Justine
was con-demned.

I can-not pre-tend to de-scribe what I then felt.  I had be-fore
ex-per-i-enced sen-sa-tions of hor-ror, and I have en-deav-oured to be-stow upon
them ad-equate ex-pres-sions, but words can-not con-vey an idea of the
heart-sick-en-ing des-pair that I then en-dured.  The per-son to whom I
ad-dressed my-self ad-ded that Justine had already con-fessed her guilt.
“That evid-ence,” he ob-served, “was hardly re-quired in so glar-ing a
case, but I am glad of it, and, in-deed, none of our judges like to
con-demn a crim-inal upon cir-cum-stan-tial evid-ence, be it ever so
de-cis-ive.”

This was strange and un-ex-pec-ted in-tel-li-gence; what could it mean?  Had
my eyes de-ceived me?  And was I really as mad as the whole world would
be-lieve me to be if I dis-closed the ob-ject of my sus-pi-cions?  I
hastened to re-turn home, and El-iza-beth eagerly de-man-ded the res-ult.

“My cousin,” replied I, “it is de-cided as you may have ex-pec-ted; all
judges had rather that ten in-no-cent should suf-fer than that one guilty
should es-cape.  But she has con-fessed.”

This was a dire blow to poor El-iza-beth, who had re-lied with firm-ness upon
Justine’s in-no-cence. “Alas!” said she. “How shall I
ever again be-lieve in hu-man good-ness? Justine, whom I loved and es-teemed as
my sis-ter, how could she put on those smiles of in-no-cence only to be-tray?
Her mild eyes seemed in-cap-able of any sever-ity or guile, and yet she has
com-mit-ted a murder.”

Soon after we heard that the poor vic-tim had ex-pressed a de-sire to see my
cousin. My father wished her not to go but said that he left it to her own
judg-ment and feel-ings to de-cide. “Yes,” said El-iza-beth,
“I will go, al-though she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall ac-com-pany
me; I can-not go alone.” The idea of this visit was tor-ture to me, yet
I could not re-fuse.

We entered the gloomy prison cham-ber and be-held Justine sit-ting on some
straw at the farther end; her hands were man-acled, and her head res-ted on
her knees. She rose on see-ing us enter, and when we were left alone with
her, she threw her-self at the feet of El-iza-beth, weep-ing bit-terly. My
cousin wept also.

“Oh, Justine!” said she.  “Why did you rob me of my last con-sol-a-tion?
I re-lied on your in-no-cence, and al-though I was then very wretched, I
was not so miser-able as I am now.”

“And do you also be-lieve that I am so very, very wicked?  Do you also
join with my en-emies to crush me, to con-demn me as a mur-derer?” Her
voice was suf-foc-ated with sobs.

“Rise, my poor girl,” said El-iza-beth; “why do you kneel,
if you are in-no-cent? I am not one of your en-emies, I be-lieved you
guilt-less, not-with-stand-ing every evid-ence, un-til I heard that you had
your-self de-clared your guilt. That re-port, you say, is false; and be
as-sured, dear Justine, that noth-ing can shake my con-fid-ence in you for a
mo-ment, but your own con-fes-sion.”

“I did con-fess, but I con-fessed a lie.  I con-fessed, that I might
ob-tain ab-so-lu-tion; but now that false-hood lies heav-ier at my heart than
all my other sins.  The God of heaven for-give me!  Ever since I was
con-demned, my con-fessor has be-sieged me; he threatened and men-aced,
un-til I al-most began to think that I was the mon-ster that he said I
was.  He threatened ex-com-mu-nic-a-tion and hell fire in my last mo-ments if
I con-tin-ued ob-dur-ate.  Dear lady, I had none to sup-port me; all looked
on me as a wretch doomed to ig-no-miny and per-di-tion.  What could I do?
In an evil hour I sub-scribed to a lie; and now only am I truly
miser-able.”

She paused, weep-ing, and then con-tin-ued, “I thought with hor-ror, my
sweet lady, that you should be-lieve your Justine, whom your blessed
aunt had so highly hon-oured, and whom you loved, was a creature cap-able
of a crime which none but the devil him-self could have per-pet-rated.
Dear Wil-liam! dearest blessed child!  I soon shall see you again in
heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that con-soles me, go-ing as I
am to suf-fer ig-no-miny and death.”

“Oh, Justine!  For-give me for hav-ing for one mo-ment dis-trus-ted you.
Why did you con-fess?  But do not mourn, dear girl.  Do not fear.  I
will pro-claim, I will prove your in-no-cence.  I will melt the stony
hearts of your en-emies by my tears and pray-ers.  You shall not die!
You, my play-fel-low, my com-pan-ion, my sis-ter, per-ish on the scaf-fold!
No!  No!  I never could sur-vive so hor-rible a mis-for-tune.”

Justine shook her head mourn-fully.  “I do not fear to die,” she said;
“that pang is past.  God raises my weak-ness and gives me cour-age to
en-dure the worst.  I leave a sad and bit-ter world; and if you re-mem-ber
me and think of me as of one un-justly con-demned, I am resigned to the
fate await-ing me.  Learn from me, dear lady, to sub-mit in pa-tience to
the will of heaven!”

Dur-ing this con-ver-sa-tion I had re-tired to a corner of the prison room,
where I could con-ceal the hor-rid an-guish that pos-sessed me.  Despair!
Who dared talk of that?  The poor vic-tim, who on the mor-row was to pass
the aw-ful bound-ary between life and death, felt not, as I did, such
deep and bit-ter agony.  I gnashed my teeth and ground them to-gether,
ut-ter-ing a groan that came from my in-most soul.  Justine star-ted.  When
she saw who it was, she ap-proached me and said, “Dear sir, you are very
kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not be-lieve that I am guilty?”

I could not an-swer.  “No, Justine,” said El-iza-beth; “he is more
con-vinced of your in-no-cence than I was, for even when he heard that you
had con-fessed, he did not credit it.”

“I truly thank him.  In these last mo-ments I feel the sin-cerest
grat-it-ude to-wards those who think of me with kind-ness.  How sweet is
the af-fec-tion of oth-ers to such a wretch as I am!  It re-moves more than
half my mis-for-tune, and I feel as if I could die in peace now that my
in-no-cence is ac-know-ledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.”

Thus the poor suf-ferer tried to com-fort oth-ers and her-self.  She in-deed
gained the resig-na-tion she de-sired.  But I, the true mur-derer, felt the
never-dy-ing worm alive in my bosom, which al-lowed of no hope or
con-sol-a-tion.  El-iza-beth also wept and was un-happy, but hers also was
the misery of in-no-cence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair
moon, for a while hides but can-not tar-nish its bright-ness.  An-guish and
des-pair had pen-et-rated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within
me which noth-ing could ex-tin-guish.  We stayed sev-eral hours with
Justine, and it was with great dif-fi-culty that El-iza-beth could tear
her-self away.  “I wish,” cried she, “that I were to die with you; I
can-not live in this world of misery.”

Justine as-sumed an air of cheer-ful-ness, while she with dif-fi-culty
repressed her bit-ter tears.  She em-braced El-iza-beth and said in a voice
of half-sup-pressed emo-tion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest El-iza-beth,
my be-loved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and
pre-serve you; may this be the last mis-for-tune that you will ever
suf-fer!  Live, and be happy, and make oth-ers so.”

And on the mor-row Justine died.  El-iza-beth’s heart-rend-ing elo-quence
failed to move the judges from their settled con-vic-tion in the
crimin-al-ity of the saintly suf-ferer.  My pas-sion-ate and in-dig-nant
ap-peals were lost upon them.  And when I re-ceived their cold an-swers
and heard the harsh, un-feel-ing reas-on-ing of these men, my pur-posed
avowal died away on my lips.  Thus I might pro-claim my-self a mad-man,
but not re-voke the sen-tence passed upon my wretched vic-tim.  She
per-ished on the scaf-fold as a murderess!

From the tor-tures of my own heart, I turned to con-tem-plate the deep and
voice-less grief of my El-iza-beth.  This also was my do-ing!  And my
father’s woe, and the des-ol-a-tion of that late so smil-ing home all was
the work of my thrice-ac-cursed hands!  Ye weep, un-happy ones, but these
are not your last tears!  Again shall you raise the fu-neral wail, and
the sound of your lam-ent-a-tions shall again and again be heard!
Franken-stein, your son, your kins-man, your early, much-loved friend; he
who would spend each vi-tal drop of blood for your sakes, who has no
thought nor sense of joy ex-cept as it is mirrored also in your dear
coun-ten-ances, who would fill the air with bless-ings and spend his life
in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed count-less tears; happy bey-ond
his hopes, if thus in-ex-or-able fate be sat-is-fied, and if the de-struc-tion
pause be-fore the peace of the grave have suc-ceeded to your sad tor-ments!

Thus spoke my proph-etic soul, as, torn by re-morse, hor-ror, and des-pair,
I be-held those I loved spend vain sor-row upon the graves of Wil-liam and
Justine, the first hap-less vic-tims to my un-hal-lowed arts.





Chapter 9

Noth-ing is more pain-ful to the hu-man mind than, after the feel-ings have
been worked up by a quick suc-ces-sion of events, the dead calmness of
in-ac-tion and cer-tainty which fol-lows and de-prives the soul both of hope
and fear.  Justine died, she res-ted, and I was alive.  The blood flowed
freely in my veins, but a weight of des-pair and re-morse pressed on my
heart which noth-ing could re-move.  Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered
like an evil spirit, for I had com-mit-ted deeds of mis-chief bey-ond
de-scrip-tion hor-rible, and more, much more (I per-suaded my-self) was yet
be-hind.  Yet my heart over-flowed with kind-ness and the love of vir-tue.
I had be-gun life with be-ne-vol-ent in-ten-tions and thirsted for the mo-ment
when I should put them in prac-tice and make my-self use-ful to my fel-low
be-ings.  Now all was blas-ted; in-stead of that serenity of con-science
which al-lowed me to look back upon the past with self-sat-is-fac-tion, and
from thence to gather prom-ise of new hopes, I was seized by re-morse and
the sense of guilt, which hur-ried me away to a hell of in-tense tor-tures
such as no lan-guage can de-scribe.

This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had per-haps never
en-tirely re-covered from the first shock it had sus-tained.  I shunned
the face of man; all sound of joy or com-pla-cency was tor-ture to me;
solitude was my only con-sol-a-tion—deep, dark, death-like solitude.

My father ob-served with pain the al-ter-a-tion per-cept-ible in my dis-pos-i-tion
and habits and en-deav-oured by ar-gu-ments de-duced from the feel-ings of his
se-rene con-science and guilt-less life to in-spire me with forti-tude and
awaken in me the cour-age to dis-pel the dark cloud which brooded over me.
“Do you think, Victor,” said he, “that I do not suf-fer
also? No one could love a child more than I loved your
brother”—tears came into his eyes as he spoke—“but
is it not a duty to the sur-viv-ors that we should re-frain from aug-ment-ing
their un-hap-pi-ness by an ap-pear-ance of im-mod-er-ate grief? It is also a duty
owed to your-self, for ex-cess-ive sor-row pre-vents im-prove-ment or en-joy-ment,
or even the dis-charge of daily use-ful-ness, without which no man is fit for
so-ci-ety.”

This ad-vice, al-though good, was totally in-ap-plic-able to my case; I
should have been the first to hide my grief and con-sole my friends if
re-morse had not mingled its bit-ter-ness, and ter-ror its alarm, with my
other sen-sa-tions.  Now I could only an-swer my father with a look of
des-pair and en-deav-our to hide my-self from his view.

About this time we re-tired to our house at Bel-rive.  This change was
par-tic-u-larly agree-able to me.  The shut-ting of the gates reg-u-larly at
ten o’clock and the im-possib-il-ity of re-main-ing on the lake after that
hour had rendered our res-id-ence within the walls of Geneva very irk-some
to me.  I was now free.  Often, after the rest of the fam-ily had
re-tired for the night, I took the boat and passed many hours upon the
wa-ter.  So-me-times, with my sails set, I was car-ried by the wind; and
some-times, after row-ing into the middle of the lake, I left the boat to
pur-sue its own course and gave way to my own miser-able re-flec-tions.  I
was of-ten temp-ted, when all was at peace around me, and I the only
un-quiet thing that wandered rest-less in a scene so beau-ti-ful and
heav-enly—if I ex-cept some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and
in-ter-rup-ted croak-ing was heard only when I ap-proached the shore—of-ten,
I say, I was temp-ted to plunge into the si-lent lake, that the wa-ters
might close over me and my calam-it-ies for ever.  But I was re-strained,
when I thought of the heroic and suf-fer-ing El-iza-beth, whom I ten-derly
loved, and whose ex-ist-ence was bound up in mine.  I thought also of my
father and sur-viv-ing brother; should I by my base deser-tion leave them
ex-posed and un-pro-tec-ted to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose
among them?

At these mo-ments I wept bit-terly and wished that peace would re-visit my
mind only that I might af-ford them con-sol-a-tion and hap-pi-ness. But that
could not be. Re-morse ex-tin-guished every hope. I had been the au-thor of
un-al-ter-able evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the mon-ster whom I had
cre-ated should per-pet-rate some new wicked-ness. I had an ob-scure feel-ing
that all was not over and that he would still com-mit some sig-nal crime,
which by its enorm-ity should al-most ef-face the re-col-lec-tion of the past.
There was al-ways scope for fear so long as any-thing I loved re-mained
be-hind. My ab-hor-rence of this fiend can-not be con-ceived. When I thought of
him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes be-came in-flamed, and I ar-dently wished to
ex-tin-guish that life which I had so thought-lessly be-stowed. When I
re-flec-ted on his crimes and malice, my hatred and re-venge burst all bounds
of mod-er-a-tion. I would have made a pil-grim-age to the highest peak of the
Andes, could I, when there, have pre-cip-it-ated him to their base. I wished
to see him again, that I might wreak the ut-most ex-tent of ab-hor-rence on his
head and avenge the deaths of Wil-liam and Justine.

Our house was the house of mourn-ing. My father’s health was deeply
shaken by the hor-ror of the re-cent events. El-iza-beth was sad and
des-pond-ing; she no longer took de-light in her or-din-ary oc-cu-pa-tions; all
pleas-ure seemed to her sac-ri-lege to-ward the dead; eternal woe and tears she
then thought was the just trib-ute she should pay to in-no-cence so blas-ted
and des-troyed. She was no longer that happy creature who in earlier youth
wandered with me on the banks of the lake and talked with ec-stasy of our
fu-ture pro-spects. The first of those sor-rows which are sent to wean us from
the earth had vis-ited her, and its dim-ming in-flu-ence quenched her dearest
smiles.

“When I re-flect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miser-able death of
Justine Mor-itz, I no longer see the world and its works as they be-fore
ap-peared to me.  Be-fore, I looked upon the ac-counts of vice and
in-justice that I read in books or heard from oth-ers as tales of an-cient
days or ima-gin-ary evils; at least they were re-mote and more fa-mil-iar to
reason than to the ima-gin-a-tion; but now misery has come home, and men
ap-pear to me as mon-sters thirst-ing for each other’s blood.  Yet I am
cer-tainly un-just.  Every-body be-lieved that poor girl to be guilty; and
if she could have com-mit-ted the crime for which she suffered, as-suredly
she would have been the most de-praved of hu-man creatures.  For the sake
of a few jew-els, to have murdered the son of her be-ne-factor and friend,
a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and ap-peared to love as if
it had been her own!  I could not con-sent to the death of any hu-man
be-ing, but cer-tainly I should have thought such a creature un-fit to
re-main in the so-ci-ety of men.  But she was in-no-cent.  I know, I feel
she was in-no-cent; you are of the same opin-ion, and that con-firms me.
Alas!  Victor, when false-hood can look so like the truth, who can
as-sure them-selves of cer-tain hap-pi-ness?  I feel as if I were walk-ing on
the edge of a pre-cip-ice, to-wards which thou-sands are crowding and
en-deav-our-ing to plunge me into the abyss.  Wil-liam and Justine were
as-sas-sin-ated, and the mur-derer es-capes; he walks about the world free,
and per-haps re-spec-ted.  But even if I were con-demned to suf-fer on the
scaf-fold for the same crimes, I would not change places with such a
wretch.”

I listened to this dis-course with the ex-tremest agony.  I, not in deed,
but in ef-fect, was the true mur-derer.  El-iza-beth read my an-guish in my
coun-ten-ance, and kindly tak-ing my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you
must calm your-self.  These events have af-fected me, God knows how
deeply; but I am not so wretched as you are.  There is an ex-pres-sion of
des-pair, and some-times of re-venge, in your coun-ten-ance that makes me
tremble.  Dear Victor, ban-ish these dark pas-sions.  Re-mem-ber the
friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you.  Have we lost
the power of ren-der-ing you happy?  Ah!  While we love, while we are
true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your nat-ive
coun-try, we may reap every tran-quil bless-ing—what can dis-turb our
peace?”

And could not such words from her whom I fondly prized be-fore every
other gift of for-tune suf-fice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my
heart?  Even as she spoke I drew near to her, as if in ter-ror, lest at
that very mo-ment the des-troyer had been near to rob me of her.

Thus not the ten-der-ness of friend-ship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of
heaven, could re-deem my soul from woe; the very ac-cents of love were
in-ef-fec-tual.  I was en-com-passed by a cloud which no be-ne-fi-cial
in-flu-ence could pen-et-rate.  The wounded deer drag-ging its faint-ing
limbs to some un-trod-den brake, there to gaze upon the ar-row which had
pierced it, and to die, was but a type of me.

So-me-times I could cope with the sul-len des-pair that over-whelmed me, but
some-times the whirl-wind pas-sions of my soul drove me to seek, by bod-ily
ex-er-cise and by change of place, some re-lief from my in-tol-er-able
sen-sa-tions.  It was dur-ing an ac-cess of this kind that I sud-denly left
my home, and bend-ing my steps to-wards the near Alpine val-leys, sought
in the mag-ni-fi-cence, the etern-ity of such scenes, to for-get my-self and
my eph-em-eral, be-cause hu-man, sor-rows.  My wan-der-ings were dir-ec-ted
to-wards the val-ley of Chamounix.  I had vis-ited it fre-quently dur-ing my
boy-hood.  Six years had passed since then: _I_ was a wreck, but nought
had changed in those sav-age and en-dur-ing scenes.

I per-formed the first part of my jour-ney on horse-back.  I af-ter-wards
hired a mule, as the more sure-footed and least li-able to re-ceive
in-jury on these rugged roads.  The weather was fine; it was about the
middle of the month of August, nearly two months after the death of
Justine, that miser-able epoch from which I dated all my woe.  The
weight upon my spirit was sens-ibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in
the rav-ine of Arve.  The im-mense moun-tains and pre-cip-ices that over-hung
me on every side, the sound of the river ra-ging among the rocks, and
the dash-ing of the wa-ter-falls around spoke of a power mighty as
Om-ni-po-tence—and I ceased to fear or to bend be-fore any be-ing less
almighty than that which had cre-ated and ruled the ele-ments, here
dis-played in their most ter-rific guise.  Still, as I as-cen-ded higher,
the val-ley as-sumed a more mag-ni-fi-cent and as-ton-ish-ing char-ac-ter.
Ruined castles hanging on the pre-cip-ices of piny moun-tains, the
im-petu-ous Arve, and cot-tages every here and there peep-ing forth from
among the trees formed a scene of sin-gu-lar beauty.  But it was
aug-men-ted and rendered sub-lime by the mighty Alps, whose white and
shin-ing pyr-am-ids and domes towered above all, as be-long-ing to an-other
earth, the hab-it-a-tions of an-other race of be-ings.

I passed the bridge of Pélis-sier, where the rav-ine, which the river
forms, opened be-fore me, and I began to as-cend the moun-tain that
over-hangs it.  Soon after, I entered the val-ley of Chamounix.  This
val-ley is more won-der-ful and sub-lime, but not so beau-ti-ful and
pic-tur-esque as that of Ser-vox, through which I had just passed.  The
high and snowy moun-tains were its im-me-di-ate bound-ar-ies, but I saw no
more ruined castles and fer-tile fields.  Im-mense gla-ciers ap-proached
the road; I heard the rum-bling thun-der of the fall-ing ava-lanche and
marked the smoke of its pas-sage.  Mont Blanc, the su-preme and
mag-ni-fi-cent Mont Blanc, raised it-self from the sur-round-ing _ai-guilles_,
and its tre-mend-ous _dôme_ over-looked the val-ley.

A tingling long-lost sense of pleas-ure of-ten came across me dur-ing this
jour-ney.  Some turn in the road, some new ob-ject sud-denly per-ceived and
re-cog-nised, re-minded me of days gone by, and were as-so-ci-ated with the
light-hearted gaiety of boy-hood.  The very winds whispered in sooth-ing
ac-cents, and ma-ter-nal Nature bade me weep no more.  Then again the
kindly in-flu-ence ceased to act—I found my-self fettered again to grief
and in-dul-ging in all the misery of re-flec-tion.  Then I spurred on my
an-imal, striv-ing so to for-get the world, my fears, and more than all,
my-self—or, in a more des-per-ate fash-ion, I alighted and threw my-self on
the grass, weighed down by hor-ror and des-pair.

At length I ar-rived at the vil-lage of Chamounix.  Ex-haus-tion suc-ceeded
to the ex-treme fa-tigue both of body and of mind which I had en-dured.
For a short space of time I re-mained at the win-dow watch-ing the pal-lid
light-nings that played above Mont Blanc and listen-ing to the rush-ing of
the Arve, which pur-sued its noisy way be-neath.  The same lulling sounds
ac-ted as a lul-laby to my too keen sen-sa-tions; when I placed my head
upon my pil-low, sleep crept over me; I felt it as it came and blessed
the giver of ob-li-vion.





Chapter 10

I spent the fol-low-ing day roam-ing through the val-ley.  I stood be-side
the sources of the Ar-veiron, which take their rise in a gla-cier, that
with slow pace is ad-van-cing down from the sum-mit of the hills to
bar-ri-cade the val-ley.  The ab-rupt sides of vast moun-tains were be-fore
me; the icy wall of the gla-cier over-hung me; a few shattered pines were
scattered around; and the sol-emn si-lence of this glor-i-ous
pres-ence-cham-ber of im-per-ial Nature was broken only by the brawl-ing
waves or the fall of some vast frag-ment, the thun-der sound of the
ava-lanche or the crack-ing, re-ver-ber-ated along the moun-tains, of the
ac-cu-mu-lated ice, which, through the si-lent work-ing of im-mut-able laws,
was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in
their hands.  These sub-lime and mag-ni-fi-cent scenes af-forded me the
greatest con-sol-a-tion that I was cap-able of re-ceiv-ing.  They el-ev-ated me
from all lit-tle-ness of feel-ing, and al-though they did not re-move my
grief, they sub-dued and tran-quil-lised it.  In some de-gree, also, they
di-ver-ted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the
last month.  I re-tired to rest at night; my slum-bers, as it were,
waited on and min-istered to by the as-semb-lance of grand shapes which I
had con-tem-plated dur-ing the day.  They con-greg-ated round me; the
un-stained snowy moun-tain-top, the glit-ter-ing pin-nacle, the pine woods,
and ragged bare rav-ine, the eagle, soar-ing amidst the clouds—they all
gathered round me and bade me be at peace.

Where had they fled when the next morn-ing I awoke?  All of
soul-in-spir-it-ing fled with sleep, and dark mel-an-choly clouded every
thought.  The rain was pour-ing in tor-rents, and thick mists hid the
sum-mits of the moun-tains, so that I even saw not the faces of those
mighty friends.  Still I would pen-et-rate their misty veil and seek them
in their cloudy re-treats.  What were rain and storm to me?  My mule was
brought to the door, and I re-solved to as-cend to the sum-mit of
Montan-vert.  I re-membered the ef-fect that the view of the tre-mend-ous
and ever-mov-ing gla-cier had pro-duced upon my mind when I first saw it.
It had then filled me with a sub-lime ec-stasy that gave wings to the
soul and al-lowed it to soar from the ob-scure world to light and joy.
The sight of the aw-ful and majestic in nature had in-deed al-ways the
ef-fect of sol-em-nising my mind and caus-ing me to for-get the passing
cares of life.  I de-term-ined to go without a guide, for I was well
ac-quain-ted with the path, and the pres-ence of an-other would des-troy the
sol-it-ary grandeur of the scene.

The as-cent is pre-cip-it-ous, but the path is cut into con-tinual and short
wind-ings, which en-able you to sur-mount the per-pen-dic-u-lar-ity of the
moun-tain.  It is a scene ter-rific-ally des-ol-ate.  In a thou-sand spots
the traces of the winter ava-lanche may be per-ceived, where trees lie
broken and strewed on the ground, some en-tirely des-troyed, oth-ers bent,
lean-ing upon the jut-ting rocks of the moun-tain or trans-versely upon
other trees.  The path, as you as-cend higher, is in-ter-sec-ted by rav-ines
of snow, down which stones con-tinu-ally roll from above; one of them is
par-tic-u-larly dan-ger-ous, as the slight-est sound, such as even speak-ing
in a loud voice, pro-duces a con-cus-sion of air suf-fi-cient to draw
de-struc-tion upon the head of the speaker.  The pines are not tall or
lux-uri-ant, but they are sombre and add an air of sever-ity to the scene.
I looked on the val-ley be-neath; vast mists were rising from the rivers
which ran through it and curl-ing in thick wreaths around the op-pos-ite
moun-tains, whose sum-mits were hid in the uni-form clouds, while rain
poured from the dark sky and ad-ded to the mel-an-choly im-pres-sion I
re-ceived from the ob-jects around me.  Alas!  Why does man boast of
sens-ib-il-it-ies su-per-ior to those ap-par-ent in the brute; it only renders
them more ne-ces-sary be-ings.  If our im-pulses were con-fined to hun-ger,
thirst, and de-sire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by
every wind that blows and a chance word or scene that that word may
con-vey to us.

  We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.
       We rise; one wand’ring thought pol-lutes the day.
  We feel, con-ceive, or reason; laugh or weep,
       Em-brace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
  It is the same:  for, be it joy or sor-row,
       The path of its de-par-ture still is free.
  Man’s yes-ter-day may ne’er be like his mor-row;
       Nought may en-dure but mut-ab-il-ity!



It was nearly noon when I ar-rived at the top of the as-cent.  For some
time I sat upon the rock that over-looks the sea of ice.  A mist covered
both that and the sur-round-ing moun-tains.  Presently a breeze dis-sip-ated
the cloud, and I des-cen-ded upon the gla-cier.  The sur-face is very
un-even, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, des-cend-ing low, and
in-ter-spersed by rifts that sink deep.  The field of ice is al-most a
league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in cross-ing it.  The
op-pos-ite moun-tain is a bare per-pen-dic-u-lar rock.  From the side where I
now stood Montan-vert was ex-actly op-pos-ite, at the dis-tance of a league;
and above it rose Mont Blanc, in aw-ful majesty.  I re-mained in a re-cess
of the rock, gaz-ing on this won-der-ful and stu-pendous scene.  The sea,
or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its de-pend-ent moun-tains,
whose aer-ial sum-mits hung over its re-cesses.  Their icy and glit-ter-ing
peaks shone in the sun-light over the clouds.  My heart, which was
be-fore sor-row-ful, now swelled with some-thing like joy; I ex-claimed,
“Wan-der-ing spir-its, if in-deed ye wander, and do not rest in your nar-row
beds, al-low me this faint hap-pi-ness, or take me, as your com-pan-ion,
away from the joys of life.”

As I said this I sud-denly be-held the fig-ure of a man, at some dis-tance,
ad-van-cing to-wards me with su-per-hu-man speed.  He bounded over the
crevices in the ice, among which I had walked with cau-tion; his
stature, also, as he ap-proached, seemed to ex-ceed that of man.  I was
troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faint-ness seize me,
but I was quickly re-stored by the cold gale of the moun-tains.  I
per-ceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tre-mend-ous and ab-horred!)
that it was the wretch whom I had cre-ated.  I trembled with rage and
hor-ror, resolv-ing to wait his ap-proach and then close with him in
mor-tal com-bat.  He ap-proached; his coun-ten-ance be-spoke bit-ter an-guish,
com-bined with dis-dain and ma-lig-nity, while its un-earthly ugli-ness
rendered it al-most too hor-rible for hu-man eyes.  But I scarcely
ob-served this; rage and hatred had at first de-prived me of ut-ter-ance,
and I re-covered only to over-whelm him with words ex-press-ive of furi-ous
de-test-a-tion and con-tempt.

“Devil,” I ex-claimed, “do you dare ap-proach me? And do
not you fear the fierce ven-geance of my arm wreaked on your miser-able head?
Be-gone, vile in-sect! Or rather, stay, that I may trample you to dust! And,
oh! That I could, with the ex-tinc-tion of your miser-able ex-ist-ence, re-store
those vic-tims whom you have so diabol-ic-ally murdered!”

“I ex-pec-ted this re-cep-tion,” said the dæ-mon.  “All men hate the
wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miser-able bey-ond all
liv-ing things!  Yet you, my cre-ator, de-test and spurn me, thy creature,
to whom thou art bound by ties only dis-sol-uble by the an-ni-hil-a-tion of
one of us.  You pur-pose to kill me.  How dare you sport thus with life?
Do your duty to-wards me, and I will do mine to-wards you and the rest of
man-kind.  If you will com-ply with my con-di-tions, I will leave them and
you at peace; but if you re-fuse, I will glut the maw of death, un-til it
be sa-ti-ated with the blood of your re-main-ing friends.”

“Ab-horred mon-ster!  Fiend that thou art!  The tor-tures of hell are too
mild a ven-geance for thy crimes.  Wretched devil!  You re-proach me with
your cre-ation, come on, then, that I may ex-tin-guish the spark which I
so neg-li-gently be-stowed.”

My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, im-pelled by all the
feel-ings which can arm one be-ing against the ex-ist-ence of an-other.

He eas-ily eluded me and said,

“Be calm!  I en-treat you to hear me be-fore you give vent to your hatred
on my de-voted head.  Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to
in-crease my misery?  Life, al-though it may only be an ac-cu-mu-la-tion of
an-guish, is dear to me, and I will de-fend it.  Re-mem-ber, thou hast made
me more power-ful than thy-self; my height is su-per-ior to thine, my
joints more supple.  But I will not be temp-ted to set my-self in
op-pos-i-tion to thee.  I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and
do-cile to my nat-ural lord and king if thou wilt also per-form thy part,
the which thou ow-est me.  Oh, Franken-stein, be not equit-able to every
other and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy
clem-ency and af-fec-tion, is most due.  Re-mem-ber that I am thy creature;
I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen an-gel, whom thou
drivest from joy for no mis-deed.  Every-where I see bliss, from which I
alone am ir-re-voc-ably ex-cluded.  I was be-ne-vol-ent and good; misery made
me a fiend.  Make me happy, and I shall again be vir-tu-ous.”

“Be-gone!  I will not hear you.  There can be no com-munity between you
and me; we are en-emies.  Be-gone, or let us try our strength in a fight,
in which one must fall.”

“How can I move thee?  Will no en-treat-ies cause thee to turn a
fa-vour-able eye upon thy creature, who im-plores thy good-ness and
com-pas-sion?  Be-lieve me, Franken-stein, I was be-ne-vol-ent; my soul glowed
with love and hu-man-ity; but am I not alone, miser-ably alone?  You, my
cre-ator, ab-hor me; what hope can I gather from your fel-low creatures,
who owe me noth-ing?  They spurn and hate me.  The desert moun-tains and
dreary gla-ciers are my refuge.  I have wandered here many days; the
caves of ice, which I only do not fear, are a dwell-ing to me, and the
only one which man does not grudge.  These bleak skies I hail, for they
are kinder to me than your fel-low be-ings.  If the mul-ti-tude of man-kind
knew of my ex-ist-ence, they would do as you do, and arm them-selves for
my de-struc-tion.  Shall I not then hate them who ab-hor me?  I will keep
no terms with my en-emies.  I am miser-able, and they shall share my
wretched-ness.  Yet it is in your power to re-com-pense me, and de-liver
them from an evil which it only re-mains for you to make so great, that
not only you and your fam-ily, but thou-sands of oth-ers, shall be
swal-lowed up in the whirl-winds of its rage.  Let your com-pas-sion be
moved, and do not dis-dain me.  Listen to my tale; when you have heard
that, aban-don or com-mis-er-ate me, as you shall judge that I de-serve.
But hear me.  The guilty are al-lowed, by hu-man laws, bloody as they
are, to speak in their own de-fence be-fore they are con-demned.  Listen
to me, Franken-stein.  You ac-cuse me of murder, and yet you would, with
a sat-is-fied con-science, des-troy your own creature.  Oh, praise the
eternal justice of man!  Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me,
and then, if you can, and if you will, des-troy the work of your hands.”

“Why do you call to my re-mem-brance,” I re-joined, “cir-cum-stances of
which I shud-der to re-flect, that I have been the miser-able ori-gin and
au-thor?  Cursed be the day, ab-horred devil, in which you first saw
light!  Cursed (al-though I curse my-self) be the hands that formed you!
You have made me wretched bey-ond ex-pres-sion.  You have left me no power
to con-sider whether I am just to you or not.  Be-gone!  Re-lieve me from
the sight of your de-tested form.”

“Thus I re-lieve thee, my cre-ator,” he said, and placed his hated hands
be-fore my eyes, which I flung from me with vi-ol-ence; “thus I take from
thee a sight which you ab-hor.  Still thou canst listen to me and grant
me thy com-pas-sion.  By the vir-tues that I once pos-sessed, I de-mand this
from you.  Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the tem-per-at-ure of
this place is not fit-ting to your fine sen-sa-tions; come to the hut upon
the moun-tain.  The sun is yet high in the heav-ens; be-fore it des-cends
to hide it-self be-hind your snowy pre-cip-ices and il-lu-min-ate an-other
world, you will have heard my story and can de-cide.  On you it rests,
whether I quit for ever the neigh-bour-hood of man and lead a harm-less
life, or be-come the scourge of your fel-low creatures and the au-thor of
your own speedy ruin.”

As he said this he led the way across the ice; I fol-lowed.  My heart
was full, and I did not an-swer him, but as I pro-ceeded, I weighed the
vari-ous ar-gu-ments that he had used and de-term-ined at least to listen to
his tale.  I was partly urged by curi-os-ity, and com-pas-sion con-firmed my
res-ol-u-tion.  I had hitherto sup-posed him to be the mur-derer of my
brother, and I eagerly sought a con-firm-a-tion or denial of this opin-ion.
For the first time, also, I felt what the du-ties of a cre-ator to-wards
his creature were, and that I ought to render him happy be-fore I
com-plained of his wicked-ness.  These motives urged me to com-ply with
his de-mand.  We crossed the ice, there-fore, and as-cen-ded the op-pos-ite
rock.  The air was cold, and the rain again began to des-cend; we
entered the hut, the fiend with an air of ex-ulta-tion, I with a heavy
heart and de-pressed spir-its.  But I con-sen-ted to listen, and seat-ing
my-self by the fire which my odi-ous com-pan-ion had lighted, he thus began
his tale.





Chapter 11

“It is with con-sid-er-able dif-fi-culty that I re-mem-ber the ori-ginal era of
my be-ing; all the events of that period ap-pear con-fused and in-dis-tinct.
A strange mul-ti-pli-city of sen-sa-tions seized me, and I saw, felt, heard,
and smelt at the same time; and it was, in-deed, a long time be-fore I
learned to dis-tin-guish between the op-er-a-tions of my vari-ous senses.  By
de-grees, I re-mem-ber, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I
was ob-liged to shut my eyes.  Dark-ness then came over me and troubled
me, but hardly had I felt this when, by open-ing my eyes, as I now
sup-pose, the light poured in upon me again.  I walked and, I be-lieve,
des-cen-ded, but I presently found a great al-ter-a-tion in my sen-sa-tions.
Be-fore, dark and opaque bod-ies had sur-roun-ded me, im-per-vi-ous to my
touch or sight; but I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with
no obstacles which I could not either sur-mount or avoid.  The light
be-came more and more op-press-ive to me, and the heat weary-ing me as I
walked, I sought a place where I could re-ceive shade.  This was the
forest near In-gol-stadt; and here I lay by the side of a brook rest-ing
from my fa-tigue, un-til I felt tor-men-ted by hun-ger and thirst.  This
roused me from my nearly dormant state, and I ate some ber-ries which I
found hanging on the trees or ly-ing on the ground.  I slaked my thirst
at the brook, and then ly-ing down, was over-come by sleep.

“It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it
were, in-stinct-ively, find-ing my-self so des-ol-ate.  Be-fore I had quit-ted
your apart-ment, on a sen-sa-tion of cold, I had covered my-self with some
clothes, but these were in-suf-fi-cient to se-cure me from the dews of
night.  I was a poor, help-less, miser-able wretch; I knew, and could
dis-tin-guish, noth-ing; but feel-ing pain in-vade me on all sides, I sat
down and wept.

“Soon a gentle light stole over the heav-ens and gave me a sen-sa-tion of
pleas-ure.  I star-ted up and be-held a ra-di-ant form rise from among the
trees.  [The moon]  I gazed with a kind of won-der.  It moved slowly,
but it en-lightened my path, and I again went out in search of ber-ries.
I was still cold when un-der one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with
which I covered my-self, and sat down upon the ground.  No dis-tinct
ideas oc-cu-pied my mind; all was con-fused.  I felt light, and hun-ger,
and thirst, and dark-ness; in-nu-mer-able sounds rang in my ears, and on
all sides vari-ous scents sa-luted me; the only ob-ject that I could
dis-tin-guish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with
pleas-ure.

“Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had
greatly lessened, when I began to dis-tin-guish my sen-sa-tions from each
other.  I gradu-ally saw plainly the clear stream that sup-plied me with
drink and the trees that shaded me with their fo-liage.  I was de-lighted
when I first dis-covered that a pleas-ant sound, which of-ten sa-luted my
ears, pro-ceeded from the throats of the little winged an-im-als who had
of-ten in-ter-cep-ted the light from my eyes.  I began also to ob-serve,
with greater ac-cur-acy, the forms that sur-roun-ded me and to per-ceive the
bound-ar-ies of the ra-di-ant roof of light which can-op-ied me.  So-me-times I
tried to im-it-ate the pleas-ant songs of the birds but was un-able.
So-me-times I wished to ex-press my sen-sa-tions in my own mode, but the
un-couth and in-ar-tic-u-late sounds which broke from me frightened me into
si-lence again.

“The moon had dis-ap-peared from the night, and again, with a lessened
form, showed it-self, while I still re-mained in the forest.  My
sen-sa-tions had by this time be-come dis-tinct, and my mind re-ceived every
day ad-di-tional ideas.  My eyes be-came ac-cus-tomed to the light and to
per-ceive ob-jects in their right forms; I dis-tin-guished the in-sect from
the herb, and by de-grees, one herb from an-other.  I found that the
spar-row uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the black-bird and
thrush were sweet and en-ti-cing.

“One day, when I was op-pressed by cold, I found a fire which had been
left by some wan-der-ing beg-gars, and was over-come with de-light at the
warmth I ex-per-i-enced from it.  In my joy I thrust my hand into the live
em-bers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain.  How strange,
I thought, that the same cause should pro-duce such op-pos-ite ef-fects!  I
ex-amined the ma-ter-i-als of the fire, and to my joy found it to be
com-posed of wood.  I quickly col-lec-ted some branches, but they were wet
and would not burn.  I was pained at this and sat still watch-ing the
op-er-a-tion of the fire.  The wet wood which I had placed near the heat
dried and it-self be-came in-flamed.  I re-flec-ted on this, and by touch-ing
the vari-ous branches, I dis-covered the cause and busied my-self in
col-lect-ing a great quant-ity of wood, that I might dry it and have a
plen-ti-ful sup-ply of fire.  When night came on and brought sleep with
it, I was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be ex-tin-guished.  I
covered it care-fully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches
upon it; and then, spread-ing my cloak, I lay on the ground and sank
into sleep.

“It was morn-ing when I awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
I un-covered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame.  I
ob-served this also and con-trived a fan of branches, which roused the
em-bers when they were nearly ex-tin-guished.  When night came again I
found, with pleas-ure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that
the dis-cov-ery of this ele-ment was use-ful to me in my food, for I found
some of the of-fals that the trav-el-lers had left had been roas-ted, and
tasted much more sa-voury than the ber-ries I gathered from the trees.  I
tried, there-fore, to dress my food in the same man-ner, pla-cing it on
the live em-bers.  I found that the ber-ries were spoiled by this
op-er-a-tion, and the nuts and roots much im-proved.

“Food, how-ever, be-came scarce, and I of-ten spent the whole day
search-ing in vain for a few acorns to as-suage the pangs of hun-ger. When
I found this, I re-solved to quit the place that I had hitherto
in-hab-ited, to seek for one where the few wants I ex-per-i-enced would be
more eas-ily sat-is-fied.  In this emig-ra-tion I ex-ceed-ingly lamen-ted the
loss of the fire which I had ob-tained through ac-ci-dent and knew not how
to re-pro-duce it.  I gave sev-eral hours to the ser-i-ous con-sid-er-a-tion of
this dif-fi-culty, but I was ob-liged to re-lin-quish all at-tempt to sup-ply
it, and wrap-ping my-self up in my cloak, I struck across the wood
to-wards the set-ting sun.  I passed three days in these rambles and at
length dis-covered the open coun-try.  A great fall of snow had taken
place the night be-fore, and the fields were of one uni-form white; the
ap-pear-ance was dis-con-sol-ate, and I found my feet chilled by the cold
damp sub-stance that covered the ground.

“It was about seven in the morn-ing, and I longed to ob-tain food and
shel-ter; at length I per-ceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which
had doubt-less been built for the con-veni-ence of some shep-herd.  This
was a new sight to me, and I ex-amined the struc-ture with great
curi-os-ity.  Find-ing the door open, I entered.  An old man sat in it,
near a fire, over which he was pre-par-ing his break-fast.  He turned on
hear-ing a noise, and per-ceiv-ing me, shrieked loudly, and quit-ting the
hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his de-bil-it-ated form
hardly ap-peared cap-able.  His ap-pear-ance, dif-fer-ent from any I had ever
be-fore seen, and his flight some-what sur-prised me.  But I was en-chanted
by the ap-pear-ance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not
pen-et-rate; the ground was dry; and it presen-ted to me then as ex-quis-ite
and di-vine a re-treat as Pandæ-monium ap-peared to the dæ-mons of hell
after their suf-fer-ings in the lake of fire.  I greed-ily de-voured the
rem-nants of the shep-herd’s break-fast, which con-sisted of bread, cheese,
milk, and wine; the lat-ter, how-ever, I did not like.  Then, over-come by
fa-tigue, I lay down among some straw and fell asleep.

“It was noon when I awoke, and al-lured by the warmth of the sun, which
shone brightly on the white ground, I de-term-ined to re-com-mence my
travels; and, de-pos-it-ing the re-mains of the peas-ant’s break-fast in a
wal-let I found, I pro-ceeded across the fields for sev-eral hours, un-til
at sun-set I ar-rived at a vil-lage.  How mi-ra-cu-lous did this ap-pear!  The
huts, the neater cot-tages, and stately houses en-gaged my ad-mir-a-tion by
turns.  The ve-get-ables in the gar-dens, the milk and cheese that I saw
placed at the win-dows of some of the cot-tages, al-lured my ap-pet-ite. One
of the best of these I entered, but I had hardly placed my foot within
the door be-fore the chil-dren shrieked, and one of the wo-men fain-ted.
The whole vil-lage was roused; some fled, some at-tacked me, un-til,
griev-ously bruised by stones and many other kinds of mis-sile weapons, I
es-caped to the open coun-try and fear-fully took refuge in a low hovel,
quite bare, and mak-ing a wretched ap-pear-ance after the palaces I had
be-held in the vil-lage.  This hovel how-ever, joined a cot-tage of a neat
and pleas-ant ap-pear-ance, but after my late dearly bought ex-per-i-ence, I
dared not enter it.  My place of refuge was con-struc-ted of wood, but so
low that I could with dif-fi-culty sit up-right in it.  No wood, how-ever,
was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and
al-though the wind entered it by in-nu-mer-able chinks, I found it an
agree-able asylum from the snow and rain.

“Here, then, I re-treated and lay down happy to have found a shel-ter,
how-ever miser-able, from the in-clem-ency of the sea-son, and still more
from the bar-bar-ity of man.  As soon as morn-ing dawned I crept from my
ken-nel, that I might view the ad-ja-cent cot-tage and dis-cover if I could
re-main in the hab-it-a-tion I had found.  It was situ-ated against the back
of the cot-tage and sur-roun-ded on the sides which were ex-posed by a pig
sty and a clear pool of wa-ter.  One part was open, and by that I had
crept in; but now I covered every crevice by which I might be per-ceived
with stones and wood, yet in such a man-ner that I might move them on
oc-ca-sion to pass out; all the light I en-joyed came through the sty, and
that was suf-fi-cient for me.

“Hav-ing thus ar-ranged my dwell-ing and car-peted it with clean straw, I
re-tired, for I saw the fig-ure of a man at a dis-tance, and I re-membered
too well my treat-ment the night be-fore to trust my-self in his power.  I
had first, how-ever, provided for my susten-ance for that day by a loaf
of coarse bread, which I pur-loined, and a cup with which I could drink
more con-veni-ently than from my hand of the pure wa-ter which flowed by
my re-treat.  The floor was a little raised, so that it was kept
per-fectly dry, and by its vi-cin-ity to the chim-ney of the cot-tage it was
tol-er-ably warm.

“Be-ing thus provided, I re-solved to reside in this hovel un-til
some-thing should oc-cur which might al-ter my de-term-in-a-tion.  It was
in-deed a para-dise com-pared to the bleak forest, my former res-id-ence,
the rain-drop-ping branches, and dank earth.  I ate my break-fast with
pleas-ure and was about to re-move a plank to pro-cure my-self a little
wa-ter when I heard a step, and look-ing through a small chink, I be-held
a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing be-fore my hovel. The
girl was young and of gentle de-mean-our, un-like what I have since found
cot-tagers and farm-house ser-vants to be.  Yet she was meanly dressed, a
coarse blue pet-ti-coat and a linen jacket be-ing her only garb; her fair
hair was plaited but not ad-orned:  she looked pa-tient yet sad.  I lost
sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she re-turned bear-ing
the pail, which was now partly filled with milk.  As she walked along,
seem-ingly in-com-moded by the bur-den, a young man met her, whose
coun-ten-ance ex-pressed a deeper des-pond-ence.  Ut-ter-ing a few sounds with
an air of mel-an-choly, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the
cot-tage him-self.  She fol-lowed, and they dis-ap-peared.  Presently I saw
the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field
be-hind the cot-tage; and the girl was also busied, some-times in the
house and some-times in the yard.

“On ex-amin-ing my dwell-ing, I found that one of the win-dows of the
cot-tage had formerly oc-cu-pied a part of it, but the panes had been
filled up with wood. In one of these was a small and al-most
im-per-cept-ible chink through which the eye could just pen-et-rate.
Through this crevice a small room was vis-ible, white-washed and clean
but very bare of fur-niture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an
old man, lean-ing his head on his hands in a dis-con-sol-ate at-ti-tude. The
young girl was oc-cu-pied in ar-ran-ging the cot-tage; but presently she
took some-thing out of a drawer, which em-ployed her hands, and she sat
down be-side the old man, who, tak-ing up an in-stru-ment, began to play
and to pro-duce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the
night-in-gale. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had
never be-held aught beau-ti-ful be-fore. The sil-ver hair and be-ne-vol-ent
coun-ten-ance of the aged cot-tager won my rev-er-ence, while the gentle
man-ners of the girl en-ticed my love. He played a sweet mourn-ful air
which I per-ceived drew tears from the eyes of his ami-able com-pan-ion, of
which the old man took no no-tice, un-til she sobbed aud-ibly; he then
pro-nounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leav-ing her work, knelt
at his feet. He raised her and smiled with such kind-ness and af-fec-tion
that I felt sen-sa-tions of a pe-cu-liar and over-power-ing nature; they were
a mix-ture of pain and pleas-ure, such as I had never be-fore ex-per-i-enced,
either from hun-ger or cold, warmth or food; and I with-drew from the
win-dow, un-able to bear these emo-tions.

“Soon after this the young man re-turned, bear-ing on his shoulders a
load of wood.  The girl met him at the door, helped to re-lieve him of
his bur-den, and tak-ing some of the fuel into the cot-tage, placed it on
the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cot-tage,
and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese.  She seemed
pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she
placed in wa-ter, and then upon the fire.  She af-ter-wards con-tin-ued her
work, whilst the young man went into the garden and ap-peared busily
em-ployed in dig-ging and pulling up roots.  After he had been em-ployed
thus about an hour, the young wo-man joined him and they entered the
cot-tage to-gether.

“The old man had, in the mean-time, been pens-ive, but on the ap-pear-ance
of his com-pan-ions he as-sumed a more cheer-ful air, and they sat down to
eat.  The meal was quickly dis-patched.  The young wo-man was again
oc-cu-pied in ar-ran-ging the cot-tage, the old man walked be-fore the
cot-tage in the sun for a few minutes, lean-ing on the arm of the youth.
Noth-ing could ex-ceed in beauty the con-trast between these two ex-cel-lent
creatures.  One was old, with sil-ver hairs and a coun-ten-ance beam-ing
with be-ne-vol-ence and love; the younger was slight and grace-ful in his
fig-ure, and his fea-tures were moul-ded with the finest sym-metry, yet his
eyes and at-ti-tude ex-pressed the ut-most sad-ness and des-pond-ency.  The
old man re-turned to the cot-tage, and the youth, with tools dif-fer-ent
from those he had used in the morn-ing, dir-ec-ted his steps across the
fields.

“Night quickly shut in, but to my ex-treme won-der, I found that the
cot-tagers had a means of pro-long-ing light by the use of tapers, and was
de-lighted to find that the set-ting of the sun did not put an end to the
pleas-ure I ex-per-i-enced in watch-ing my hu-man neigh-bours.  In the even-ing
the young girl and her com-pan-ion were em-ployed in vari-ous oc-cu-pa-tions
which I did not un-der-stand; and the old man again took up the
in-stru-ment which pro-duced the di-vine sounds that had en-chanted me in
the morn-ing.  So soon as he had fin-ished, the youth began, not to play,
but to ut-ter sounds that were mono-ton-ous, and neither re-sem-bling the
har-mony of the old man’s in-stru-ment nor the songs of the birds; I since
found that he read aloud, but at that time I knew noth-ing of the
sci-ence of words or let-ters.

“The fam-ily, after hav-ing been thus oc-cu-pied for a short time,
ex-tin-guished their lights and re-tired, as I con-jec-tured, to rest.”





Chapter 12

“I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep.  I thought of the
oc-cur-rences of the day.  What chiefly struck me was the gentle man-ners
of these people, and I longed to join them, but dared not.  I
re-membered too well the treat-ment I had suffered the night be-fore from
the bar-bar-ous vil-la-gers, and re-solved, whatever course of con-duct I
might here-after think it right to pur-sue, that for the present I would
re-main quietly in my hovel, watch-ing and en-deav-our-ing to dis-cover the
motives which in-flu-enced their ac-tions.

“The cot-tagers arose the next morn-ing be-fore the sun.  The young wo-man
ar-ranged the cot-tage and pre-pared the food, and the youth de-par-ted
after the first meal.

“This day was passed in the same routine as that which pre-ceded it.
The young man was con-stantly em-ployed out of doors, and the girl in
vari-ous la-bor-i-ous oc-cu-pa-tions within.  The old man, whom I soon
per-ceived to be blind, em-ployed his leis-ure hours on his in-stru-ment or
in con-tem-pla-tion.  Noth-ing could ex-ceed the love and re-spect which the
younger cot-tagers ex-hib-ited to-wards their ven-er-able com-pan-ion.  They
per-formed to-wards him every little of-fice of af-fec-tion and duty with
gen-tle-ness, and he re-war-ded them by his be-ne-vol-ent smiles.

“They were not en-tirely happy.  The young man and his com-pan-ion of-ten
went apart and ap-peared to weep.  I saw no cause for their un-hap-pi-ness,
but I was deeply af-fected by it.  If such lovely creatures were
miser-able, it was less strange that I, an im-per-fect and sol-it-ary be-ing,
should be wretched.  Yet why were these gentle be-ings un-happy?  They
pos-sessed a de-light-ful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every
lux-ury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and de-li-cious vi-ands
when hungry; they were dressed in ex-cel-lent clothes; and, still more,
they en-joyed one an-other’s com-pany and speech, in-ter-chan-ging each day
looks of af-fec-tion and kind-ness.  What did their tears im-ply?  Did they
really ex-press pain?  I was at first un-able to solve these ques-tions,
but per-petual at-ten-tion and time ex-plained to me many ap-pear-ances which
were at first en-ig-matic.

“A con-sid-er-able period elapsed be-fore I dis-covered one of the causes of
the un-eas-i-ness of this ami-able fam-ily:  it was poverty, and they
suffered that evil in a very dis-tress-ing de-gree.  Their nour-ish-ment
con-sisted en-tirely of the ve-get-ables of their garden and the milk of
one cow, which gave very little dur-ing the winter, when its mas-ters
could scarcely pro-cure food to sup-port it.  They of-ten, I be-lieve,
suffered the pangs of hun-ger very poignantly, es-pe-cially the two
younger cot-tagers, for sev-eral times they placed food be-fore the old
man when they re-served none for them-selves.

“This trait of kind-ness moved me sens-ibly.  I had been ac-cus-tomed,
dur-ing the night, to steal a part of their store for my own
con-sump-tion, but when I found that in do-ing this I in-flic-ted pain on
the cot-tagers, I ab-stained and sat-is-fied my-self with ber-ries, nuts, and
roots which I gathered from a neigh-bour-ing wood.

“I dis-covered also an-other means through which I was en-abled to as-sist
their la-bours.  I found that the youth spent a great part of each day
in col-lect-ing wood for the fam-ily fire, and dur-ing the night I of-ten
took his tools, the use of which I quickly dis-covered, and brought home
fir-ing suf-fi-cient for the con-sump-tion of sev-eral days.

“I re-mem-ber, the first time that I did this, the young wo-man, when she
opened the door in the morn-ing, ap-peared greatly as-ton-ished on see-ing a great
pile of wood on the out-side. She uttered some words in a loud voice, and the
youth joined her, who also ex-pressed sur-prise. I ob-served, with pleas-ure,
that he did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in re-pair-ing the
cot-tage and cul-tiv-at-ing the garden.

“By de-grees I made a dis-cov-ery of still greater mo-ment. I found that
these people pos-sessed a method of com-mu-nic-at-ing their ex-per-i-ence and
feel-ings to one an-other by ar-tic-u-late sounds. I per-ceived that the words
they spoke some-times pro-duced pleas-ure or pain, smiles or sad-ness, in the
minds and coun-ten-ances of the hear-ers.  This was in-deed a god-like sci-ence,
and I ar-dently de-sired to be-come ac-quain-ted with it. But I was baffled in
every at-tempt I made for this pur-pose. Their pro-nun-ci-ation was quick, and
the words they uttered, not hav-ing any ap-par-ent con-nec-tion with vis-ible
ob-jects, I was un-able to dis-cover any clue by which I could un-ravel the
mys-tery of their ref-er-ence.  By great ap-plic-a-tion, how-ever, and after hav-ing
re-mained dur-ing the space of sev-eral re-volu-tions of the moon in my hovel, I
dis-covered the names that were given to some of the most fa-mil-iar ob-jects of
dis-course; I learned and ap-plied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and
_wood._ I learned also the names of the cot-tagers them-selves. The youth
and his com-pan-ion had each of them sev-eral names, but the old man had only
one, which was _father._ The girl was called _s-ister_ or
_Agatha,_ and the youth _Felix, brother,_ or _son_. I can-not
de-scribe the de-light I felt when I learned the ideas ap-pro-pri-ated to each of
these sounds and was able to pro-nounce them.  I dis-tin-guished sev-eral other
words without be-ing able as yet to un-der-stand or ap-ply them, such as _good,
dearest, un-happy._

“I spent the winter in this man-ner.  The gentle man-ners and beauty of
the cot-tagers greatly en-deared them to me; when they were un-happy, I
felt de-pressed; when they re-joiced, I sym-path-ised in their joys.  I saw
few hu-man be-ings be-sides them, and if any other happened to enter the
cot-tage, their harsh man-ners and rude gait only en-hanced to me the
su-per-ior ac-com-plish-ments of my friends.  The old man, I could per-ceive,
of-ten en-deav-oured to en-cour-age his chil-dren, as some-times I found that
he called them, to cast off their mel-an-choly.  He would talk in a
cheer-ful ac-cent, with an ex-pres-sion of good-ness that be-stowed pleas-ure
even upon me.  Agatha listened with re-spect, her eyes some-times filled
with tears, which she en-deav-oured to wipe away un-per-ceived; but I
gen-er-ally found that her coun-ten-ance and tone were more cheer-ful after
hav-ing listened to the ex-horta-tions of her father.  It was not thus
with Felix.  He was al-ways the sad-dest of the group, and even to my
un-prac-tised senses, he ap-peared to have suffered more deeply than his
friends.  But if his coun-ten-ance was more sor-row-ful, his voice was more
cheer-ful than that of his sis-ter, es-pe-cially when he ad-dressed the old
man.

“I could men-tion in-nu-mer-able in-stances which, al-though slight, marked
the dis-pos-i-tions of these ami-able cot-tagers.  In the midst of poverty
and want, Felix car-ried with pleas-ure to his sis-ter the first little
white flower that peeped out from be-neath the snowy ground.  Early in
the morn-ing, be-fore she had risen, he cleared away the snow that
ob-struc-ted her path to the milk-house, drew wa-ter from the well, and
brought the wood from the out-house, where, to his per-petual
as-ton-ish-ment, he found his store al-ways re-plen-ished by an in-vis-ible
hand.  In the day, I be-lieve, he worked some-times for a neigh-bour-ing
farmer, be-cause he of-ten went forth and did not re-turn un-til din-ner,
yet brought no wood with him.  At other times he worked in the garden,
but as there was little to do in the frosty sea-son, he read to the old
man and Agatha.

“This read-ing had puzzled me ex-tremely at first, but by de-grees I
dis-covered that he uttered many of the same sounds when he read as when
he talked.  I con-jec-tured, there-fore, that he found on the pa-per signs
for speech which he un-der-stood, and I ar-dently longed to com-pre-hend
these also; but how was that pos-sible when I did not even un-der-stand
the sounds for which they stood as signs?  I im-proved, how-ever,
sens-ibly in this sci-ence, but not suf-fi-ciently to fol-low up any kind of
con-ver-sa-tion, al-though I ap-plied my whole mind to the en-deav-our, for I
eas-ily per-ceived that, al-though I eagerly longed to dis-cover my-self to
the cot-tagers, I ought not to make the at-tempt un-til I had first be-come
mas-ter of their lan-guage, which know-ledge might en-able me to make them
over-look the de-form-ity of my fig-ure, for with this also the con-trast
per-petu-ally presen-ted to my eyes had made me ac-quain-ted.

“I had ad-mired the per-fect forms of my cot-tagers—their grace, beauty,
and del-ic-ate com-plex-ions; but how was I ter-ri-fied when I viewed my-self
in a trans-par-ent pool!  At first I star-ted back, un-able to be-lieve that
it was in-deed I who was re-flec-ted in the mir-ror; and when I be-came
fully con-vinced that I was in real-ity the mon-ster that I am, I was
filled with the bitterest sen-sa-tions of des-pond-ence and mor-ti-fic-a-tion.
Alas!  I did not yet en-tirely know the fatal ef-fects of this miser-able
de-form-ity.

“As the sun be-came warmer and the light of day longer, the snow
van-ished, and I be-held the bare trees and the black earth.  From this
time Felix was more em-ployed, and the heart-mov-ing in-dic-a-tions of
im-pend-ing fam-ine dis-ap-peared.  Their food, as I af-ter-wards found, was
coarse, but it was whole-some; and they pro-cured a suf-fi-ciency of it.
Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they
dressed; and these signs of com-fort in-creased daily as the sea-son
ad-vanced.

“The old man, lean-ing on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did
not rain, as I found it was called when the heav-ens poured forth its
wa-ters.  This fre-quently took place, but a high wind quickly dried the
earth, and the sea-son be-came far more pleas-ant than it had been.

“My mode of life in my hovel was uni-form.  Dur-ing the morn-ing I
at-ten-ded the mo-tions of the cot-tagers, and when they were dis-persed in
vari-ous oc-cu-pa-tions, I slept; the re-mainder of the day was spent in
ob-serving my friends.  When they had re-tired to rest, if there was any
moon or the night was star-light, I went into the woods and col-lec-ted
my own food and fuel for the cot-tage.  When I re-turned, as of-ten as it
was ne-ces-sary, I cleared their path from the snow and per-formed those
of-fices that I had seen done by Felix.  I af-ter-wards found that these
la-bours, per-formed by an in-vis-ible hand, greatly as-ton-ished them; and
once or twice I heard them, on these oc-ca-sions, ut-ter the words _good
spirit, won-der-ful_; but I did not then un-der-stand the sig-ni-fic-a-tion
of these terms.

“My thoughts now be-came more act-ive, and I longed to dis-cover the
motives and feel-ings of these lovely creatures; I was in-quis-it-ive to
know why Felix ap-peared so miser-able and Agatha so sad.  I thought
(fool-ish wretch!) that it might be in my power to re-store hap-pi-ness to
these de-serving people.  When I slept or was ab-sent, the forms of the
ven-er-able blind father, the gentle Agatha, and the ex-cel-lent Felix
flit-ted be-fore me.  I looked upon them as su-per-ior be-ings who would be
the ar-bit-ers of my fu-ture des-tiny.  I formed in my ima-gin-a-tion a
thou-sand pic-tures of present-ing my-self to them, and their re-cep-tion of
me.  I ima-gined that they would be dis-gus-ted, un-til, by my gentle
de-mean-our and con-cili-at-ing words, I should first win their fa-vour and
af-ter-wards their love.

“These thoughts ex-hil-ar-ated me and led me to ap-ply with fresh ar-dour to
the ac-quir-ing the art of lan-guage.  My or-gans were in-deed harsh, but
supple; and al-though my voice was very un-like the soft mu-sic of their
tones, yet I pro-nounced such words as I un-der-stood with tol-er-able ease.
It was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose
in-ten-tions were af-fec-tion-ate, al-though his man-ners were rude, de-served
bet-ter treat-ment than blows and ex-ec-ra-tion.

“The pleas-ant showers and gen-ial warmth of spring greatly altered the
as-pect of the earth.  Men who be-fore this change seemed to have been
hid in caves dis-persed them-selves and were em-ployed in vari-ous arts of
cul-tiv-a-tion.  The birds sang in more cheer-ful notes, and the leaves
began to bud forth on the trees.  Happy, happy earth!  Fit hab-it-a-tion
for gods, which, so short a time be-fore, was bleak, damp, and
un-whole-some.  My spir-its were el-ev-ated by the en-chant-ing ap-pear-ance of
nature; the past was blot-ted from my memory, the present was tran-quil,
and the fu-ture gil-ded by bright rays of hope and an-ti-cip-a-tions of joy.”





Chapter 13

“I now hasten to the more mov-ing part of my story.  I shall re-late
events that im-pressed me with feel-ings which, from what I had been,
have made me what I am.

“Spring ad-vanced rap-idly; the weather be-came fine and the skies
cloud-less.  It sur-prised me that what be-fore was desert and gloomy
should now bloom with the most beau-ti-ful flowers and ver-dure.  My
senses were grat-i-fied and re-freshed by a thou-sand scents of de-light and
a thou-sand sights of beauty.

“It was on one of these days, when my cot-tagers peri-od-ic-ally res-ted
from la-bour—the old man played on his gui-tar, and the chil-dren
listened to him—that I ob-served the coun-ten-ance of Felix was
mel-an-choly bey-ond ex-pres-sion; he sighed fre-quently, and once his father
paused in his mu-sic, and I con-jec-tured by his man-ner that he in-quired
the cause of his son’s sor-row.  Felix replied in a cheer-ful ac-cent, and
the old man was re-com-men-cing his mu-sic when someone tapped at the door.

“It was a lady on horse-back, ac-com-pan-ied by a coun-try-man as a guide.
The lady was dressed in a dark suit and covered with a thick black
veil.  Agatha asked a ques-tion, to which the stranger only replied by
pro-noun-cing, in a sweet ac-cent, the name of Felix.  Her voice was
mu-sical but un-like that of either of my friends.  On hear-ing this word,
Felix came up hast-ily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her
veil, and I be-held a coun-ten-ance of an-gelic beauty and ex-pres-sion.  Her
hair of a shin-ing raven black, and curi-ously braided; her eyes were
dark, but gentle, al-though an-im-ated; her fea-tures of a reg-u-lar
pro-por-tion, and her com-plex-ion won-drously fair, each cheek tinged with
a lovely pink.

“Felix seemed rav-ished with de-light when he saw her, every trait of
sor-row van-ished from his face, and it in-stantly ex-pressed a de-gree of
ec-static joy, of which I could hardly have be-lieved it cap-able; his
eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleas-ure; and at that mo-ment I
thought him as beau-ti-ful as the stranger.  She ap-peared af-fected by
dif-fer-ent feel-ings; wip-ing a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held
out her hand to Felix, who kissed it rap-tur-ously and called her, as
well as I could dis-tin-guish, his sweet Ar-a-bian.  She did not ap-pear to
un-der-stand him, but smiled.  He as-sisted her to dis-mount, and
dis-miss-ing her guide, con-duc-ted her into the cot-tage.  Some
con-ver-sa-tion took place between him and his father, and the young
stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have kissed his hand,
but he raised her and em-braced her af-fec-tion-ately.

“I soon per-ceived that al-though the stranger uttered ar-tic-u-late sounds
and ap-peared to have a lan-guage of her own, she was neither un-der-stood
by nor her-self un-der-stood the cot-tagers.  They made many signs which I
did not com-pre-hend, but I saw that her pres-ence dif-fused glad-ness
through the cot-tage, dis-pelling their sor-row as the sun dis-sip-ates the
morn-ing mists.  Felix seemed pe-cu-li-arly happy and with smiles of
de-light wel-comed his Ar-a-bian.  Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed
the hands of the lovely stranger, and point-ing to her brother, made
signs which ap-peared to me to mean that he had been sor-row-ful un-til she
came.  Some hours passed thus, while they, by their coun-ten-ances,
ex-pressed joy, the cause of which I did not com-pre-hend.  Presently I
found, by the fre-quent re-cur-rence of some sound which the stranger
re-peated after them, that she was en-deav-our-ing to learn their lan-guage;
and the idea in-stantly oc-curred to me that I should make use of the
same in-struc-tions to the same end.  The stranger learned about twenty
words at the first les-son; most of them, in-deed, were those which I had
be-fore un-der-stood, but I profited by the oth-ers.

“As night came on, Agatha and the Ar-a-bian re-tired early.  When they
sep-ar-ated Felix kissed the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night
sweet Safie.’  He sat up much longer, con-vers-ing with his father, and
by the fre-quent re-pe-ti-tion of her name I con-jec-tured that their lovely
guest was the sub-ject of their con-ver-sa-tion.  I ar-dently de-sired to
un-der-stand them, and bent every fac-ulty to-wards that pur-pose, but found
it ut-terly im-possible.

“The next morn-ing Felix went out to his work, and after the usual
oc-cu-pa-tions of Agatha were fin-ished, the Ar-a-bian sat at the feet of the
old man, and tak-ing his gui-tar, played some airs so en-tran-cingly
beau-ti-ful that they at once drew tears of sor-row and de-light from my
eyes.  She sang, and her voice flowed in a rich ca-dence, swell-ing or
dy-ing away like a night-in-gale of the woods.

“When she had fin-ished, she gave the gui-tar to Agatha, who at first
de-clined it.  She played a simple air, and her voice ac-com-pan-ied it in
sweet ac-cents, but un-like the won-drous strain of the stranger.  The old
man ap-peared en-rap-tured and said some words which Agatha en-deav-oured to
ex-plain to Safie, and by which he ap-peared to wish to ex-press that she
be-stowed on him the greatest de-light by her mu-sic.

“The days now passed as peace-ably as be-fore, with the sole al-ter-a-tion
that joy had taken place of sad-ness in the coun-ten-ances of my friends.
Safie was al-ways gay and happy; she and I im-proved rap-idly in the
know-ledge of lan-guage, so that in two months I began to com-pre-hend most
of the words uttered by my pro-tect-ors.

“In the mean-while also the black ground was covered with herb-age, and
the green banks in-ter-spersed with in-nu-mer-able flowers, sweet to the
scent and the eyes, stars of pale ra-di-ance among the moon-light woods;
the sun be-came warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my noc-turnal
rambles were an ex-treme pleas-ure to me, al-though they were con-sid-er-ably
shortened by the late set-ting and early rising of the sun, for I never
ven-tured abroad dur-ing day-light, fear-ful of meet-ing with the same
treat-ment I had formerly en-dured in the first vil-lage which I entered.

“My days were spent in close at-ten-tion, that I might more speedily
mas-ter the lan-guage; and I may boast that I im-proved more rap-idly than
the Ar-a-bian, who un-der-stood very little and con-versed in broken
ac-cents, whilst I com-pre-hen-ded and could im-it-ate al-most every word that
was spoken.

“While I im-proved in speech, I also learned the sci-ence of let-ters as
it was taught to the stranger, and this opened be-fore me a wide field
for won-der and de-light.

“The book from which Felix in-struc-ted Safie was Vol-ney’s _Ruins
of Em-pires_. I should not have un-der-stood the pur-port of this book had not
Felix, in read-ing it, given very minute ex-plan-a-tions. He had chosen this
work, he said, be-cause the de-clam-at-ory style was framed in im-it-a-tion of the
Eastern au-thors. Through this work I ob-tained a curs-ory know-ledge of his-tory
and a view of the sev-eral em-pires at present ex-ist-ing in the world; it gave
me an in-sight into the man-ners, gov-ern-ments, and re-li-gions of the dif-fer-ent
na-tions of the earth. I heard of the sloth-ful Asi-at-ics, of the stu-pendous
genius and men-tal activ-ity of the Gre-cians, of the wars and won-der-ful vir-tue
of the early Ro-mans—of their sub-sequent de-gen-er-at-ing—of the
de-cline of that mighty em-pire, of chiv-alry, Chris-tian-ity, and kings. I heard
of the dis-cov-ery of the Amer-ican hemi-sphere and wept with Safie over the
hap-less fate of its ori-ginal in-hab-it-ants.

“These won-der-ful nar-ra-tions in-spired me with strange feel-ings.  Was
man, in-deed, at once so power-ful, so vir-tu-ous and mag-ni-fi-cent, yet so
vi-cious and base?  He ap-peared at one time a mere scion of the evil
prin-ciple and at an-other as all that can be con-ceived of noble and
god-like.  To be a great and vir-tu-ous man ap-peared the highest hon-our
that can be-fall a sens-it-ive be-ing; to be base and vi-cious, as many on
re-cord have been, ap-peared the low-est de-grad-a-tion, a con-di-tion more
ab-ject than that of the blind mole or harm-less worm.  For a long time I
could not con-ceive how one man could go forth to murder his fel-low, or
even why there were laws and gov-ern-ments; but when I heard de-tails of
vice and blood-shed, my won-der ceased and I turned away with dis-gust and
loath-ing.

“Every con-ver-sa-tion of the cot-tagers now opened new won-ders to me.
While I listened to the in-struc-tions which Felix be-stowed upon the
Ar-a-bian, the strange sys-tem of hu-man so-ci-ety was ex-plained to me.  I
heard of the di-vi-sion of prop-erty, of im-mense wealth and squalid
poverty, of rank, des-cent, and noble blood.

“The words in-duced me to turn to-wards my-self.  I learned that the
pos-ses-sions most es-teemed by your fel-low creatures were high and
un-sul-lied des-cent united with riches.  A man might be re-spec-ted with
only one of these ad-vant-ages, but without either he was con-sidered,
ex-cept in very rare in-stances, as a vag-a-bond and a slave, doomed to
waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few!  And what was I? Of
my cre-ation and cre-ator I was ab-so-lutely ig-nor-ant, but I knew that I
pos-sessed no money, no friends, no kind of prop-erty.  I was, be-sides,
en-dued with a fig-ure hideously de-formed and loath-some; I was not even
of the same nature as man.  I was more agile than they and could
sub-sist upon coarser diet; I bore the ex-tremes of heat and cold with
less in-jury to my frame; my stature far ex-ceeded theirs.  When I looked
around I saw and heard of none like me.  Was I, then, a mon-ster, a blot
upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men dis-owned?

“I can-not de-scribe to you the agony that these re-flec-tions in-flic-ted
upon me; I tried to dis-pel them, but sor-row only in-creased with
know-ledge.  Oh, that I had for ever re-mained in my nat-ive wood, nor
known nor felt bey-ond the sen-sa-tions of hun-ger, thirst, and heat!

“Of what a strange nature is know-ledge!  It clings to the mind when it
has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock.  I wished some-times to
shake off all thought and feel-ing, but I learned that there was but one
means to over-come the sen-sa-tion of pain, and that was death—a state
which I feared yet did not un-der-stand.  I ad-mired vir-tue and good
feel-ings and loved the gentle man-ners and ami-able qual-it-ies of my
cot-tagers, but I was shut out from in-ter-course with them, ex-cept
through means which I ob-tained by stealth, when I was un-seen and
un-known, and which rather in-creased than sat-is-fied the de-sire I had of
be-com-ing one among my fel-lows.  The gentle words of Agatha and  the
an-im-ated smiles of the charm-ing Ar-a-bian were not for me.  The mild
ex-horta-tions of the old man and the lively con-ver-sa-tion of the loved
Felix were not for me. Miser-able, un-happy wretch!

“Other les-sons were im-pressed upon me even more deeply.  I heard of the
dif-fer-ence of sexes, and the birth and growth of chil-dren, how the
father doted on the smiles of the in-fant, and the lively sal-lies of the
older child, how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up
in the pre-cious charge, how the mind of youth ex-pan-ded and gained
know-ledge, of brother, sis-ter, and all the vari-ous re-la-tion-ships which
bind one hu-man be-ing to an-other in mu-tual bonds.

“But where were my friends and re-la-tions?  No father had watched my
in-fant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if
they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind va-cancy in which I
dis-tin-guished noth-ing.  From my earli-est re-mem-brance I had been as I
then was in height and pro-por-tion.  I had never yet seen a be-ing
re-sem-bling me or who claimed any in-ter-course with me.  What was I?  The
ques-tion again re-curred, to be answered only with groans.

“I will soon ex-plain to what these feel-ings ten-ded, but al-low me now to
re-turn to the cot-tagers, whose story ex-cited in me such vari-ous
feel-ings of in-dig-na-tion, de-light, and won-der, but which all ter-min-ated
in ad-di-tional love and rev-er-ence for my pro-tect-ors (for so I loved, in
an in-no-cent, half-pain-ful self-de-ceit, to call them).”





Chapter 14

“Some time elapsed be-fore I learned the his-tory of my friends.  It was
one which could not fail to im-press it-self deeply on my mind, un-fold-ing
as it did a num-ber of cir-cum-stances, each in-ter-est-ing and won-der-ful to
one so ut-terly in-ex-per-i-enced as I was.

“The name of the old man was De Lacey.  He was des-cen-ded from a good
fam-ily in France, where he had lived for many years in af-flu-ence,
re-spec-ted by his su-per-i-ors and be-loved by his equals.  His son was bred
in the ser-vice of his coun-try, and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the
highest dis-tinc-tion.  A few months be-fore my ar-rival they had lived in
a large and lux-uri-ous city called Paris, sur-roun-ded by friends and
pos-sessed of every en-joy-ment which vir-tue, re-fine-ment of in-tel-lect, or
taste, ac-com-pan-ied by a mod-er-ate for-tune, could af-ford.

“The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin.  He was a
Turk-ish mer-chant and had in-hab-ited Paris for many years, when, for some
reason which I could not learn, he be-came ob-nox-ious to the gov-ern-ment.
He was seized and cast into prison the very day that Safie ar-rived from
Con-stantinople to join him.  He was tried and con-demned to death.  The
in-justice of his sen-tence was very flag-rant; all Paris was in-dig-nant;
and it was judged that his re-li-gion and wealth rather than the crime
al-leged against him had been the cause of his con-dem-na-tion.

“Felix had ac-ci-dent-ally been present at the trial; his hor-ror and
in-dig-na-tion were un-con-trol-lable when he heard the de-cision of the
court.  He made, at that mo-ment, a sol-emn vow to de-liver him and then
looked around for the means.  After many fruit-less at-tempts to gain
ad-mit-tance to the prison, he found a strongly grated win-dow in an
un-guarded part of the build-ing, which lighted the dun-geon of the
un-for-tu-nate Muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in des-pair the
ex-e-cu-tion of the bar-bar-ous sen-tence.  Felix vis-ited the grate at night
and made known to the pris-oner his in-ten-tions in his fa-vour.  The Turk,
amazed and de-lighted, en-deav-oured to kindle the zeal of his de-liverer
by prom-ises of re-ward and wealth.  Felix re-jec-ted his of-fers with
con-tempt, yet when he saw the lovely Safie, who was al-lowed to visit
her father and who by her ges-tures ex-pressed her lively grat-it-ude, the
youth could not help own-ing to his own mind that the cap-tive pos-sessed
a treas-ure which would fully re-ward his toil and haz-ard.

“The Turk quickly per-ceived the im-pres-sion that his daugh-ter had made
on the heart of Felix and en-deav-oured to se-cure him more en-tirely in
his in-terests by the prom-ise of her hand in mar-riage so soon as he
should be con-veyed to a place of safety.  Felix was too del-ic-ate to
ac-cept this of-fer, yet he looked for-ward to the prob-ab-il-ity of the
event as to the con-sum-ma-tion of his hap-pi-ness.

“Dur-ing the en-su-ing days, while the pre-par-a-tions were go-ing for-ward for
the es-cape of the mer-chant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by sev-eral
let-ters that he re-ceived from this lovely girl, who found means to
ex-press her thoughts in the lan-guage of her lover by the aid of an old
man, a ser-vant of her father who un-der-stood French.  She thanked him in
the most ar-dent terms for his in-ten-ded ser-vices to-wards her par-ent, and
at the same time she gently de-plored her own fate.

“I have cop-ies of these let-ters, for I found means, dur-ing my res-id-ence
in the hovel, to pro-cure the im-ple-ments of writ-ing; and the let-ters
were of-ten in the hands of Felix or Agatha.  Be-fore I de-part I will
give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present,
as the sun is already far de-clined, I shall only have time to re-peat
the sub-stance of them to you.

“Safie re-lated that her mother was a Chris-tian Arab, seized and made a
slave by the Turks; re-com-men-ded by her beauty, she had won the heart of
the father of Safie, who mar-ried her.  The young girl spoke in high and
en-thu-si-astic terms of her mother, who, born in free-dom, spurned the
bond-age to which she was now re-duced.  She in-struc-ted her daugh-ter in
the ten-ets of her re-li-gion and taught her to as-pire to higher powers of
in-tel-lect and an in-de-pend-ence of spirit for-bid-den to the fe-male
fol-low-ers of Muhammad.  This lady died, but her les-sons were in-delibly
im-pressed on the mind of Safie, who sickened at the pro-spect of again
re-turn-ing to Asia and be-ing im-mured within the walls of a harem,
al-lowed only to oc-cupy her-self with in-fant-ile amuse-ments, ill-suited to
the tem-per of her soul, now ac-cus-tomed to grand ideas and a noble
emu-la-tion for vir-tue.  The pro-spect of mar-ry-ing a Chris-tian and
re-main-ing in a coun-try where wo-men were al-lowed to take a rank in
so-ci-ety was en-chant-ing to her.

“The day for the ex-e-cu-tion of the Turk was fixed, but on the night
pre-vi-ous to it he quit-ted his prison and be-fore morn-ing was dis-tant
many leagues from Paris.  Felix had pro-cured pass-ports in the name of
his father, sis-ter, and him-self.  He had pre-vi-ously com-mu-nic-ated his
plan to the former, who aided the de-ceit by quit-ting his house, un-der
the pre-tence of a jour-ney and con-cealed him-self, with his daugh-ter, in
an ob-scure part of Paris.

“Felix con-duc-ted the fu-git-ives through France to Ly-ons and across Mont
Cenis to Leg-horn, where the mer-chant had de-cided to wait a fa-vour-able
op-por-tun-ity of passing into some part of the Turk-ish domin-ions.

“Safie re-solved to re-main with her father un-til the mo-ment of his
de-par-ture, be-fore which time the Turk re-newed his prom-ise that she
should be united to his de-liverer; and Felix re-mained with them in
ex-pect-a-tion of that event; and in the mean-time he en-joyed the so-ci-ety
of the Ar-a-bian, who ex-hib-ited to-wards him the simplest and tenderest
af-fec-tion.  They con-versed with one an-other through the means of an
in-ter-preter, and some-times with the in-ter-pret-a-tion of looks; and Safie
sang to him the di-vine airs of her nat-ive coun-try.

“The Turk al-lowed this in-tim-acy to take place and en-cour-aged the hopes
of the youth-ful lov-ers, while in his heart he had formed far other
plans.  He loathed the idea that his daugh-ter should be united to a
Chris-tian, but he feared the re-sent-ment of Felix if he should ap-pear
luke-warm, for he knew that he was still in the power of his de-liverer
if he should choose to be-tray him to the Italian state which they
in-hab-ited.  He re-volved a thou-sand plans by which he should be en-abled
to pro-long the de-ceit un-til it might be no longer ne-ces-sary, and
secretly to take his daugh-ter with him when he de-par-ted.  His plans
were fa-cil-it-ated by the news which ar-rived from Paris.

“The gov-ern-ment of France were greatly en-raged at the es-cape of their
vic-tim and spared no pains to de-tect and pun-ish his de-liverer.  The
plot of Felix was quickly dis-covered, and De Lacey and Agatha were
thrown into prison.  The news reached Felix and roused him from his
dream of pleas-ure.  His blind and aged father and his gentle sis-ter lay
in a noi-some dun-geon while he en-joyed the free air and the so-ci-ety of
her whom he loved.  This idea was tor-ture to him.  He quickly ar-ranged
with the Turk that if the lat-ter should find a fa-vour-able op-por-tun-ity
for es-cape be-fore Felix could re-turn to Italy, Safie should re-main as a
boarder at a con-vent at Leg-horn; and then, quit-ting the lovely Ar-a-bian,
he hastened to Paris and de-livered him-self up to the ven-geance of the
law, hop-ing to free De Lacey and Agatha by this pro-ceed-ing.

“He did not suc-ceed.  They re-mained con-fined for five months be-fore the
trial took place, the res-ult of which de-prived them of their for-tune
and con-demned them to a per-petual ex-ile from their nat-ive coun-try.

“They found a miser-able asylum in the cot-tage in Ger-many, where I
dis-covered them.  Felix soon learned that the treach-er-ous Turk, for
whom he and his fam-ily en-dured such un-heard-of op-pres-sion, on
dis-cov-er-ing that his de-liverer was thus re-duced to poverty and ruin,
be-came a traitor to good feel-ing and hon-our and had quit-ted Italy with
his daugh-ter, in-sult-ingly send-ing Felix a pit-tance of money to aid him,
as he said, in some plan of fu-ture main-ten-ance.

“Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix and rendered
him, when I first saw him, the most miser-able of his fam-ily.  He could
have en-dured poverty, and while this dis-tress had been the meed of his
vir-tue, he glor-ied in it; but the in-grat-it-ude of the Turk and the loss
of his be-loved Safie were mis-for-tunes more bit-ter and ir-re-par-able.  The
ar-rival of the Ar-a-bian now in-fused new life into his soul.

“When the news reached Leg-horn that Felix was de-prived of his wealth
and rank, the mer-chant com-manded his daugh-ter to think no more of her
lover, but to pre-pare to re-turn to her nat-ive coun-try.  The gen-er-ous
nature of Safie was out-raged by this com-mand; she at-temp-ted to
ex-pos-tu-late with her father, but he left her an-grily, re-it-er-at-ing his
tyr-an-nical man-date.

“A few days after, the Turk entered his daugh-ter’s apart-ment and told
her hast-ily that he had reason to be-lieve that his res-id-ence at Leg-horn
had been di-vulged and that he should speedily be de-livered up to the
French gov-ern-ment; he had con-sequently hired a ves-sel to con-vey him to
Con-stantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours.  He
in-ten-ded to leave his daugh-ter un-der the care of a con-fid-en-tial
ser-vant, to fol-low at her leis-ure with the greater part of his
prop-erty, which had not yet ar-rived at Leg-horn.

“When alone, Safie re-solved in her own mind the plan of con-duct that it
would be-come her to pur-sue in this emer-gency.  A res-id-ence in Tur-key
was ab-hor-rent to her; her re-li-gion and her feel-ings were alike averse
to it.  By some pa-pers of her father which fell into her hands she
heard of the ex-ile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where
he then resided.  She hes-it-ated some time, but at length she formed her
de-term-in-a-tion.  Tak-ing with her some jew-els that be-longed to her and a
sum of money, she quit-ted Italy with an at-tend-ant, a nat-ive of Leg-horn,
but who un-der-stood the com-mon lan-guage of Tur-key, and de-par-ted for
Ger-many.

“She ar-rived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cot-tage
of De Lacey, when her at-tend-ant fell dan-ger-ously ill.  Safie nursed her
with the most de-voted af-fec-tion, but the poor girl died, and the
Ar-a-bian was left alone, un-ac-quain-ted with the lan-guage of the coun-try
and ut-terly ig-nor-ant of the cus-toms of the world.  She fell, how-ever,
into good hands.  The Italian had men-tioned the name of the spot for
which they were bound, and after her death the wo-man of the house in
which they had lived took care that Safie should ar-rive in safety at
the cot-tage of her lover.”





Chapter 15

“Such was the his-tory of my be-loved cot-tagers.  It im-pressed me deeply.
I learned, from the views of so-cial life which it de-veloped, to ad-mire
their vir-tues and to de-prec-ate the vices of man-kind.

“As yet I looked upon crime as a dis-tant evil, be-ne-vol-ence and
gen-er-os-ity were ever present be-fore me, in-cit-ing within me a de-sire to
be-come an actor in the busy scene where so many ad-mir-able qual-it-ies
were called forth and dis-played.  But in giv-ing an ac-count of the
pro-gress of my in-tel-lect, I must not omit a cir-cum-stance which oc-curred
in the be-gin-ning of the month of August of the same year.

“One night dur-ing my ac-cus-tomed visit to the neigh-bour-ing wood where I
col-lec-ted my own food and brought home fir-ing for my pro-tect-ors, I found on
the ground a leath-ern port-manteau con-tain-ing sev-eral art-icles of dress and
some books.  I eagerly seized the prize and re-turned with it to my hovel. 
For-tunately the books were writ-ten in the lan-guage, the ele-ments of which I
had ac-quired at the cot-tage; they con-sisted of _Paradise Lost_, a volume
of _Plut-arch’s Lives_, and the _Sor-rows of Werter_. The
pos-ses-sion of these treas-ures gave me ex-treme de-light; I now con-tinu-ally
stud-ied and ex-er-cised my mind upon these his-tor-ies, whilst my friends were
em-ployed in their or-din-ary oc-cu-pa-tions.

“I can hardly de-scribe to you the ef-fect of these books.  They pro-duced
in me an in-fin-ity of new im-ages and feel-ings, that some-times raised me
to ec-stasy, but more fre-quently sunk me into the low-est de-jec-tion.  In
the _Sor-rows of Werter_, be-sides the in-terest of its simple and af-fect-ing
story, so many opin-ions are can-vassed and so many lights thrown upon
what had hitherto been to me ob-scure sub-jects that I found in it a
never-end-ing source of spec-u-la-tion and as-ton-ish-ment.  The gentle and
do-mestic man-ners it de-scribed, com-bined with lofty sen-ti-ments and
feel-ings, which had for their ob-ject some-thing out of self, ac-cor-ded
well with my ex-per-i-ence among my pro-tect-ors and with the wants which
were for ever alive in my own bosom.  But I thought Werter him-self a
more di-vine be-ing than I had ever be-held or ima-gined; his char-ac-ter
con-tained no pre-ten-sion, but it sank deep.  The dis-quis-i-tions upon
death and sui-cide were cal-cu-lated to fill  me with won-der.  I did not
pre-tend to enter into the mer-its of the case, yet I in-clined to-wards
the opin-ions of the hero, whose ex-tinc-tion I wept, without pre-cisely
un-der-stand-ing it.

“As I read, how-ever, I ap-plied much per-son-ally to my own feel-ings and
con-di-tion.  I found my-self sim-ilar yet at the same time strangely
un-like to the be-ings con-cern-ing whom I read and to whose con-ver-sa-tion I
was a listener.  I sym-path-ised with and partly un-der-stood them, but I
was un-formed in mind; I was de-pend-ent on none and re-lated to none.
‘The path of my de-par-ture was free,’ and there was none to lament my
an-ni-hil-a-tion.  My per-son was hideous and my stature gi-gantic.  What did
this mean?  Who was I?  What was I?  Whence did I come?  What was my
des-tin-a-tion?  These ques-tions con-tinu-ally re-curred, but I was un-able to
solve them.

“The volume of _Plut-arch’s Lives_ which I pos-sessed con-tained the
his-tor-ies of the first founders of the an-cient re-pub-lics.  This book
had a far dif-fer-ent ef-fect upon me from the _Sor-rows of Werter_.  I
learned from Werter’s ima-gin-a-tions des-pond-ency and gloom, but Plut-arch
taught me high thoughts; he el-ev-ated me above the wretched sphere of my
own re-flec-tions, to ad-mire and love the her-oes of past ages.  Many
things I read sur-passed my un-der-stand-ing and ex-per-i-ence.  I had a very
con-fused know-ledge of king-doms, wide ex-tents of coun-try, mighty rivers,
and bound-less seas.  But I was per-fectly un-ac-quain-ted with towns and
large as-semblages of men. The cot-tage of my pro-tect-ors had been the
only school in which I had stud-ied hu-man nature, but this book
de-veloped new and migh-tier scenes of ac-tion.  I read of men con-cerned
in pub-lic af-fairs, gov-ern-ing or mas-sac-ring their spe-cies.  I felt the
greatest ar-dour for vir-tue rise within me, and ab-hor-rence for vice, as
far as I un-der-stood the sig-ni-fic-a-tion of those terms, re-l-at-ive as they
were, as I ap-plied them, to pleas-ure and pain alone.  In-duced by these
feel-ings, I was of course led to ad-mire peace-able law-givers, Numa,
So-lon, and Ly-cur-gus, in pref-er-ence to Romu-lus and Theseus.  The
pat-ri-archal lives of my pro-tect-ors caused these im-pres-sions to take a
firm hold on my mind; per-haps, if my first in-tro-duc-tion to hu-man-ity had
been made by a young sol-dier, burn-ing for glory and slaughter, I should
have been im-bued with dif-fer-ent sen-sa-tions.

“But _Paradise Lost_ ex-cited dif-fer-ent and far deeper emo-tions.  I read
it, as I had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as
a true his-tory.  It moved every feel-ing of won-der and awe that the
pic-ture of an om-ni-po-tent God war-ring with his creatures was cap-able of
ex-cit-ing.  I of-ten re-ferred the sev-eral situ-ations, as their sim-il-ar-ity
struck me, to my own.  Like Adam, I was ap-par-ently united by no link to
any other be-ing in ex-ist-ence; but his state was far dif-fer-ent from mine
in every other re-spect.  He had come forth from the hands of God a
per-fect creature, happy and pros-per-ous, guarded by the es-pe-cial care of
his Creator; he was al-lowed to con-verse with and ac-quire know-ledge from
be-ings of a su-per-ior nature, but I was wretched, help-less, and alone.
Many times I con-sidered Satan as the fit-ter em-blem of my con-di-tion, for
of-ten, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my pro-tect-ors, the bit-ter
gall of envy rose within me.

“Another cir-cum-stance strengthened and con-firmed these feel-ings.  Soon
after my ar-rival in the hovel I dis-covered some pa-pers in the pocket of
the dress which I had taken from your labor-at-ory.  At first I had
neg-lected them, but now that I was able to de-cipher the char-ac-ters in
which they were writ-ten, I began to study them with di-li-gence.  It was
your journal of the four months that pre-ceded my cre-ation.  You
minutely de-scribed in these pa-pers every step you took in the pro-gress
of your work; this his-tory was mingled with ac-counts of do-mestic
oc-cur-rences.  You doubt-less re-col-lect these pa-pers.  Here they are.
Everything is re-lated in them which bears ref-er-ence to my ac-cursed
ori-gin; the whole de-tail of that series of dis-gust-ing cir-cum-stances
which pro-duced it is set in view; the minutest de-scrip-tion of my odi-ous
and loath-some per-son is given, in lan-guage which painted your own
hor-rors and rendered mine in-delible.  I sickened as I read.  ‘Hate-ful
day when I re-ceived life!’ I ex-claimed in agony.  ‘Ac-cursed cre-ator!
Why did you form a mon-ster so hideous that even _y-ou_ turned from me in
dis-gust?  God, in pity, made man beau-ti-ful and al-lur-ing, after his own
im-age; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more hor-rid even from the
very re-semb-lance.  Satan had his com-pan-ions, fel-low dev-ils, to ad-mire
and en-cour-age him, but I am sol-it-ary and ab-horred.’

“These were the re-flec-tions of my hours of des-pond-ency and solitude;
but when I con-tem-plated the vir-tues of the cot-tagers, their ami-able and
be-ne-vol-ent dis-pos-i-tions, I per-suaded my-self that when they should
be-come ac-quain-ted with my ad-mir-a-tion of their vir-tues they  would
com-pas-sion-ate me and over-look my per-sonal de-form-ity.  Could they turn
from their door one, how-ever mon-strous, who so-li-cited their com-pas-sion
and friend-ship?  I re-solved, at least, not to des-pair, but in every way
to fit my-self for an in-ter-view with them which would de-cide my fate.  I
post-poned this at-tempt for some months longer, for the im-port-ance
at-tached to its suc-cess in-spired me with a dread lest I should fail.
Besides, I found that my un-der-stand-ing im-proved so much with every
day’s ex-per-i-ence that I was un-will-ing to com-mence this un-der-tak-ing
un-til a few more months should have ad-ded to my saga-city.

“Several changes, in the mean-time, took place in the cot-tage.  The
pres-ence of Safie dif-fused hap-pi-ness among its in-hab-it-ants, and I also
found that a greater de-gree of plenty reigned there.  Felix and Agatha
spent more time in amuse-ment and con-ver-sa-tion, and were as-sisted in
their la-bours by ser-vants.  They did not ap-pear rich, but they were
con-ten-ted and happy; their feel-ings were se-rene and peace-ful, while
mine be-came every day more tu-mul-tu-ous.  In-crease of know-ledge only
dis-covered to me more clearly what a wretched out-cast I was.  I
cher-ished hope, it is true, but it van-ished when I be-held my per-son
re-flec-ted in wa-ter or my shadow in the moon-shine, even as that frail
im-age and that in-con-stant shade.

“I en-deav-oured to crush these fears and to for-tify my-self for the trial
which in a few months I re-solved to un-dergo; and some-times I al-lowed my
thoughts, un-checked by reason, to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and
dared to fancy ami-able and lovely creatures sym-path-ising with my
feel-ings and cheer-ing my gloom; their an-gelic coun-ten-ances breathed
smiles of con-sol-a-tion.  But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my
sor-rows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone.  I re-membered Adam’s
sup-plic-a-tion to his Creator.  But where was mine?  He had aban-doned me,
and in the bit-ter-ness of my heart I cursed him.

“Au-tumn passed thus.  I saw, with sur-prise and grief, the leaves de-cay
and fall, and nature again as-sume the bar-ren and bleak ap-pear-ance it
had worn when I first be-held the woods and the lovely moon.  Yet I did
not heed the bleak-ness of the weather; I was bet-ter fit-ted by my
con-form-a-tion for the en-dur-ance of cold than heat.  But my chief
de-lights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay
ap-parel of sum-mer; when those deser-ted me, I turned with more at-ten-tion
to-wards the cot-tagers.  Their hap-pi-ness was not de-creased by the
ab-sence of sum-mer.  They loved and sym-path-ised with one an-other; and
their joys, de-pend-ing on each other, were not in-ter-rup-ted by the
cas-u-al-ties that took place around them.  The more I saw of them, the
greater be-came my de-sire to claim their pro-tec-tion and kind-ness; my
heart yearned to be known and loved by these ami-able creatures; to see
their sweet looks dir-ec-ted to-wards me with af-fec-tion was the ut-most
limit of my am-bi-tion.  I dared not think that they would turn them from
me with dis-dain and hor-ror.  The poor that stopped at their door were
never driven away.  I asked, it is true, for greater treas-ures than a
little food or rest:  I re-quired kind-ness and sym-pathy; but I did not
be-lieve my-self ut-terly un-worthy of it.

“The winter ad-vanced, and an en-tire re-volu-tion of the sea-sons had taken
place since I awoke into life.  My at-ten-tion at this time was solely
dir-ec-ted to-wards my plan of in-tro-du-cing my-self into the cot-tage of my
pro-tect-ors.  I re-volved many pro-jects, but that on which I fi-nally
fixed was to enter the dwell-ing when the blind old man should be alone.
I had saga-city enough to dis-cover that the un-nat-ural hideous-ness of my
per-son was the chief ob-ject of hor-ror with those who had formerly
be-held me.  My voice, al-though harsh, had noth-ing ter-rible in it; I
thought, there-fore, that if in the ab-sence of his chil-dren I could gain
the good will and me-di-ation of the old De Lacey, I might by his means
be tol-er-ated by my younger pro-tect-ors.

“One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground
and dif-fused cheer-ful-ness, al-though it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha,
and Felix de-par-ted on a long coun-try walk, and the old man, at his own
de-sire, was left alone in the cot-tage.  When his chil-dren had de-par-ted,
he took up his gui-tar and played sev-eral mourn-ful but sweet airs, more
sweet and mourn-ful than I had ever heard him play be-fore.  At first his
coun-ten-ance was il-lu-min-ated with pleas-ure, but as he con-tin-ued,
thought-ful-ness and sad-ness suc-ceeded; at length, lay-ing aside the
in-stru-ment, he sat ab-sorbed in re-flec-tion.

“My heart beat quick; this was the hour and mo-ment of trial, which
would de-cide my hopes or real-ise my fears. The ser-vants were gone to a
neigh-bour-ing fair.  All was si-lent in and around the cot-tage; it was an
ex-cel-lent op-por-tun-ity; yet, when I pro-ceeded to ex-ecute my plan, my
limbs failed me and I sank to the ground.  Again I rose, and ex-ert-ing
all the firm-ness of which I was mas-ter, re-moved the planks which I had
placed be-fore my hovel to con-ceal my re-treat.  The fresh air re-vived
me, and with re-newed de-term-in-a-tion I ap-proached the door of their
cot-tage.

“I knocked. ‘Who is there?’ said the old man. ‘Come in.’

“I entered. ‘Par-don this in-tru-sion,’ said I; ‘I am
a trav-el-ler in want of a little rest; you would greatly ob-lige me if you
would al-low me to re-main a few minutes be-fore the fire.’

“‘Enter,’ said De Lacey, ‘and I will try in what
man-ner I can to re-lieve your wants; but, un-for-tu-nately, my chil-dren are
from home, and as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it dif-fi-cult to
pro-cure food for you.’

“‘Do not trouble your-self, my kind host; I have food; it is
warmth and rest only that I need.’

“I sat down, and a si-lence en-sued.  I knew that every minute was
pre-cious to me, yet I re-mained ir-res-ol-ute in what man-ner to com-mence
the in-ter-view, when the old man ad-dressed me.

‘By your lan-guage, stranger, I sup-pose you are my coun-try-man; are you
French?’

“‘No; but I was edu-cated by a French fam-ily and un-der-stand that
lan-guage only.  I am now go-ing to claim the pro-tec-tion of some friends,
whom I sin-cerely love, and of whose fa-vour I have some hopes.’

“‘Are they Ger-mans?’

“‘No, they are French.  But let us change the sub-ject.  I am an
un-for-tu-nate and deser-ted creature, I look around and I have no re-la-tion
or friend upon earth.  These ami-able people to whom I go have never
seen me and know little of me.  I am full of fears, for if I fail
there, I am an out-cast in the world for ever.’

“‘Do not des-pair. To be friend-less is in-deed to be un-for-tu-nate, but
the hearts of men, when un-pre-ju-diced by any ob-vi-ous self-in-terest, are
full of broth-erly love and char-ity.  Rely, there-fore, on your hopes;
and if these friends are good and ami-able, do not des-pair.’

“‘They are kind—they are the most ex-cel-lent creatures in the world;
but, un-for-tu-nately, they are pre-ju-diced against me.  I have good
dis-pos-i-tions; my life has been hitherto harm-less and in some de-gree
be-ne-fi-cial; but a fatal pre-ju-dice clouds their eyes, and where they
ought to see a feel-ing and kind friend, they be-hold only a de-test-able
mon-ster.’

“‘That is in-deed un-for-tu-nate; but if you are really blame-less, can-not
you un-de-ceive them?’

“‘I am about to un-der-take that task; and it is on that ac-count that I
feel so many over-whelm-ing ter-rors.  I ten-derly love these friends; I
have, un-known to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
kind-ness to-wards them; but they be-lieve that I wish to in-jure them, and
it is that pre-ju-dice which I wish to over-come.’

“‘Where do these friends reside?’

“‘Near this spot.’

“The old man paused and then con-tin-ued, ‘If you will un-re-servedly
con-fide to me the par-tic-u-lars of your tale, I per-haps may be of use in
un-de-ceiv-ing them.  I am blind and can-not judge of your coun-ten-ance, but
there is some-thing in your words which per-suades me that you are
sin-cere.  I am poor and an ex-ile, but it will af-ford me true pleas-ure
to be in any way ser-vice-able to a hu-man creature.’

“‘Ex-cel-lent man!  I thank you and ac-cept your gen-er-ous of-fer.  You
raise me from the dust by this kind-ness; and I trust that, by your aid,
I shall not be driven from the so-ci-ety and sym-pathy of your fel-low
creatures.’

“‘Heaven for-bid!  Even if you were really crim-inal, for that can only
drive you to des-per-a-tion, and not in-stig-ate you to vir-tue.  I also am
un-for-tu-nate; I and my fam-ily have been con-demned, al-though in-no-cent;
judge, there-fore, if I do not feel for your mis-for-tunes.’

“‘How can I thank you, my best and only be-ne-factor?  From your lips
first have I heard the voice of kind-ness dir-ec-ted to-wards me; I shall
be for ever grate-ful; and your present hu-man-ity as-sures me of suc-cess
with those friends whom I am on the point of meet-ing.’

“‘May I know the names and res-id-ence of those friends?’

“I paused. This, I thought, was the mo-ment of de-cision, which was to
rob me of or be-stow hap-pi-ness on me for ever.  I struggled vainly for
firm-ness suf-fi-cient to an-swer him, but the ef-fort des-troyed all my
re-main-ing strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud.  At that
mo-ment I heard the steps of my younger pro-tect-ors.  I had not a mo-ment
to lose, but seiz-ing the hand of the old man, I cried, ‘Now is the
time!  Save and pro-tect me!  You and your fam-ily are the friends whom I
seek.  Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!’

“‘Great God!’ ex-claimed the old man.  ‘Who are you?’

“At that in-stant the cot-tage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and
Agatha entered.  Who can de-scribe their hor-ror and con-sterna-tion on
be-hold-ing me?  Agatha fain-ted, and Safie, un-able to at-tend to her
friend, rushed out of the cot-tage.  Felix dar-ted for-ward, and with
su-per-nat-ural force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in
a trans-port of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me vi-ol-ently
with a stick.  I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends
the ante-lope.  But my heart sank within me as with bit-ter sick-ness, and
I re-frained.  I saw him on the point of re-peat-ing his blow, when,
over-come by pain and an-guish, I quit-ted the cot-tage, and in the gen-eral
tu-mult es-caped un-per-ceived to my hovel.”





Chapter 16

“Cursed, cursed cre-ator!  Why did I live?  Why, in that in-stant, did I
not ex-tin-guish the spark of ex-ist-ence which you had so wan-tonly
be-stowed?  I know not; des-pair had not yet taken pos-ses-sion of me; my
feel-ings were those of rage and re-venge.  I could with pleas-ure have
des-troyed the cot-tage and its in-hab-it-ants and have glut-ted my-self with
their shrieks and misery.

“When night came I quit-ted my re-treat and wandered in the wood; and
now, no longer re-strained by the fear of dis-cov-ery, I gave vent to my
an-guish in fear-ful howl-ings.  I was like a wild beast that had broken
the toils, des-troy-ing the ob-jects that ob-struc-ted me and ran-ging
through the wood with a stag-like swift-ness.  Oh!  What a miser-able
night I passed!  The cold stars shone in mock-ery, and the bare trees
waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird
burst forth amidst the uni-ver-sal still-ness.  All, save I, were at rest
or in en-joy-ment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and
find-ing my-self un-sym-path-ised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread
havoc and de-struc-tion around me, and then to have sat down and en-joyed
the ruin.

“But this was a lux-ury of sen-sa-tion that could not en-dure; I be-came
fa-tigued with ex-cess of bod-ily ex-er-tion and sank on the damp grass in
the sick im-pot-ence of des-pair.  There was none among the myri-ads of men
that ex-is-ted who would pity or as-sist me; and should I feel kind-ness
to-wards my en-emies?  No; from that mo-ment I de-clared ever-last-ing war
against the spe-cies, and more than all, against him who had formed me
and sent me forth to this in-sup-port-able misery.

“The sun rose; I heard the voices of men and knew that it was
im-possible to re-turn to my re-treat dur-ing that day.  Ac-cord-ingly I hid
my-self in some thick un-der-wood, de-term-in-ing to de-vote the en-su-ing hours
to re-flec-tion on my situ-ation.

“The pleas-ant sun-shine and the pure air of day re-stored me to some
de-gree of tran-quil-lity; and when I con-sidered what had passed at the
cot-tage, I could not help be-liev-ing that I had been too hasty in my
con-clu-sions.  I had cer-tainly ac-ted im-prudently.  It was ap-par-ent that
my con-ver-sa-tion had in-ter-ested the father in my be-half, and  I was a
fool in hav-ing ex-posed my per-son to the hor-ror of his chil-dren.  I
ought to have fa-mil-i-ar-ised the old De Lacey to me, and by de-grees to
have dis-covered my-self to the rest of his fam-ily, when they should have
been  pre-pared for my ap-proach.  But I did not be-lieve my er-rors to be
ir-re-triev-able, and after much con-sid-er-a-tion I re-solved to re-turn to the
cot-tage, seek the old man, and by my rep-res-ent-a-tions win him to my
party.

“These thoughts calmed me, and in the af-ter-noon I sank into a pro-found
sleep; but the fever of my blood did not al-low me to be vis-ited by
peace-ful dreams.  The hor-rible scene of the pre-ced-ing day was for ever
act-ing be-fore my eyes; the fe-males were fly-ing and the en-raged Felix
tear-ing me from his father’s feet.  I awoke ex-hausted, and find-ing that
it was already night, I crept forth from my hid-ing-place, and went in
search of food.

“When my hun-ger was ap-peased, I dir-ec-ted my steps to-wards the
well-known path that con-duc-ted to the cot-tage.  All there was at peace.
I crept into my hovel and re-mained in si-lent ex-pect-a-tion of the
ac-cus-tomed hour when the fam-ily arose.  That hour passed, the sun
moun-ted high in the heav-ens, but the cot-tagers did not ap-pear.  I
trembled vi-ol-ently, ap-pre-hend-ing some dread-ful mis-for-tune.  The in-side
of the cot-tage was dark, and I heard no mo-tion; I can-not de-scribe the
agony of this sus-pense.

“Presently two coun-try-men passed by, but paus-ing near the cot-tage, they
entered into con-ver-sa-tion, us-ing vi-ol-ent ges-tic-u-la-tions; but I did not
un-der-stand what they said, as they spoke the lan-guage of the coun-try,
which differed from that of my pro-tect-ors.  Soon after, how-ever, Felix
ap-proached with an-other man; I was sur-prised, as I knew that he had not
quit-ted the cot-tage that morn-ing, and waited anxiously to dis-cover from
his dis-course the mean-ing of these un-usual ap-pear-ances.

“‘Do you con-sider,’ said his com-pan-ion to him,
‘that you will be ob-liged to pay three months’ rent and to lose
the pro-duce of your garden? I do not wish to take any un-fair ad-vant-age, and
I beg there-fore that you will take some days to con-sider of your
de-term-in-a-tion.’

“‘It is ut-terly use-less,’ replied Felix; ‘we can
never again in-habit your cot-tage. The life of my father is in the greatest
danger, ow-ing to the dread-ful cir-cum-stance that I have re-lated. My wife and
my sis-ter will never re-cover from their hor-ror. I en-treat you not to reason
with me any more. Take pos-ses-sion of your tene-ment and let me fly from this
place.’

“Felix trembled vi-ol-ently as he said this.  He and his com-pan-ion
entered the cot-tage, in which they re-mained for a few minutes, and then
de-par-ted.  I never saw any of the fam-ily of De Lacey more.

“I con-tin-ued for the re-mainder of the day in my hovel in a state of
ut-ter and stu-pid des-pair.  My pro-tect-ors had de-par-ted and had broken
the only link that held me to the world.  For the first time the
feel-ings of re-venge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive to
con-trol them, but al-low-ing my-self to be borne away by the stream, I
bent my mind to-wards in-jury and death.  When I thought of my friends,
of the mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and the
ex-quis-ite beauty of the Ar-a-bian, these thoughts van-ished and a gush of
tears some-what soothed me.  But again when I re-flec-ted that they had
spurned and deser-ted me, an-ger re-turned, a rage of an-ger, and un-able to
in-jure any-thing hu-man, I turned my fury to-wards in-an-im-ate ob-jects.  As
night ad-vanced, I placed a vari-ety of com-bust-ibles around the cot-tage,
and after hav-ing des-troyed every vestige of cul-tiv-a-tion in the garden,
I waited with forced im-pa-tience un-til the moon had sunk to com-mence my
op-er-a-tions.

“As the night ad-vanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly
dis-persed the clouds that had loitered in the heav-ens; the blast tore
along like a mighty ava-lanche and pro-duced a kind of in-san-ity in my
spir-its that burst all bounds of reason and re-flec-tion.  I lighted the
dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the de-voted cot-tage,
my eyes still fixed on the west-ern ho-ri-zon, the edge of which the moon
nearly touched.  A part of its orb was at length hid, and I waved my
brand; it sank, and with a loud scream I fired the straw, and heath,
and bushes, which I had col-lec-ted.  The wind fanned the fire, and the
cot-tage was quickly en-vel-oped by the flames, which clung to it and
licked it with their forked and des-troy-ing tongues.

“As soon as I was con-vinced that no as-sist-ance could save any part of
the hab-it-a-tion, I quit-ted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.

“And now, with the world be-fore me, whither should I bend my steps?  I
re-solved to fly far from the scene of my mis-for-tunes; but to me, hated
and des-pised, every coun-try must be equally hor-rible.  At length the
thought of you crossed my mind.  I learned from your pa-pers that you
were my father, my cre-ator; and to whom could I ap-ply with more fit-ness
than to him who had given me life?  Among the les-sons that Felix had
be-stowed upon Safie, geo-graphy had not been omit-ted; I had learned from
these the re-l-at-ive situ-ations of the dif-fer-ent coun-tries of the earth.
You had men-tioned Geneva as the name of your nat-ive town, and to-wards
this place I re-solved to pro-ceed.

“But how was I to dir-ect my-self?  I knew that I must travel in a
south-west-erly dir-ec-tion to reach my des-tin-a-tion, but the sun was my
only guide.  I did not know the names of the towns that I was to pass
through, nor could I ask in-form-a-tion from a single hu-man be-ing; but I
did not des-pair.  From you only could I hope for suc-cour, al-though
to-wards you I felt no sen-ti-ment but that of hatred.  Un-feel-ing,
heart-less cre-ator!  You had en-dowed me with per-cep-tions and pas-sions
and then cast me abroad an ob-ject for the scorn and hor-ror of man-kind.
But on you only had I any claim for pity and re-dress, and from you I
de-term-ined to seek that justice which I vainly at-temp-ted to gain from
any other be-ing that wore the hu-man form.

“My travels were long and the suf-fer-ings I en-dured in-tense.  It was
late in au-tumn when I quit-ted the dis-trict where I had so long resided.
I trav-elled only at night, fear-ful of en-coun-ter-ing the vis-age of a
hu-man be-ing.  Nature de-cayed around me, and the sun be-came heat-less;
rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the sur-face
of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found no shel-ter.  Oh,
earth!  How of-ten did I im-prec-ate curses on the cause of my be-ing!  The
mild-ness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall
and bit-ter-ness.  The nearer I ap-proached to your hab-it-a-tion, the more
deeply did I feel the spirit of re-venge en-kindled in my heart.  Snow
fell, and the wa-ters were hardened, but I res-ted not.  A few in-cid-ents
now and then dir-ec-ted me, and I pos-sessed a map of the coun-try; but I
of-ten wandered wide from my path.  The agony of my feel-ings al-lowed me
no res-pite; no in-cid-ent oc-curred from which my rage and misery could
not ex-tract its food; but a cir-cum-stance that happened when I ar-rived
on the con-fines of Switzer-land, when the sun had re-covered its warmth
and the earth again began to look green, con-firmed in an es-pe-cial
man-ner the bit-ter-ness and hor-ror of my feel-ings.

“I gen-er-ally res-ted dur-ing the day and trav-elled only when I was
se-cured by night from the view of man.  One morn-ing, how-ever, find-ing
that my path lay through a deep wood, I ven-tured to con-tinue my jour-ney
after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
cheered even me by the love-li-ness of its sun-shine and the balm-i-ness of
the air.  I felt emo-tions of gen-tle-ness and pleas-ure, that had long
ap-peared dead, re-vive within me.  Half sur-prised by the nov-elty of
these sen-sa-tions, I al-lowed my-self to be borne away by them, and
for-get-ting my solitude and de-form-ity, dared to be happy.  Soft tears
again be-dewed my cheeks, and I even raised my hu-mid eyes with
thank-ful-ness to-wards the blessed sun, which be-stowed such joy upon me.

“I con-tin-ued to wind among the paths of the wood, un-til I came to its
bound-ary, which was skir-ted by a deep and rapid river, into which many
of the trees bent their branches, now bud-ding with the fresh spring.
Here I paused, not ex-actly know-ing what path to pur-sue, when I heard
the sound of voices, that in-duced me to con-ceal my-self un-der the shade
of a cypress.  I was scarcely hid when a young girl came run-ning
to-wards the spot where I was con-cealed, laugh-ing, as if she ran from
someone in sport.  She con-tin-ued her course along the pre-cip-it-ous sides
of the river, when sud-denly her foot slipped, and she fell into the
rapid stream.  I rushed from my hid-ing-place and with ex-treme la-bour,
from the force of the cur-rent, saved her and dragged her to shore.  She
was sense-less, and I en-deav-oured by every means in my power to re-store
an-im-a-tion, when I was sud-denly in-ter-rup-ted by the ap-proach of a rus-tic,
who was prob-ably the per-son from whom she had play-fully fled.  On
see-ing me, he dar-ted to-wards me, and tear-ing the girl from my arms,
hastened to-wards the deeper parts of the wood.  I fol-lowed speedily, I
hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun,
which he car-ried, at my body and fired.  I sank to the ground, and my
in-jurer, with in-creased swift-ness, es-caped into the wood.

“This was then the re-ward of my be-ne-vol-ence!  I had saved a hu-man be-ing
from de-struc-tion, and as a re-com-pense I now writhed un-der the miser-able
pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone.  The feel-ings of
kind-ness and gen-tle-ness which I had en-ter-tained but a few mo-ments
be-fore gave place to hellish rage and gnash-ing of teeth.  In-flamed by
pain, I vowed eternal hatred and ven-geance to all man-kind.  But the
agony of my wound over-came me; my pulses paused, and I fain-ted.

“For some weeks I led a miser-able life in the woods, en-deav-our-ing to
cure the wound which I had re-ceived.  The ball had entered my shoulder,
and I knew not whether it had re-mained there or passed through; at any
rate I had no means of ex-tract-ing it.  My suf-fer-ings were aug-men-ted
also by the op-press-ive sense of the in-justice and in-grat-it-ude of their
in-flic-tion.  My daily vows rose for re-venge—a deep and deadly re-venge,
such as would alone com-pensate for the out-rages and an-guish I had
en-dured.

“After some weeks my wound healed, and I con-tin-ued my jour-ney.  The
la-bours I en-dured were no longer to be al-le-vi-ated by the bright sun or
gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mock-ery which in-sul-ted my
des-ol-ate state and made me feel more pain-fully that I was not made for
the en-joy-ment of pleas-ure.

“But my toils now drew near a close, and in two months from this time I
reached the en-virons of Geneva.

“It was even-ing when I ar-rived, and I re-tired to a hid-ing-place among
the fields that sur-round it to med-it-ate in what man-ner I should ap-ply
to you.  I was op-pressed by fa-tigue and hun-ger and far too un-happy to
en-joy the gentle breezes of even-ing or the pro-spect of the sun set-ting
be-hind the stu-pendous moun-tains of Jura.

“At this time a slight sleep re-lieved me from the pain of re-flec-tion,
which was dis-turbed by the ap-proach of a beau-ti-ful child, who came
run-ning into the re-cess I had chosen, with all the sport-ive-ness of
in-fancy.  Sud-denly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this
little creature was un-pre-ju-diced and had lived too short a time to have
im-bibed a hor-ror of de-form-ity.  If, there-fore, I could seize him and
edu-cate him as my com-pan-ion and friend, I should not be so des-ol-ate in
this peopled earth.

“Urged by this im-pulse, I seized on the boy as he passed and drew him
to-wards me.  As soon as he be-held my form, he placed his hands be-fore
his eyes and uttered a shrill scream; I drew his hand for-cibly from his
face and said, ‘Child, what is the mean-ing of this?  I do not in-tend to
hurt you; listen to me.’

“He struggled vi-ol-ently. ‘Let me go,’ he cried;
‘mon-ster! Ugly wretch! You wish to eat me and tear me to pieces. You
are an ogre. Let me go, or I will tell my papa.’

“‘Boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.’

“‘Hideous mon-ster!  Let me go.  My papa is a syn-dic—he is M.
Franken-stein—he will pun-ish you.  You dare not keep me.’

“‘Franken-stein! you be-long then to my en-emy—to him to-wards whom I have
sworn eternal re-venge; you shall be my first vic-tim.’

“The child still struggled and loaded me with epi-thets which car-ried
des-pair to my heart; I grasped his throat to si-lence him, and in a
mo-ment he lay dead at my feet.

“I gazed on my vic-tim, and my heart swelled with ex-ulta-tion and hellish
tri-umph; clap-ping my hands, I ex-claimed, ‘I too can cre-ate des-ol-a-tion;
my en-emy is not in-vul-ner-able; this death will carry des-pair to him, and
a thou-sand other miser-ies shall tor-ment and des-troy him.’

“As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw some-thing glit-ter-ing on his
breast.  I took it; it was a por-trait of a most lovely wo-man.  In spite
of my ma-lig-nity, it softened and at-trac-ted me.  For a few mo-ments I
gazed with de-light on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her
lovely lips; but presently my rage re-turned; I re-membered that I was
for ever de-prived of the de-lights that such beau-ti-ful creatures could
be-stow and that she whose re-semb-lance I con-tem-plated would, in
re-gard-ing me, have changed that air of di-vine be-nig-nity to one
ex-press-ive of dis-gust and af-fright.

“Can you won-der that such thoughts trans-por-ted me with rage?  I only
won-der that at that mo-ment, in-stead of vent-ing my sen-sa-tions in
ex-clam-a-tions and agony, I did not rush among man-kind and per-ish in the
at-tempt to des-troy them.

“While I was over-come by these feel-ings, I left the spot where I had
com-mit-ted the murder, and seek-ing a more se-cluded hid-ing-place, I
entered a barn which had ap-peared to me to be empty.  A wo-man was
sleep-ing on some straw; she was young, not in-deed so beau-ti-ful as her
whose por-trait I held, but of an agree-able as-pect and bloom-ing in the
love-li-ness of youth and health.  Here, I thought, is one of those whose
joy-im-part-ing smiles are be-stowed on all but me.  And then I bent over
her and whispered, ‘Awake, fairest, thy lover is near—he who would
give his life but to ob-tain one look of af-fec-tion from thine eyes; my
be-loved, awake!’

“The sleeper stirred; a thrill of ter-ror ran through me.  Should she
in-deed awake, and see me, and curse me, and de-nounce the mur-derer? Thus
would she as-suredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she be-held me.
The thought was mad-ness; it stirred the fiend within me—not I, but
she, shall suf-fer; the murder I have com-mit-ted be-cause I am for ever
robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone.  The crime had
its source in her; be hers the pun-ish-ment!  Thanks to the les-sons of
Felix and the san-guin-ary laws of man, I had learned now to work
mis-chief.  I bent over her and placed the por-trait se-curely in one of
the folds of her dress.  She moved again, and I fled.

“For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place,
some-times wish-ing to see you, some-times re-solved to quit the world and
its miser-ies for ever.  At length I wandered to-wards these moun-tains,
and have ranged through their im-mense re-cesses, con-sumed by a burn-ing
pas-sion which you alone can grat-ify.  We may not part un-til you have
prom-ised to com-ply with my re-quis-i-tion.  I am alone and miser-able; man
will not as-so-ci-ate with me; but one as de-formed and hor-rible as my-self
would not deny her-self to me.  My com-pan-ion must be of the same spe-cies
and have the same de-fects.  This be-ing you must cre-ate.”





Chapter 17

The be-ing fin-ished speak-ing and fixed his looks upon me in the
ex-pect-a-tion of a reply.  But I was be-wildered, per-plexed, and un-able to
ar-range my ideas suf-fi-ciently to un-der-stand the full ex-tent of his
pro-pos-i-tion.  He con-tin-ued,

“You must cre-ate a fe-male for me with whom I can live in the
in-ter-change of those sym-path-ies ne-ces-sary for my be-ing.  This you alone
can do, and I de-mand it of you as a right which you must not re-fuse to
con-cede.”

The lat-ter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the an-ger that had
died away while he nar-rated his peace-ful life among the cot-tagers, and
as he said this I could no longer sup-press the rage that burned within
me.

“I do re-fuse it,” I replied; “and no tor-ture shall ever ex-tort a
con-sent from me.  You may render me the most miser-able of men, but you
shall never make me base in my own eyes.  Shall I cre-ate an-other like
your-self, whose joint wicked-ness might des-ol-ate the world.  Be-gone!  I
have answered you; you may tor-ture me, but I will never con-sent.”

“You are in the wrong,” replied the fiend; “and in-stead
of threat-en-ing, I am con-tent to reason with you. I am ma-li-cious be-cause I
am miser-able. Am I not shunned and hated by all man-kind? You, my cre-ator,
would tear me to pieces and tri-umph; re-mem-ber that, and tell me why I
should pity man more than he pit-ies me? You would not call it murder if you
could pre-cip-it-ate me into one of those ice-rifts and des-troy my frame, the
work of your own hands. Shall I re-spect man when he con-demns me? Let him
live with me in the in-ter-change of kind-ness, and in-stead of in-jury I would
be-stow every be-ne-fit upon him with tears of grat-it-ude at his ac-cept-ance.
But that can-not be; the hu-man senses are in-sur-mount-able bar-ri-ers to our
union. Yet mine shall not be the sub-mis-sion of ab-ject slavery. I will
re-venge my in-jur-ies; if I can-not in-spire love, I will cause fear, and
chiefly to-wards you my arch-en-emy, be-cause my cre-ator, do I swear
in-ex-tin-guish-able hatred. Have a care; I will work at your de-struc-tion, nor
fin-ish un-til I des-ol-ate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of
your birth.”

A fiendish rage an-im-ated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled
into con-tor-tions too hor-rible for hu-man eyes to be-hold; but presently
he calmed him-self and pro-ceeded—

“I in-ten-ded to reason. This pas-sion is det-ri-mental to me, for you do
not re-flect that _y-ou_ are the cause of its ex-cess. If any be-ing felt
emo-tions of be-ne-vol-ence to-wards me, I should re-turn them a hun-dred and a
hun-dred-fold; for that one creature’s sake I would make peace with the
whole kind! But I now in-dulge in dreams of bliss that can-not be real-ised.
What I ask of you is reas-on-able and mod-er-ate; I de-mand a creature of
an-other sex, but as hideous as my-self; the grat-i-fic-a-tion is small, but it
is all that I can re-ceive, and it shall con-tent me. It is true, we shall be
mon-sters, cut off from all the world; but on that ac-count we shall be more
at-tached to one an-other. Our lives will not be happy, but they will be
harm-less and free from the misery I now feel. Oh! My cre-ator, make me
happy; let me feel grat-it-ude to-wards you for one be-ne-fit! Let me see that I
ex-cite the sym-pathy of some ex-ist-ing thing; do not deny me my
re-quest!”

I was moved.  I shuddered when I thought of the pos-sible con-sequences
of my con-sent, but I felt that there was some justice in his ar-gu-ment.
His tale and the feel-ings he now ex-pressed proved him to be a creature
of fine sen-sa-tions, and did I not as his maker owe him all the por-tion
of hap-pi-ness that it was in my power to be-stow?  He saw my change of
feel-ing and con-tin-ued,

“If you con-sent, neither you nor any other hu-man be-ing shall ever see
us again; I will go to the vast wilds of South Amer-ica.  My food is not
that of man; I do not des-troy the lamb and the kid to glut my ap-pet-ite;
acorns and ber-ries af-ford me suf-fi-cient nour-ish-ment.  My com-pan-ion will
be of the same nature as my-self and will be con-tent with the same fare.
We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
man and will ripen our food.  The pic-ture I present to you is peace-ful
and hu-man, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
wan-ton-ness of power and cruelty.  Piti-less as you have been to-wards me,
I now see com-pas-sion in your eyes; let me seize the fa-vour-able mo-ment
and per-suade you to prom-ise what I so ar-dently de-sire.”

“You pro-pose,” replied I, “to fly from the hab-it-a-tions of
man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your
only com-pan-ions. How can you, who long for the love and sym-pathy of man,
per-severe in this ex-ile? You will re-turn and again seek their kind-ness, and
you will meet with their de-test-a-tion; your evil pas-sions will be re-newed,
and you will then have a com-pan-ion to aid you in the task of de-struc-tion.
This may not be; cease to ar-gue the point, for I can-not con-sent.”

“How in-con-stant are your feel-ings! But a mo-ment ago you were moved by
my rep-res-ent-a-tions, and why do you again harden your-self to my com-plaints?
I swear to you, by the earth which I in-habit, and by you that made me, that
with the com-pan-ion you be-stow, I will quit the neigh-bour-hood of man and
dwell, as it may chance, in the most sav-age of places. My evil pas-sions
will have fled, for I shall meet with sym-pathy! My life will flow quietly
away, and in my dy-ing mo-ments I shall not curse my maker.”

His words had a strange ef-fect upon me.  I com-pas-sion-ated him and
some-times felt a wish to con-sole him, but when I looked upon him, when
I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my
feel-ings were altered to those of hor-ror and hatred.  I tried to stifle
these sen-sa-tions; I thought that as I could not sym-path-ise with him, I
had no right to with-hold from him the small por-tion of hap-pi-ness which
was yet in my power to be-stow.

“You swear,” I said, “to be harm-less; but have you not
already shown a de-gree of malice that should reas-on-ably make me dis-trust
you? May not even this be a feint that will in-crease your tri-umph by
af-ford-ing a wider scope for your re-venge?”

“How is this?  I must not be trifled with, and I de-mand an an-swer.  If
I have no ties and no af-fec-tions, hatred and vice must be my por-tion;
the love of an-other will des-troy the cause of my crimes, and I shall
be-come a thing of whose ex-ist-ence every-one will be ig-nor-ant.  My vices
are the chil-dren of a forced solitude that I ab-hor, and my vir-tues will
ne-ces-sar-ily arise when I live in com-mu-nion with an equal.  I shall feel
the af-fec-tions of a sens-it-ive be-ing and be-come linked to the chain of
ex-ist-ence and events from which I am now ex-cluded.”

I paused some time to re-flect on all he had re-lated and the vari-ous
ar-gu-ments which he had em-ployed. I thought of the prom-ise of vir-tues which
he had dis-played on the open-ing of his ex-ist-ence and the sub-sequent blight
of all kindly feel-ing by the loath-ing and scorn which his pro-tect-ors had
mani-fes-ted to-wards him. His power and threats were not omit-ted in my
cal-cu-la-tions; a creature who could ex-ist in the ice-caves of the gla-ciers
and hide him-self from pur-suit among the ridges of in-ac-cess-ible pre-cip-ices
was a be-ing pos-sess-ing fac-ulties it would be vain to cope with. After a
long pause of re-flec-tion I con-cluded that the justice due both to him and
my fel-low creatures de-man-ded of me that I should com-ply with his re-quest.
Turn-ing to him, there-fore, I said,

“I con-sent to your de-mand, on your sol-emn oath to quit Europe for ever,
and every other place in the neigh-bour-hood of man, as soon as I shall
de-liver into your hands a fe-male who will ac-com-pany you in your ex-ile.”

“I swear,” he cried, “by the sun, and by the blue sky of
heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my
prayer, while they ex-ist you shall never be-hold me again. De-part to your
home and com-mence your la-bours; I shall watch their pro-gress with
un-ut-ter-able anxi-ety; and fear not but that when you are ready I shall
ap-pear.”

Say-ing this, he sud-denly quit-ted me, fear-ful, per-haps, of any change in
my sen-ti-ments.  I saw him des-cend the moun-tain with greater speed than
the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the un-du-la-tions of the
sea of ice.

His tale had oc-cu-pied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of
the ho-ri-zon when he de-par-ted.  I knew that I ought to hasten my des-cent
to-wards the val-ley, as I should soon be en-com-passed in dark-ness; but my
heart was heavy, and my steps slow.  The la-bour of wind-ing among the
little paths of the moun-tain and fix-ing my feet firmly as I ad-vanced
per-plexed me, oc-cu-pied as I was by the emo-tions which the oc-cur-rences
of the day had pro-duced.  Night was far ad-vanced when I came to the
halfway rest-ing-place and seated my-self be-side the foun-tain.  The stars
shone at in-ter-vals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
rose be-fore me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the
ground; it was a scene of won-der-ful solem-nity and stirred strange
thoughts within me.  I wept bit-terly, and clasp-ing my hands in agony, I
ex-claimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock
me; if ye really pity me, crush sen-sa-tion and memory; let me be-come as
nought; but if not, de-part, de-part, and leave me in dark-ness.”

These were wild and miser-able thoughts, but I can-not de-scribe to you
how the eternal twink-ling of the stars weighed upon me and how I
listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its
way to con-sume me.

Morn-ing dawned be-fore I ar-rived at the vil-lage of Chamounix; I took no
rest, but re-turned im-me-di-ately to Geneva.  Even in my own heart I could
give no ex-pres-sion to my sen-sa-tions—they weighed on me with a
moun-tain’s weight and their ex-cess des-troyed my agony be-neath them.
Thus I re-turned home, and en-ter-ing the house, presen-ted my-self to the
fam-ily.  My hag-gard and wild ap-pear-ance awoke in-tense alarm, but I
answered no ques-tion, scarcely did I speak.  I felt as if I were placed
un-der a ban—as if I had no right to claim their sym-path-ies—as if
never more might I en-joy com-pan-ion-ship with them.  Yet even thus I
loved them to ad-or-a-tion; and to save them, I re-solved to ded-ic-ate
my-self to my most ab-horred task.  The pro-spect of such an oc-cu-pa-tion
made every other cir-cum-stance of ex-ist-ence pass be-fore me like a dream,
and that thought only had to me the real-ity of life.





Chapter 18

Day after day, week after week, passed away on my re-turn to Geneva; and
I could not col-lect the cour-age to re-com-mence my work.  I feared the
ven-geance of the dis-ap-poin-ted fiend, yet I was un-able to over-come my
re-pug-nance to the task which was en-joined me.  I found that I could not
com-pose a fe-male without again de-vot-ing sev-eral months to pro-found
study and la-bor-i-ous dis-quis-i-tion.  I had heard of some dis-cov-er-ies
hav-ing been made by an Eng-lish philo-sopher, the know-ledge of which was
ma-ter-ial to my suc-cess, and I some-times thought of ob-tain-ing my
father’s con-sent to visit Eng-land for this pur-pose; but I clung to
every pre-tence of delay and shrank from tak-ing the first step in an
un-der-tak-ing whose im-me-di-ate ne-ces-sity began to ap-pear less ab-so-lute to
me.  A change in-deed had taken place in me; my health, which had
hitherto de-clined, was now much re-stored; and my spir-its, when
un-checked by the memory of my un-happy prom-ise, rose pro-por-tion-ably.  My
father saw this change with pleas-ure, and he turned his thoughts
to-wards the best method of erad-ic-at-ing the re-mains of my mel-an-choly,
which every now and then would re-turn by fits, and with a de-vour-ing
black-ness over-cast the ap-proach-ing sun-shine.  At these mo-ments I took
refuge in the most per-fect solitude.  I passed whole days on the lake
alone in a little boat, watch-ing the clouds and listen-ing to the
rip-pling of the waves, si-lent and list-less.  But the fresh air and
bright sun sel-dom failed to re-store me to some de-gree of com-pos-ure, and
on my re-turn I met the sa-luta-tions of my friends with a read-ier smile
and a more cheer-ful heart.

It was after my re-turn from one of these rambles that my father,
call-ing me aside, thus ad-dressed me,

“I am happy to re-mark, my dear son, that you have re-sumed your former
pleas-ures and seem to be re-turn-ing to your-self.  And yet you are still
un-happy and still avoid our so-ci-ety.  For some time I was lost in
con-jec-ture as to the cause of this, but yes-ter-day an idea struck me,
and if it is well foun-ded, I con-jure you to avow it.  Reserve on such a
point would be not only use-less, but draw down treble misery on us all.”

I trembled vi-ol-ently at his ex-or-dium, and my father con-tin-ued—

“I con-fess, my son, that I have al-ways looked for-ward to your
mar-riage with our dear El-iza-beth as the tie of our do-mestic com-fort and the
stay of my de-clin-ing years. You were at-tached to each other from your
earli-est in-fancy; you stud-ied to-gether, and ap-peared, in dis-pos-i-tions and
tastes, en-tirely suited to one an-other. But so blind is the ex-per-i-ence of
man that what I con-ceived to be the best as-sist-ants to my plan may have
en-tirely des-troyed it. You, per-haps, re-gard her as your sis-ter, without any
wish that she might be-come your wife. Nay, you may have met with an-other
whom you may love; and con-sid-er-ing your-self as bound in hon-our to
El-iza-beth, this struggle may oc-ca-sion the poignant misery which you ap-pear
to feel.”

“My dear father, re-as-sure your-self.  I love my cousin ten-derly and
sin-cerely.  I never saw any wo-man who ex-cited, as El-iza-beth does, my
warmest ad-mir-a-tion and af-fec-tion.  My fu-ture hopes and pro-spects are
en-tirely bound up in the ex-pect-a-tion of our union.”

“The ex-pres-sion of your sen-ti-ments of this sub-ject, my dear Victor,
gives me more pleas-ure than I have for some time ex-per-i-enced.  If you
feel thus, we shall as-suredly be happy, how-ever present events may cast
a gloom over us.  But it is this gloom which ap-pears to have taken so
strong a hold of your mind that I wish to dis-sip-ate.  Tell me,
there-fore, whether you ob-ject to an im-me-di-ate sol-em-nisa-tion of the
mar-riage.  We have been un-for-tu-nate, and re-cent events have drawn us
from that every-day tran-quil-lity be-fit-ting my years and in-firm-it-ies. You
are younger; yet I do not sup-pose, pos-sessed as you are of a com-pet-ent
for-tune, that an early mar-riage would at all in-ter-fere with any fu-ture
plans of hon-our and util-ity that you may have formed.  Do not sup-pose,
how-ever, that I wish to dic-tate hap-pi-ness to you or that a delay on
your part would cause me any ser-i-ous un-eas-i-ness.  In-ter-pret my words
with cand-our and an-swer me, I con-jure you, with con-fid-ence and
sin-cer-ity.”

I listened to my father in si-lence and re-mained for some time in-cap-able
of of-fer-ing any reply.  I re-volved rap-idly in my mind a mul-ti-tude of
thoughts and en-deav-oured to ar-rive at some con-clu-sion.  Alas!  To me
the idea of an im-me-di-ate union with my El-iza-beth was one of hor-ror and
dis-may.  I was bound by a sol-emn prom-ise which I had not yet ful-filled
and dared not break, or if I did, what man-i-fold miser-ies might not
im-pend over me and my de-voted fam-ily!  Could I enter into a fest-ival
with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bow-ing me to the
ground?  I must per-form my en-gage-ment and let the mon-ster de-part with
his mate be-fore I al-lowed my-self to en-joy the de-light of a union from
which I ex-pec-ted peace.

I re-membered also the ne-ces-sity im-posed upon me of either jour-ney-ing to
Eng-land or en-ter-ing into a long cor-res-pond-ence with those philo-soph-ers
of that coun-try whose know-ledge and dis-cov-er-ies were of in-dis-pens-able
use to me in my present un-der-tak-ing.  The lat-ter method of ob-tain-ing
the de-sired in-tel-li-gence was dilat-ory and un-sat-is-fact-ory; be-sides, I
had an in-sur-mount-able aver-sion to the idea of en-ga-ging my-self in my
loath-some task in my father’s house while in habits of fa-mil-iar
in-ter-course with those I loved.  I knew that a thou-sand fear-ful
ac-ci-dents might oc-cur, the slight-est of which would dis-close a tale to
thrill all con-nec-ted with me with hor-ror.  I was aware also that I
should of-ten lose all self-com-mand, all ca-pa-city of hid-ing the
har-row-ing sen-sa-tions that would pos-sess me dur-ing the pro-gress of my
un-earthly oc-cu-pa-tion.  I must ab-sent my-self from all I loved while thus
em-ployed.  Once com-menced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be
re-stored to my fam-ily in peace and hap-pi-ness.  My prom-ise ful-filled,
the mon-ster would de-part for ever.  Or (so my fond fancy im-aged) some
ac-ci-dent might mean-while oc-cur to des-troy him and put an end to my
slavery for ever.

These feel-ings dic-tated my an-swer to my father.  I ex-pressed a wish to
visit Eng-land, but con-ceal-ing the true reas-ons of this re-quest, I
clothed my de-sires un-der a guise which ex-cited no sus-pi-cion, while I
urged my de-sire with an earn-est-ness that eas-ily in-duced my father to
com-ply.  After so long a period of an ab-sorb-ing mel-an-choly that
re-sembled mad-ness in its in-tens-ity and ef-fects, he was glad to find
that I was cap-able of tak-ing pleas-ure in the idea of such a jour-ney,
and he hoped that change of scene and var-ied amuse-ment would, be-fore my
re-turn, have re-stored me en-tirely to my-self.

The dur-a-tion of my ab-sence was left to my own choice; a few months, or
at most a year, was the period con-tem-plated.  One pa-ternal kind
pre-cau-tion he had taken to en-sure my hav-ing a com-pan-ion.  Without
pre-vi-ously com-mu-nic-at-ing with me, he had, in con-cert with El-iza-beth,
ar-ranged that Cler-val should join me at Stras-burgh.  This in-terfered
with the solitude I coveted for the pro-sec-u-tion of my task; yet at the
com-mence-ment of my jour-ney the pres-ence of my friend could in no way be
an im-ped-i-ment, and truly I re-joiced that thus I should be saved many
hours of lonely, mad-den-ing re-flec-tion.  Nay, Henry might stand between
me and the in-tru-sion of my foe.  If I were alone, would he not at times
force his ab-horred pres-ence on me to re-mind me of my task or to
con-tem-plate its pro-gress?

To Eng-land, there-fore, I was bound, and it was un-der-stood that my union
with El-iza-beth should take place im-me-di-ately on my re-turn.  My father’s
age rendered him ex-tremely averse to delay.  For my-self, there was one
re-ward I prom-ised my-self from my de-tested toils—one con-sol-a-tion for my
un-par-alleled suf-fer-ings; it was the pro-spect of that day when,
en-fran-chised from my miser-able slavery, I might claim El-iza-beth and
for-get the past in my union with her.

I now made ar-range-ments for my jour-ney, but one feel-ing haunted me
which filled me with fear and agit-a-tion.  Dur-ing my ab-sence I should
leave my friends un-con-scious of the ex-ist-ence of their en-emy and
un-pro-tec-ted from his at-tacks, ex-as-per-ated as he might be by my
de-par-ture.  But he had prom-ised to fol-low me wherever I might go, and
would he not ac-com-pany me to Eng-land?  This ima-gin-a-tion was dread-ful in
it-self, but sooth-ing inas-much as it sup-posed the safety of my friends.
I was ag-on-ised with the idea of the pos-sib-il-ity that the re-verse of
this might hap-pen.  But through the whole period dur-ing which I was the
slave of my creature I al-lowed my-self to be gov-erned by the im-pulses of
the mo-ment; and my present sen-sa-tions strongly in-tim-ated that the fiend
would fol-low me and ex-empt my fam-ily from the danger of his
mach-in-a-tions.

It was in the lat-ter end of Septem-ber that I again quit-ted my nat-ive
coun-try.  My jour-ney had been my own sug-ges-tion, and El-iza-beth
there-fore ac-qui-esced, but she was filled with dis-quiet at the idea of
my suf-fer-ing, away from her, the in-roads of misery and grief.  It had
been her care which provided me a com-pan-ion in Cler-val—and yet a man
is blind to a thou-sand minute cir-cum-stances which call forth a wo-man’s
sed-u-lous at-ten-tion.  She longed to bid me hasten my re-turn; a thou-sand
con-flict-ing emo-tions rendered her mute as she bade me a tear-ful, si-lent
farewell.

I threw my-self into the car-riage that was to con-vey me away, hardly
know-ing whither I was go-ing, and care-less of what was passing around.
I re-membered only, and it was with a bit-ter an-guish that I re-flec-ted on
it, to or-der that my chem-ical in-stru-ments should be packed to go with
me.  Filled with dreary ima-gin-a-tions, I passed through many beau-ti-ful
and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and un-ob-serving.  I could
only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to oc-cupy
me whilst they en-dured.

After some days spent in list-less in-dol-ence, dur-ing which I tra-versed
many leagues, I ar-rived at Stras-burgh, where I waited two days for
Cler-val.  He came.  Alas, how great was the con-trast between us!  He
was alive to every new scene, joy-ful when he saw the beau-ties of the
set-ting sun, and more happy when he be-held it rise and re-com-mence a new
day.  He poin-ted out to me the shift-ing col-ours of the land-scape and
the ap-pear-ances of the sky.  “This is what it is to live,” he cried;
“now I en-joy ex-ist-ence!  But you, my dear Franken-stein, where-fore are
you des-pond-ing and sor-row-ful!” In truth, I was oc-cu-pied by gloomy
thoughts and neither saw the des-cent of the even-ing star nor the golden
sun-rise re-flec-ted in the Rhine.  And you, my friend, would be far more
amused with the journal of Cler-val, who ob-served the scenery with an
eye of feel-ing and de-light, than in listen-ing to my re-flec-tions.  I, a
miser-able wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every av-enue to
en-joy-ment.

We had agreed to des-cend the Rhine in a boat from Stras-burgh to
Rot-ter-dam, whence we might take ship-ping for Lon-don.  Dur-ing this
voy-age we passed many wil-lowy is-lands and saw sev-eral beau-ti-ful towns.
We stayed a day at Man-nheim, and on the fifth from our de-par-ture from
Stras-burgh, ar-rived at Mainz.  The course of the Rhine be-low Mainz
be-comes much more pic-tur-esque.  The river des-cends rap-idly and winds
between hills, not high, but steep, and of beau-ti-ful forms.  We saw
many ruined castles stand-ing on the edges of pre-cip-ices, sur-roun-ded by
black woods, high and in-ac-cess-ible.  This part of the Rhine, in-deed,
presents a sin-gu-larly varie-gated land-scape.  In one spot you view
rugged hills, ruined castles over-look-ing tre-mend-ous pre-cip-ices, with
the dark Rhine rush-ing be-neath; and on the sud-den turn of a promon-tory,
flour-ish-ing vine-yards with green slop-ing banks and a me-an-der-ing river
and pop-u-lous towns oc-cupy the scene.

We trav-elled at the time of the vin-tage and heard the song of the la-bour-ers
as we glided down the stream. Even I, de-pressed in mind, and my spir-its
con-tinu-ally agit-ated by gloomy feel-ings, even I was pleased. I lay at the
bot-tom of the boat, and as I gazed on the cloud-less blue sky, I seemed to
drink in a tran-quil-lity to which I had long been a stranger. And if these
were my sen-sa-tions, who can de-scribe those of Henry? He felt as if he had
been trans-por-ted to Fairy-land and en-joyed a hap-pi-ness sel-dom tasted by
man. “I have seen,” he said, “the most beau-ti-ful scenes
of my own coun-try; I have vis-ited the lakes of Lu-cerne and Uri, where the
snowy moun-tains des-cend al-most per-pen-dic-u-larly to the wa-ter, cast-ing black
and im-pen-et-rable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mourn-ful ap-pear-ance
were it not for the most verd-ant is-lands that re-lieve the eye by their gay
ap-pear-ance; I have seen this lake agit-ated by a tem-pest, when the wind tore
up whirl-winds of wa-ter and gave you an idea of what the wa-ter-spout must be
on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the moun-tain,
where the priest and his mis-tress were over-whelmed by an ava-lanche and
where their dy-ing voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the
nightly wind; I have seen the moun-tains of La Val-ais, and the Pays de Vaud;
but this coun-try, Victor, pleases me more than all those won-ders. The
moun-tains of Switzer-land are more majestic and strange, but there is a
charm in the banks of this di-vine river that I never be-fore saw equalled.
Look at that castle which over-hangs yon pre-cip-ice; and that also on the
is-land, al-most con-cealed amongst the fo-liage of those lovely trees; and now
that group of la-bour-ers com-ing from among their vines; and that vil-lage
half hid in the re-cess of the moun-tain. Oh, surely the spirit that in-hab-its
and guards this place has a soul more in har-mony with man than those who
pile the gla-cier or re-tire to the in-ac-cess-ible peaks of the moun-tains of
our own coun-try.”

Cler-val! Beloved friend! Even now it de-lights me to re-cord your words and
to dwell on the praise of which you are so em-in-ently de-serving. He was a
be-ing formed in the “very po-etry of nature.” His wild and
en-thu-si-astic ima-gin-a-tion was chastened by the sens-ib-il-ity of his heart. His
soul over-flowed with ar-dent af-fec-tions, and his friend-ship was of that
de-voted and won-drous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only
in the ima-gin-a-tion. But even hu-man sym-path-ies were not suf-fi-cient to
sat-isfy his eager mind. The scenery of ex-ternal nature, which oth-ers re-gard
only with ad-mir-a-tion, he loved with ar-dour:—

     ——The sound-ing catar-act
     Haunted him like a pas-sion:  the tall rock,
     The moun-tain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
     Their col-ours and their forms, were then to him
     An ap-pet-ite; a feel-ing, and a love,
     That had no need of a re-moter charm,
     By thought sup-plied, or any in-terest
     Un-bor-row’d from the eye.
     
                    [Wordsworth’s “Tin-tern Ab-bey”.]



And where does he now ex-ist?  Is this gentle and lovely be-ing lost
for ever?  Has this mind, so re-plete with ideas, ima-gin-a-tions fanci-ful
and mag-ni-fi-cent, which formed a world, whose ex-ist-ence de-pended on the
life of its cre-ator;—has this mind per-ished?  Does it now only ex-ist
in my memory?  No, it is not thus; your form so di-vinely wrought, and
beam-ing with beauty, has de-cayed, but your spirit still vis-its and
con-soles your un-happy friend.

Par-don this gush of sor-row; these in-ef-fec-tual words are but a slight
trib-ute to the un-exampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart,
over-flow-ing with the an-guish which his re-mem-brance cre-ates.  I will
pro-ceed with my tale.

Bey-ond Co-logne we des-cen-ded to the plains of Hol-land; and we re-solved to
post the re-mainder of our way, for the wind was con-trary and the stream of
the river was too gentle to aid us.

Our jour-ney here lost the in-terest arising from beau-ti-ful scenery, but we
ar-rived in a few days at Rot-ter-dam, whence we pro-ceeded by sea to Eng-land.
It was on a clear morn-ing, in the lat-ter days of Decem-ber, that I first saw
the white cliffs of Bri-tain. The banks of the Thames presen-ted a new scene;
they were flat but fer-tile, and al-most every town was marked by the
re-mem-brance of some story. We saw Til-bury Fort and re-membered the Span-ish
Ar-mada, Gravesend, Wool-wich, and Green-wich—places which I had heard
of even in my coun-try.

At length we saw the nu-mer-ous steeples of Lon-don, St. Paul’s tower-ing
above all, and the Tower famed in Eng-lish his-tory.





Chapter 19

Lon-don was our present point of rest; we de-term-ined to re-main sev-eral
months in this won-der-ful and cel-eb-rated city.  Cler-val de-sired the
in-ter-course of the men of genius and tal-ent who flour-ished at this
time, but this was with me a sec-ond-ary ob-ject; I was prin-cip-ally
oc-cu-pied with the means of ob-tain-ing the in-form-a-tion ne-ces-sary for the
com-ple-tion of my prom-ise and quickly availed my-self of the let-ters of
in-tro-duc-tion that I had brought with me, ad-dressed to the most
dis-tin-guished nat-ural philo-soph-ers.

If this jour-ney had taken place dur-ing my days of study and hap-pi-ness,
it would have af-forded me in-ex-press-ible pleas-ure.  But a blight had
come over my ex-ist-ence, and I only vis-ited these people for the sake of
the in-form-a-tion they might give me on the sub-ject in which my in-terest
was so ter-ribly pro-found.  Com-pany was irk-some to me; when alone, I
could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of
Henry soothed me, and I could thus cheat my-self into a trans-it-ory
peace.  But busy, un-in-ter-est-ing, joy-ous faces brought back des-pair to
my heart.  I saw an in-sur-mount-able bar-rier placed between me and my
fel-low men; this bar-rier was sealed with the blood of Wil-liam and
Justine, and to re-flect on the events con-nec-ted with those names filled
my soul with an-guish.

But in Cler-val I saw the im-age of my former self; he was in-quis-it-ive
and anxious to gain ex-per-i-ence and in-struc-tion.  The dif-fer-ence of
man-ners which he ob-served was to him an in-ex-haust-ible source of
in-struc-tion and amuse-ment.  He was also pur-su-ing an ob-ject he had long
had in view.  His design was to visit In-dia, in the be-lief that he had
in his know-ledge of its vari-ous lan-guages, and in the views he had
taken of its so-ci-ety, the means of ma-ter-i-ally as-sist-ing the pro-gress of
European col-on-iz-a-tion and trade.  In Bri-tain only could he fur-ther the
ex-e-cu-tion of his plan.  He was for ever busy, and the only check to his
en-joy-ments was my sor-row-ful and de-jec-ted mind.  I tried to con-ceal this
as much as pos-sible, that I might not de-bar him from the pleas-ures
nat-ural to one who was en-ter-ing on a new scene of life, un-dis-turbed by
any care or bit-ter re-col-lec-tion.  I of-ten re-fused to ac-com-pany him,
al-leging an-other en-gage-ment, that I might re-main alone.  I now also
began to col-lect the ma-ter-i-als ne-ces-sary for my new cre-ation, and this
was to me like the tor-ture of single drops of wa-ter con-tinu-ally fall-ing
on the head.  Every thought that was de-voted to it was an ex-treme
an-guish, and every word that I spoke in al-lu-sion to it caused my lips
to quiver, and my heart to pal-pit-ate.

After passing some months in Lon-don, we re-ceived a let-ter from a per-son in
Scot-land who had formerly been our vis-itor at Geneva. He men-tioned the
beau-ties of his nat-ive coun-try and asked us if those were not suf-fi-cient
al-lure-ments to in-duce us to pro-long our jour-ney as far north as Perth,
where he resided. Cler-val eagerly de-sired to ac-cept this in-vit-a-tion, and I,
al-though I ab-horred so-ci-ety, wished to view again moun-tains and streams and
all the won-drous works with which Nature ad-orns her chosen dwell-ing-places.

We had ar-rived in Eng-land at the be-gin-ning of Octo-ber, and it was now
Febru-ary. We ac-cord-ingly de-term-ined to com-mence our jour-ney to-wards the
north at the ex-pir-a-tion of an-other month. In this ex-ped-i-tion we did not
in-tend to fol-low the great road to Ed-in-burgh, but to visit Wind-sor, Ox-ford,
Mat-lock, and the Cum-ber-land lakes, resolv-ing to ar-rive at the com-ple-tion of
this tour about the end of July. I packed up my chem-ical in-stru-ments and
the ma-ter-i-als I had col-lec-ted, resolv-ing to fin-ish my la-bours in some
ob-scure nook in the north-ern high-lands of Scot-land.

We quit-ted Lon-don on the 27th of March and re-mained a few days at
Wind-sor, ram-bling in its beau-ti-ful forest.  This was a new scene to us
moun-tain-eers; the majestic oaks, the quant-ity of game, and the herds of
stately deer were all nov-el-ties to us.

From thence we pro-ceeded to Ox-ford.  As we entered this city, our minds
were filled with the re-mem-brance of the events that had been trans-acted
there more than a cen-tury and a half be-fore.  It was here that Charles
I. had col-lec-ted his forces.  This city had re-mained faith-ful to him,
after the whole na-tion had for-saken his cause to join the stand-ard of
Parlia-ment and liberty.  The memory of that un-for-tu-nate king and his
com-pan-ions, the ami-able Falk-land, the in-solent Gor-ing, his queen, and
son, gave a pe-cu-liar in-terest to every part of the city which they
might be sup-posed to have in-hab-ited.  The spirit of elder days found a
dwell-ing here, and we de-lighted to trace its foot-steps.  If these
feel-ings had not found an ima-gin-ary grat-i-fic-a-tion, the ap-pear-ance of
the city had yet in it-self suf-fi-cient beauty to ob-tain our ad-mir-a-tion.
The col-leges are an-cient and pic-tur-esque; the streets are al-most
mag-ni-fi-cent; and the lovely Isis, which flows be-side it through mead-ows
of ex-quis-ite ver-dure, is spread forth into a pla-cid ex-panse of wa-ters,
which re-flects its majestic as-semblage of towers, and spires, and
domes, em-bosomed among aged trees.

I en-joyed this scene, and yet my en-joy-ment was em-bittered both by the
memory of the past and the an-ti-cip-a-tion of the fu-ture.  I was formed
for peace-ful hap-pi-ness.  Dur-ing my youth-ful days dis-con-tent never
vis-ited my mind, and if I was ever over-come by _en-nui_, the sight of what
is beau-ti-ful in nature or the study of what is ex-cel-lent and sub-lime in
the pro-duc-tions of man could al-ways in-terest my heart and com-mu-nic-ate
elasti-city to my spir-its.  But I am a blas-ted tree; the bolt has
entered my soul; and I felt then that I should sur-vive to ex-hibit what
I shall soon cease to be—a miser-able spec-tacle of wrecked hu-man-ity,
pi-ti-able to oth-ers and in-tol-er-able to my-self.

We passed a con-sid-er-able period at Ox-ford, ram-bling among its en-virons
and en-deav-our-ing to identify every spot which might re-late to the most
an-im-at-ing epoch of Eng-lish his-tory.  Our little voy-ages of dis-cov-ery
were of-ten pro-longed by the suc-cess-ive ob-jects that presen-ted
them-selves.  We vis-ited the tomb of the il-lus-tri-ous Hamp-den and the
field on which that pat-riot fell.  For a mo-ment my soul was el-ev-ated
from its de-bas-ing and miser-able fears to con-tem-plate the di-vine ideas
of liberty and self-sac-ri-fice of which these sights were the monu-ments
and the re-mem-bran-cers.  For an in-stant I dared to shake off my chains
and look around me with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten
into my flesh, and I sank again, trem-bling and hope-less, into my
miser-able self.

We left Ox-ford with re-gret and pro-ceeded to Mat-lock, which was our next
place of rest.  The coun-try in the neigh-bour-hood of this vil-lage
re-sembled, to a greater de-gree, the scenery of Switzer-land; but
everything is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of
dis-tant white Alps which al-ways at-tend on the piny moun-tains of my
nat-ive coun-try.  We vis-ited the won-drous cave and the little cab-in-ets
of nat-ural his-tory, where the curi-os-it-ies are dis-posed in the same
man-ner as in the col-lec-tions at Ser-vox and Chamounix.  The lat-ter name
made me tremble when pro-nounced by Henry, and I hastened to quit
Mat-lock, with which that ter-rible scene was thus as-so-ci-ated.

From Derby, still jour-ney-ing north-wards, we passed two months in
Cum-ber-land and West-mor-land.  I could now al-most fancy my-self among the
Swiss moun-tains.  The little patches of snow which yet lingered on the
north-ern sides of the moun-tains, the lakes, and the dash-ing of the
rocky streams were all fa-mil-iar and dear sights to me.  Here also we
made some ac-quaint-ances, who al-most con-trived to cheat me into
hap-pi-ness.  The de-light of Cler-val was pro-por-tion-ably greater than
mine; his mind ex-pan-ded in the com-pany of men of tal-ent, and he found
in his own nature greater ca-pa-cit-ies and re-sources than he could have
ima-gined him-self to have pos-sessed while he as-so-ci-ated with his
in-feri-ors.  “I could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among
these moun-tains I should scarcely re-gret Switzer-land and the Rhine.”

But he found that a trav-el-ler’s life is one that in-cludes much pain
amidst its en-joy-ments.  His feel-ings are for ever on the stretch; and
when he be-gins to sink into re-pose, he finds him-self ob-liged to quit
that on which he rests in pleas-ure for some-thing new, which again
en-gages his at-ten-tion, and which also he for-sakes for other nov-el-ties.

We had scarcely vis-ited the vari-ous lakes of Cum-ber-land and West-mor-land
and con-ceived an af-fec-tion for some of the in-hab-it-ants when the period
of our ap-point-ment with our Scotch friend ap-proached, and we left them
to travel on.  For my own part I was not sorry.  I had now neg-lected my
prom-ise for some time, and I feared the ef-fects of the dæ-mon’s
dis-ap-point-ment.  He might re-main in Switzer-land and wreak his ven-geance
on my re-l-at-ives.  This idea pur-sued me and tor-men-ted me at every mo-ment
from which I might oth-er-wise have snatched re-pose and peace.  I waited
for my let-ters with fe-ver-ish im-pa-tience; if they were delayed I was
miser-able and over-come by a thou-sand fears; and when they ar-rived and I
saw the su-per-scrip-tion of El-iza-beth or my father, I hardly dared to
read and as-cer-tain my fate.  So-me-times I thought that the fiend
fol-lowed me and might ex-ped-ite my re-miss-ness by mur-der-ing my com-pan-ion.
When these thoughts pos-sessed me, I would not quit Henry for a mo-ment,
but fol-lowed him as his shadow, to pro-tect him from the fan-cied rage of
his des-troyer.  I felt as if I had com-mit-ted some great crime, the
con-scious-ness of which haunted me.  I was guilt-less, but I had in-deed
drawn down a hor-rible curse upon my head, as mor-tal as that of crime.

I vis-ited Ed-in-burgh with lan-guid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
have in-ter-ested the most un-for-tu-nate be-ing. Cler-val did not like it so well
as Ox-ford, for the an-tiquity of the lat-ter city was more pleas-ing to him.
But the beauty and reg-u-lar-ity of the new town of Ed-in-burgh, its ro-mantic
castle and its en-virons, the most de-light-ful in the world, Ar-thur’s
Seat, St. Bern-ard’s Well, and the Pent-land Hills, com-pensated him for
the change and filled him with cheer-ful-ness and ad-mir-a-tion. But I was
im-pa-tient to ar-rive at the ter-min-a-tion of my jour-ney.

We left Ed-in-burgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and
along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend ex-pec-ted us.
But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into
their feel-ings or plans with the good hu-mour ex-pec-ted from a guest; and
ac-cord-ingly I told Cler-val that I wished to make the tour of Scot-land
alone.  “Do you,” said I, “en-joy your-self, and let this be our
ren-dez-vous.  I may be ab-sent a month or two; but do not in-ter-fere with
my mo-tions, I en-treat you; leave me to peace and solitude for a short
time; and when I re-turn, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more
con-genial to your own tem-per.”

Henry wished to dis-suade me, but see-ing me bent on this plan, ceased to
re-mon-strate.  He en-treated me to write of-ten.  “I had rather be with
you,” he said, “in your sol-it-ary rambles, than with these Scotch
people, whom I do not know; hasten, then, my dear  friend, to re-turn,
that I may again feel my-self some-what at home, which I can-not do in
your ab-sence.”

Hav-ing par-ted from my friend, I de-term-ined to visit some re-mote spot of
Scot-land and fin-ish my work in solitude. I did not doubt but that the
mon-ster fol-lowed me and would dis-cover him-self to me when I should have
fin-ished, that he might re-ceive his com-pan-ion.

With this res-ol-u-tion I tra-versed the north-ern high-lands and fixed on one of
the re-motest of the Orkneys as the scene of my la-bours. It was a place
fit-ted for such a work, be-ing hardly more than a rock whose high sides were
con-tinu-ally beaten upon by the waves. The soil was bar-ren, scarcely
af-ford-ing pas-ture for a few miser-able cows, and oat-meal for its
in-hab-it-ants, which con-sisted of five per-sons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs
gave tokens of their miser-able fare. Ve-get-ables and bread, when they
in-dulged in such lux-ur-ies, and even fresh wa-ter, was to be pro-cured from
the main-land, which was about five miles dis-tant.

On the whole is-land there were but three miser-able huts, and one of
these was va-cant when I ar-rived.  This I hired.  It con-tained but two
rooms, and these ex-hib-ited all the squal-id-ness of the most miser-able
pen-ury.  The thatch had fallen in, the walls were un-plastered, and the
door was off its hinges.  I ordered it to be re-paired, bought some
fur-niture, and took pos-ses-sion, an in-cid-ent which would doubt-less have
oc-ca-sioned some sur-prise had not all the senses of the cot-tagers been
be-numbed by want and squalid poverty.  As it was, I lived un-gazed at
and un-mo-les-ted, hardly thanked for the pit-tance of food and clothes
which I gave, so much does suf-fer-ing blunt even the coarsest sen-sa-tions
of men.

In this re-treat I de-voted the morn-ing to la-bour; but in the even-ing,
when the weather per-mit-ted, I walked on the stony beach of the sea to
listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet.  It was a
mono-ton-ous yet ever-chan-ging scene.  I thought of Switzer-land; it was
far dif-fer-ent from this des-ol-ate and ap-palling land-scape.  Its hills
are covered with vines, and its cot-tages are scattered thickly in the
plains.  Its fair lakes re-flect a blue and gentle sky, and when
troubled by the winds, their tu-mult is but as the play of a lively
in-fant when com-pared to the roar-ings of the gi-ant ocean.

In this man-ner I dis-trib-uted my oc-cu-pa-tions when I first ar-rived, but
as I pro-ceeded in my la-bour, it be-came every day more hor-rible and
irk-some to me.  So-me-times I could not pre-vail on my-self to enter my
labor-at-ory for sev-eral days, and at other times I toiled day and night
in or-der to com-plete my work.  It was, in-deed, a filthy pro-cess in
which I was en-gaged.  Dur-ing my first ex-per-i-ment, a kind of
en-thu-si-astic frenzy had blinded me to the hor-ror of my em-ploy-ment; my
mind was in-tently fixed on the con-sum-ma-tion of my la-bour, and my eyes
were shut to the hor-ror of my pro-ceed-ings.  But now I went to it in
cold blood, and my heart of-ten sickened at the work of my hands.

Thus situ-ated, em-ployed in the most de-test-able oc-cu-pa-tion, im-mersed in
a solitude where noth-ing could for an in-stant call my at-ten-tion from
the ac-tual scene in which I was en-gaged, my spir-its be-came un-equal; I
grew rest-less and nervous.  Every mo-ment I feared to meet my
per-se-cutor.  So-me-times I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fear-ing
to raise them lest they should en-counter the ob-ject which I so much
dreaded to be-hold.  I feared to wander from the sight of my fel-low
creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his com-pan-ion.

In the mean time I worked on, and my la-bour was already con-sid-er-ably
ad-vanced.  I looked to-wards its com-ple-tion with a trem-u-lous and eager
hope, which I dared not trust my-self to ques-tion but which was
in-ter-mixed with ob-scure fore-bod-ings of evil that made my heart sicken
in my bosom.





Chapter 20

I sat one even-ing in my labor-at-ory; the sun had set, and the moon was just
rising from the sea; I had not suf-fi-cient light for my em-ploy-ment, and I
re-mained idle, in a pause of con-sid-er-a-tion of whether I should leave my
la-bour for the night or hasten its con-clu-sion by an un-re-mit-ting at-ten-tion
to it. As I sat, a train of re-flec-tion oc-curred to me which led me to
con-sider the ef-fects of what I was now do-ing. Three years be-fore, I was
en-gaged in the same man-ner and had cre-ated a fiend whose un-par-alleled
bar-bar-ity had des-ol-ated my heart and filled it for ever with the bitterest
re-morse. I was now about to form an-other be-ing of whose dis-pos-i-tions I was
alike ig-nor-ant; she might be-come ten thou-sand times more ma-lig-nant than her
mate and de-light, for its own sake, in murder and wretched-ness. He had
sworn to quit the neigh-bour-hood of man and hide him-self in deserts, but she
had not; and she, who in all prob-ab-il-ity was to be-come a think-ing and
reas-on-ing an-imal, might re-fuse to com-ply with a com-pact made be-fore her
cre-ation. They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived
loathed his own de-form-ity, and might he not con-ceive a greater ab-hor-rence
for it when it came be-fore his eyes in the fe-male form? She also might turn
with dis-gust from him to the su-per-ior beauty of man; she might quit him,
and he be again alone, ex-as-per-ated by the fresh pro-voca-tion of be-ing
deser-ted by one of his own spe-cies.

Even if they were to leave Europe and in-habit the deserts of the new world,
yet one of the first res-ults of those sym-path-ies for which the dæ-mon
thirsted would be chil-dren, and a race of dev-ils would be propag-ated upon
the earth who might make the very ex-ist-ence of the spe-cies of man a
con-di-tion pre-cari-ous and full of ter-ror. Had I right, for my own be-ne-fit,
to in-flict this curse upon ever-last-ing gen-er-a-tions? I had be-fore been moved
by the soph-isms of the be-ing I had cre-ated; I had been struck sense-less by
his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wicked-ness of my
prom-ise burst upon me; I shuddered to think that fu-ture ages might curse me
as their pest, whose selfish-ness had not hes-it-ated to buy its own peace at
the price, per-haps, of the ex-ist-ence of the whole hu-man race.

I trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on look-ing up, I saw by
the light of the moon the dæ-mon at the case-ment.  A ghastly grin
wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat ful-filling the task
which he had al-lot-ted to me.  Yes, he had fol-lowed me in my travels; he
had loitered in forests, hid him-self in caves, or taken refuge in wide
and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my pro-gress and claim the
ful-fil-ment of my prom-ise.

As I looked on him, his coun-ten-ance ex-pressed the ut-most ex-tent of
malice and treach-ery.  I thought with a sen-sa-tion of mad-ness on my
prom-ise of cre-at-ing an-other like to him, and trem-bling with pas-sion,
tore to pieces the thing on which I was en-gaged.  The wretch saw me
des-troy the creature on whose fu-ture ex-ist-ence he de-pended for
hap-pi-ness, and with a howl of dev-il-ish des-pair and re-venge, with-drew.

I left the room, and lock-ing the door, made a sol-emn vow in my own
heart never to re-sume my la-bours; and then, with trem-bling steps, I
sought my own apart-ment. I was alone; none were near me to dis-sip-ate
the gloom and re-lieve me from the sick-en-ing op-pres-sion of the most
ter-rible rev-er-ies.

Several hours passed, and I re-mained near my win-dow gaz-ing on the sea;
it was al-most mo-tion-less, for the winds were hushed, and all nature
re-posed un-der the eye of the quiet moon.  A few fish-ing ves-sels alone
specked the wa-ter, and now and then the gentle breeze waf-ted the sound
of voices as the fish-er-men called to one an-other.  I felt the si-lence,
al-though I was hardly con-scious of its ex-treme pro-fund-ity, un-til my ear
was sud-denly ar-res-ted by the pad-dling of oars near the shore, and a
per-son landed close to my house.

In a few minutes after, I heard the creak-ing of my door, as if some one
en-deav-oured to open it softly. I trembled from head to foot; I felt a
presen-ti-ment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peas-ants who
dwelt in a cot-tage not far from mine; but I was over-come by the sen-sa-tion
of help-less-ness, so of-ten felt in fright-ful dreams, when you in vain
en-deav-our to fly from an im-pend-ing danger, and was rooted to the spot.

Presently I heard the sound of foot-steps along the pas-sage; the door
opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded ap-peared. Shut-ting the door, he
ap-proached me and said in a smothered voice,

“You have des-troyed the work which you began; what is it that you
in-tend? Do you dare to break your prom-ise? I have en-dured toil and misery;
I left Switzer-land with you; I crept along the shores of the Rhine, among
its wil-low is-lands and over the sum-mits of its hills. I have dwelt many
months in the heaths of Eng-land and among the deserts of Scot-land. I have
en-dured in-cal-cul-able fa-tigue, and cold, and hun-ger; do you dare des-troy my
hopes?”

“Be-gone!  I do break my prom-ise; never will I cre-ate an-other like
your-self, equal in de-form-ity and wicked-ness.”

“Slave, I be-fore reasoned with you, but you have proved your-self
un-worthy of my con-des-cen-sion.  Re-mem-ber that I have power; you be-lieve
your-self miser-able, but I can make you so wretched that the light of
day will be hate-ful to you.  You are my cre-ator, but I am your mas-ter;
obey!”

“The hour of my ir-res-ol-u-tion is past, and the period of your power is
ar-rived.  Your threats can-not move me to do an act of wicked-ness; but
they con-firm me in a de-term-in-a-tion of not cre-at-ing you a com-pan-ion in
vice.  Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a dæ-mon whose
de-light is in death and wretched-ness?  Be-gone!  I am firm, and your
words will only ex-as-per-ate my rage.”

The mon-ster saw my de-term-in-a-tion in my face and gnashed his teeth in the
im-pot-ence of an-ger. “Shall each man,” cried he, “find a
wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and I be alone? I had
feel-ings of af-fec-tion, and they were re-quited by de-test-a-tion and scorn.
Man! You may hate, but be-ware! Your hours will pass in dread and misery,
and soon the bolt will fall which must rav-ish from you your hap-pi-ness for
ever. Are you to be happy while I grovel in the in-tens-ity of my
wretched-ness? You can blast my other pas-sions, but re-venge
re-mains—re-venge, hence-forth dearer than light or food! I may die, but
first you, my tyr-ant and tor-mentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your
misery. Be-ware, for I am fear-less and there-fore power-ful. I will watch with
the wili-ness of a snake, that I may sting with its venom. Man, you shall
re-pent of the in-jur-ies you in-flict.”

“Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
I have de-clared my res-ol-u-tion to you, and I am no cow-ard to bend
be-neath words.  Leave me; I am in-ex-or-able.”

“It is well.  I go; but re-mem-ber, I shall be with you on your
wed-ding-night.”

I star-ted for-ward and ex-claimed, “Vil-lain!  Be-fore you sign my
death-war-rant, be sure that you are your-self safe.”

I would have seized him, but he eluded me and quit-ted the house with
pre-cip-it-a-tion.  In a few mo-ments I saw him in his boat, which shot
across the wa-ters with an ar-rowy swift-ness and was soon lost amidst the
waves.

All was again si-lent, but his words rang in my ears. I burned with rage to
pur-sue the mur-derer of my peace and pre-cip-it-ate him into the ocean. I
walked up and down my room hast-ily and per-turbed, while my ima-gin-a-tion
con-jured up a thou-sand im-ages to tor-ment and sting me. Why had I not
fol-lowed him and closed with him in mor-tal strife? But I had suffered him
to de-part, and he had dir-ec-ted his course to-wards the main-land. I shuddered
to think who might be the next vic-tim sac-ri-ficed to his in-sa-ti-ate re-venge.
And then I thought again of his words—“_I will be with you on
your wed-ding-night._” That, then, was the period fixed for the
ful-fil-ment of my des-tiny. In that hour I should die and at once sat-isfy and
ex-tin-guish his malice. The pro-spect did not move me to fear; yet when I
thought of my be-loved El-iza-beth, of her tears and end-less sor-row, when she
should find her lover so bar-bar-ously snatched from her, tears, the first I
had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and I re-solved not to fall
be-fore my en-emy without a bit-ter struggle.

The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feel-ings be-came
calmer, if it may be called calmness when the vi-ol-ence of rage sinks into
the depths of des-pair. I left the house, the hor-rid scene of the last
night’s con-ten-tion, and walked on the beach of the sea, which I
al-most re-garded as an in-su-per-able bar-rier between me and my fel-low
creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. I
de-sired that I might pass my life on that bar-ren rock, wear-ily, it is true,
but un-in-ter-rup-ted by any sud-den shock of misery. If I re-turned, it was to
be sac-ri-ficed or to see those whom I most loved die un-der the grasp of a
dæ-mon whom I had my-self cre-ated.

I walked about the isle like a rest-less spectre, sep-ar-ated from all it
loved and miser-able in the sep-ar-a-tion.  When it be-came noon, and the
sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass and was over-powered by a deep
sleep.  I had been awake the whole of the pre-ced-ing night, my nerves
were agit-ated, and my eyes in-flamed by watch-ing and misery.  The sleep
into which I now sank re-freshed me; and when I awoke, I again felt as
if I be-longed to a race of hu-man be-ings like my-self, and I began to
re-flect upon what had passed with greater com-pos-ure; yet still the
words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they ap-peared
like a dream, yet dis-tinct and op-press-ive as a real-ity.

The sun had far des-cen-ded, and I still sat on the shore, sat-is-fy-ing my
ap-pet-ite, which had be-come raven-ous, with an oaten cake, when I saw a
fish-ing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet;
it con-tained let-ters from Geneva, and one from Cler-val en-treat-ing me to
join him.  He said that he was wear-ing away his time fruit-lessly where
he was, that let-ters from the friends he had formed in Lon-don de-sired
his re-turn to com-plete the ne-go-ti-ation they had entered into for his
In-dian en-ter-prise.  He could not any longer delay his de-par-ture; but as
his jour-ney to Lon-don might be fol-lowed, even sooner than he now
con-jec-tured, by his longer voy-age, he en-treated me to be-stow as much of
my so-ci-ety on him as I could spare.  He be-sought me, there-fore, to
leave my sol-it-ary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we might pro-ceed
south-wards to-gether.  This let-ter in a de-gree re-called me to life, and
I de-term-ined to quit my is-land at the ex-pir-a-tion of two days.

Yet, be-fore I de-par-ted, there was a task to per-form, on which I shuddered
to re-flect; I must pack up my chem-ical in-stru-ments, and for that pur-pose I
must enter the room which had been the scene of my odi-ous work, and I must
handle those utensils the sight of which was sick-en-ing to me. The next
morn-ing, at day-break, I summoned suf-fi-cient cour-age and un-locked the door
of my labor-at-ory. The re-mains of the half-fin-ished creature, whom I had
des-troyed, lay scattered on the floor, and I al-most felt as if I had
mangled the liv-ing flesh of a hu-man be-ing. I paused to col-lect my-self and
then entered the cham-ber. With trem-bling hand I con-veyed the in-stru-ments
out of the room, but I re-flec-ted that I ought not to leave the rel-ics of my
work to ex-cite the hor-ror and sus-pi-cion of the peas-ants; and I ac-cord-ingly
put them into a bas-ket, with a great quant-ity of stones, and lay-ing them
up, de-term-ined to throw them into the sea that very night; and in the
mean-time I sat upon the beach, em-ployed in clean-ing and ar-ran-ging my
chem-ical ap-par-atus.

Noth-ing could be more com-plete than the al-ter-a-tion that had taken place
in my feel-ings since the night of the ap-pear-ance of the dæ-mon.  I had
be-fore re-garded my prom-ise with a gloomy des-pair as a thing that, with
whatever con-sequences, must be ful-filled; but I now felt as if a film
had been taken from be-fore my eyes and that I for the first time saw
clearly.  The idea of re-new-ing my la-bours did not for one in-stant oc-cur
to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I did not
re-flect that a vol-un-tary act of mine could avert it.  I had re-solved in
my own mind that to cre-ate an-other like the fiend I had first made
would be an act of the basest and most at-ro-cious selfish-ness, and I
ban-ished from my mind every thought that could lead to a dif-fer-ent
con-clu-sion.

Between two and three in the morn-ing the moon rose; and I then, put-ting my
bas-ket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore.
The scene was per-fectly sol-it-ary; a few boats were re-turn-ing to-wards land,
but I sailed away from them. I felt as if I was about the com-mis-sion of a
dread-ful crime and avoided with shud-der-ing anxi-ety any en-counter with my
fel-low creatures. At one time the moon, which had be-fore been clear, was
sud-denly over-spread by a thick cloud, and I took ad-vant-age of the mo-ment of
dark-ness and cast my bas-ket into the sea; I listened to the gurg-ling sound
as it sank and then sailed away from the spot. The sky be-came clouded, but
the air was pure, al-though chilled by the north-east breeze that was then
rising. But it re-freshed me and filled me with such agree-able sen-sa-tions
that I re-solved to pro-long my stay on the wa-ter, and fix-ing the rud-der in a
dir-ect po-s-i-tion, stretched my-self at the bot-tom of the boat. Clouds hid the
moon, everything was ob-scure, and I heard only the sound of the boat as its
keel cut through the waves; the mur-mur lulled me, and in a short time I
slept soundly.

I do not know how long I re-mained in this situ-ation, but when I awoke I
found that the sun had already moun-ted con-sid-er-ably. The wind was high, and
the waves con-tinu-ally threatened the safety of my little skiff. I found
that the wind was north-east and must have driven me far from the coast from
which I had em-barked. I en-deav-oured to change my course but quickly found
that if I again made the at-tempt the boat would be in-stantly filled with
wa-ter. Thus situ-ated, my only re-source was to drive be-fore the wind. I
con-fess that I felt a few sen-sa-tions of ter-ror. I had no com-pass with me
and was so slen-derly ac-quain-ted with the geo-graphy of this part of the
world that the sun was of little be-ne-fit to me. I might be driven into the
wide At-lantic and feel all the tor-tures of star-va-tion or be swal-lowed up in
the im-meas-ur-able wa-ters that roared and buf-feted around me. I had already
been out many hours and felt the tor-ment of a burn-ing thirst, a pre-lude to
my other suf-fer-ings. I looked on the heav-ens, which were covered by clouds
that flew be-fore the wind, only to be re-placed by oth-ers; I looked upon the
sea; it was to be my grave. “Fiend,” I ex-claimed, “your
task is already ful-filled!” I thought of El-iza-beth, of my father, and
of Cler-val—all left be-hind, on whom the mon-ster might sat-isfy his
san-guin-ary and mer-ci-less pas-sions. This idea plunged me into a rev-erie so
des-pair-ing and fright-ful that even now, when the scene is on the point of
clos-ing be-fore me for ever, I shud-der to re-flect on it.

Some hours passed thus; but by de-grees, as the sun de-clined to-wards the
ho-ri-zon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea be-came
free from break-ers.  But these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick
and hardly able to hold the rud-der, when sud-denly I saw a line of high
land to-wards the south.

Al-most spent, as I was, by fa-tigue and the dread-ful sus-pense I en-dured
for sev-eral hours, this sud-den cer-tainty of life rushed like a flood of
warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.

How mut-able are our feel-ings, and how strange is that cling-ing love we have
of life even in the ex-cess of misery! I con-struc-ted an-other sail with a
part of my dress and eagerly steered my course to-wards the land. It had a
wild and rocky ap-pear-ance, but as I ap-proached nearer I eas-ily per-ceived
the traces of cul-tiv-a-tion. I saw ves-sels near the shore and found my-self
sud-denly trans-por-ted back to the neigh-bour-hood of civ-il-ised man. I
care-fully traced the wind-ings of the land and hailed a steeple which I at
length saw is-su-ing from be-hind a small promon-tory. As I was in a state of
ex-treme de-bil-ity, I re-solved to sail dir-ectly to-wards the town, as a place
where I could most eas-ily pro-cure nour-ish-ment. For-tunately I had money with
me. As I turned the promon-tory I per-ceived a small neat town and a good
har-bour, which I entered, my heart bound-ing with joy at my un-ex-pec-ted
es-cape.

As I was oc-cu-pied in fix-ing the boat and ar-ran-ging the sails, sev-eral
people crowded to-wards the spot.  They seemed much sur-prised at my
ap-pear-ance, but in-stead of of-fer-ing me any as-sist-ance, whispered
to-gether with ges-tures that at any other time might have pro-duced in me
a slight sen-sa-tion of alarm. As it was, I merely re-marked that they
spoke Eng-lish, and I there-fore ad-dressed them in that lan-guage.  “My
good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me the name of
this town and in-form me where I am?”

“You will know that soon enough,” replied a man with a hoarse voice.
“Maybe you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste,
but you will not be con-sul-ted as to your quar-ters, I prom-ise you.”

I was ex-ceed-ingly sur-prised on re-ceiv-ing so rude an an-swer from a
stranger, and I was also dis-con-cer-ted on per-ceiv-ing the frown-ing and
angry coun-ten-ances of his com-pan-ions.  “Why do you an-swer me so
roughly?”  I replied.  “Surely it is not the cus-tom of Eng-lish-men to
re-ceive strangers so in-hos-pit-ably.”

“I do not know,” said the man, “what the cus-tom of the
Eng-lish may be, but it is the cus-tom of the Irish to hate vil-lains.”

While this strange dia-logue con-tin-ued, I per-ceived the crowd rap-idly
in-crease. Their faces ex-pressed a mix-ture of curi-os-ity and an-ger, which
an-noyed and in some de-gree alarmed me. I in-quired the way to the inn, but
no one replied. I then moved for-ward, and a mur-mur-ing sound arose from the
crowd as they fol-lowed and sur-roun-ded me, when an ill-look-ing man
ap-proach-ing tapped me on the shoulder and said, “Come, sir, you must
fol-low me to Mr. Kir-win’s to give an ac-count of your-self.”

“Who is Mr. Kir-win?  Why am I to give an ac-count of my-self?  Is not
this a free coun-try?”

“Ay, sir, free enough for hon-est folks.  Mr. Kir-win is a ma-gis-trate,
and you are to give an ac-count of the death of a gen-tle-man who was
found murdered here last night.”

This an-swer startled me, but I presently re-covered my-self. I was in-no-cent;
that could eas-ily be proved; ac-cord-ingly I fol-lowed my con-ductor in si-lence
and was led to one of the best houses in the town. I was ready to sink from
fa-tigue and hun-ger, but be-ing sur-roun-ded by a crowd, I thought it politic
to rouse all my strength, that no phys-ical de-bil-ity might be con-strued into
ap-pre-hen-sion or con-scious guilt. Little did I then ex-pect the calam-ity that
was in a few mo-ments to over-whelm me and ex-tin-guish in hor-ror and des-pair
all fear of ig-no-miny or death.

I must pause here, for it re-quires all my forti-tude to re-call the memory of
the fright-ful events which I am about to re-late, in proper de-tail, to my
re-col-lec-tion.





Chapter 21

I was soon in-tro-duced into the pres-ence of the ma-gis-trate, an old
be-ne-vol-ent man with calm and mild man-ners.  He looked upon me, how-ever,
with some de-gree of sever-ity, and then, turn-ing to-wards my con-duct-ors,
he asked who ap-peared as wit-nesses on this oc-ca-sion.

About half a dozen men came for-ward; and, one be-ing se-lec-ted by the
ma-gis-trate, he de-posed that he had been out fish-ing the night be-fore with
his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nu-gent, when, about ten o’clock,
they ob-served a strong north-erly blast rising, and they ac-cord-ingly put in
for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did
not land at the har-bour, but, as they had been ac-cus-tomed, at a creek about
two miles be-low. He walked on first, car-ry-ing a part of the fish-ing tackle,
and his com-pan-ions fol-lowed him at some dis-tance. As he was pro-ceed-ing
along the sands, he struck his foot against some-thing and fell at his
length on the ground. His com-pan-ions came up to as-sist him, and by the
light of their lan-tern they found that he had fallen on the body of a man,
who was to all ap-pear-ance dead. Their first sup-pos-i-tion was that it was the
corpse of some per-son who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the
waves, but on ex-am-in-a-tion they found that the clothes were not wet and even
that the body was not then cold. They in-stantly car-ried it to the cot-tage
of an old wo-man near the spot and en-deav-oured, but in vain, to re-store it
to life. It ap-peared to be a hand-some young man, about five and twenty
years of age. He had ap-par-ently been strangled, for there was no sign of
any vi-ol-ence ex-cept the black mark of fin-gers on his neck.

The first part of this de-pos-ition did not in the least in-terest me, but
when the mark of the fin-gers was men-tioned I re-membered the murder of
my brother and felt my-self ex-tremely agit-ated; my limbs trembled, and a
mist came over my eyes, which ob-liged me to lean on a chair for
sup-port.  The ma-gis-trate ob-served me with a keen eye and of course drew
an un-fa-vour-able augury from my man-ner.

The son con-firmed his father’s ac-count, but when Daniel Nu-gent was
called he swore pos-it-ively that just be-fore the fall of his com-pan-ion, he
saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short dis-tance from the shore;
and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same
boat in which I had just landed.

A wo-man de-posed that she lived near the beach and was stand-ing at the door
of her cot-tage, wait-ing for the re-turn of the fish-er-men, about an hour
be-fore she heard of the dis-cov-ery of the body, when she saw a boat with
only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
was af-ter-wards found.

Another wo-man con-firmed the ac-count of the fish-er-men hav-ing brought the
body into her house; it was not cold.  They put it into a bed and
rubbed it, and Daniel went to the town for an apo-thecary, but life was
quite gone.

Several other men were ex-amined con-cern-ing my land-ing, and they agreed
that, with the strong north wind that had arisen dur-ing the night, it
was very prob-able that I had beaten about for many hours and had been
ob-liged to re-turn nearly to the same spot from which I had de-par-ted.
Besides, they ob-served that it ap-peared that I had brought the body
from an-other place, and it was likely that as I did not ap-pear to know
the shore, I might have put into the har-bour ig-nor-ant of the dis-tance
of the town of —— from the place where I had de-pos-ited the corpse.

Mr. Kir-win, on hear-ing this evid-ence, de-sired that I should be taken into
the room where the body lay for in-ter-ment, that it might be ob-served what
ef-fect the sight of it would pro-duce upon me. This idea was prob-ably
sug-ges-ted by the ex-treme agit-a-tion I had ex-hib-ited when the mode of the
murder had been de-scribed. I was ac-cord-ingly con-duc-ted, by the ma-gis-trate
and sev-eral other per-sons, to the inn. I could not help be-ing struck by the
strange co-in-cid-ences that had taken place dur-ing this event-ful night; but,
know-ing that I had been con-vers-ing with sev-eral per-sons in the is-land I had
in-hab-ited about the time that the body had been found, I was per-fectly
tran-quil as to the con-sequences of the af-fair.

I entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin. How
can I de-scribe my sen-sa-tions on be-hold-ing it? I feel yet parched with
hor-ror, nor can I re-flect on that ter-rible mo-ment without shud-der-ing and
agony. The ex-am-in-a-tion, the pres-ence of the ma-gis-trate and wit-nesses,
passed like a dream from my memory when I saw the life-less form of Henry
Cler-val stretched be-fore me. I gasped for breath, and throw-ing my-self on
the body, I ex-claimed, “Have my mur-der-ous mach-in-a-tions de-prived you
also, my dearest Henry, of life? Two I have already des-troyed; other
vic-tims await their des-tiny; but you, Cler-val, my friend, my
be-ne-factor—”

The hu-man frame could no longer sup-port the ag-on-ies that I en-dured, and
I was car-ried out of the room in strong con-vul-sions.

A fever suc-ceeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of death; my
rav-ings, as I af-ter-wards heard, were fright-ful; I called my-self the
mur-derer of Wil-liam, of Justine, and of Cler-val. So-me-times I en-treated my
at-tend-ants to as-sist me in the de-struc-tion of the fiend by whom I was
tor-men-ted; and at oth-ers I felt the fin-gers of the mon-ster already grasp-ing
my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and ter-ror. For-tunately, as I spoke
my nat-ive lan-guage, Mr. Kir-win alone un-der-stood me; but my ges-tures and
bit-ter cries were suf-fi-cient to af-fright the other wit-nesses.

Why did I not die? More miser-able than man ever was be-fore, why did I not
sink into for-get-ful-ness and rest? Death snatches away many bloom-ing
chil-dren, the only hopes of their dot-ing par-ents; how many brides and
youth-ful lov-ers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the
next a prey for worms and the de-cay of the tomb! Of what ma-ter-i-als was I
made that I could thus res-ist so many shocks, which, like the turn-ing of
the wheel, con-tinu-ally re-newed the tor-ture?

But I was doomed to live and in two months found my-self as awak-ing from
a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, sur-roun-ded by
gaol-ers, turn-keys, bolts, and all the miser-able ap-par-atus of a dun-geon.
It was morn-ing, I re-mem-ber, when I thus awoke to un-der-stand-ing; I had
for-got-ten the par-tic-u-lars of what had happened and only felt as if some
great mis-for-tune had sud-denly over-whelmed me; but when I looked around
and saw the barred win-dows and the squal-id-ness of the room in which I
was, all flashed across my memory and I groaned bit-terly.

This sound dis-turbed an old wo-man who was sleep-ing in a chair be-side
me.  She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turn-keys, and her
coun-ten-ance ex-pressed all those bad qual-it-ies which of-ten char-ac-ter-ise
that class.  The lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
per-sons ac-cus-tomed to see without sym-path-ising in sights of misery. Her
tone ex-pressed her en-tire in-dif-fer-ence; she ad-dressed me in Eng-lish,
and the voice struck me as one that I had heard dur-ing my suf-fer-ings.

“Are you bet-ter now, sir?” said she.

I replied in the same lan-guage, with a feeble voice, “I be-lieve I am;
but if it be all true, if in-deed I did not dream, I am sorry that I am
still alive to feel this misery and hor-ror.”

“For that mat-ter,” replied the old wo-man, “if you mean about the
gen-tle-man you murdered, I be-lieve that it were bet-ter for you if you
were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you!  However, that’s none
of my busi-ness; I am sent to nurse you and get you well; I do my duty
with a safe con-science; it were well if every-body did the same.”

I turned with loath-ing from the wo-man who could ut-ter so un-feel-ing a
speech to a per-son just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt
lan-guid and un-able to re-flect on all that had passed.  The whole series
of my life ap-peared to me as a dream; I some-times doubted if in-deed it
were all true, for it never presen-ted it-self to my mind with the force
of real-ity.

As the im-ages that floated be-fore me be-came more dis-tinct, I grew
fe-ver-ish; a dark-ness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed
me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand sup-por-ted me.  The
phys-i-cian came and pre-scribed medi-cines, and the old wo-man pre-pared
them for me; but ut-ter care-less-ness was vis-ible in the first, and the
ex-pres-sion of bru-tal-ity was strongly marked in the vis-age of the
second.  Who could be in-ter-ested in the fate of a mur-derer but the
hang-man who would gain his fee?

These were my first re-flec-tions, but I soon learned that Mr. Kir-win had
shown me ex-treme kind-ness.  He had caused the best room in the prison
to be pre-pared for me (wretched in-deed was the best); and it was he who
had provided a phys-i-cian and a nurse.  It is true, he sel-dom came to
see me, for al-though he ar-dently de-sired to re-lieve the suf-fer-ings of
every hu-man creature, he did not wish to be present at the ag-on-ies and
miser-able rav-ings of a mur-derer.  He came, there-fore, some-times to see
that I was not neg-lected, but his vis-its were short and with long
in-ter-vals.

One day, while I was gradu-ally re-cov-er-ing, I was seated in a chair, my eyes
half open and my cheeks livid like those in death. I was over-come by gloom
and misery and of-ten re-flec-ted I had bet-ter seek death than de-sire to
re-main in a world which to me was re-plete with wretched-ness. At one time I
con-sidered whether I should not de-clare my-self guilty and suf-fer the
pen-alty of the law, less in-no-cent than poor Justine had been. Such were my
thoughts when the door of my apart-ment was opened and Mr. Kir-win entered.
His coun-ten-ance ex-pressed sym-pathy and com-pas-sion; he drew a chair close to
mine and ad-dressed me in French,

“I fear that this place is very shock-ing to you; can I do any-thing to
make you more com-fort-able?”

“I thank you, but all that you men-tion is noth-ing to me; on the whole
earth there is no com-fort which I am cap-able of re-ceiv-ing.”

“I know that the sym-pathy of a stranger can be but of little re-lief to
one borne down as you are by so strange a mis-for-tune.  But you will, I
hope, soon quit this mel-an-choly abode, for doubt-less evid-ence can
eas-ily be brought to free you from the crim-inal charge.”

“That is my least con-cern; I am, by a course of strange events, be-come
the most miser-able of mor-tals.  Per-secuted and tor-tured as I am and
have been, can death be any evil to me?”

“Noth-ing in-deed could be more un-for-tu-nate and ag-on-ising than the
strange chances that have lately oc-curred.  You were thrown, by some
sur-pris-ing ac-ci-dent, on this shore, renowned for its hos-pit-al-ity,
seized im-me-di-ately, and charged with murder.  The first sight that was
presen-ted to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so
un-ac-count-able a man-ner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across
your path.”

As Mr. Kir-win said this, not-with-stand-ing the agit-a-tion I en-dured on
this ret-ro-spect of my suf-fer-ings, I also felt con-sid-er-able sur-prise at
the know-ledge he seemed to pos-sess con-cern-ing me.  I sup-pose some
as-ton-ish-ment was ex-hib-ited in my coun-ten-ance, for Mr. Kir-win hastened
to say,

“Im-me-di-ately upon your be-ing taken ill, all the pa-pers that were on
your per-son were brought me, and I ex-amined them that I might dis-cover some
trace by which I could send to your re-la-tions an ac-count of your mis-for-tune
and ill-ness. I found sev-eral let-ters, and, among oth-ers, one which I
dis-covered from its com-mence-ment to be from your father. I in-stantly wrote
to Geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the de-par-ture of my let-ter.
But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are un-fit for agit-a-tion of any
kind.”

“This sus-pense is a thou-sand times worse than the most hor-rible event;
tell me what new scene of death has been ac-ted, and whose murder I am
now to lament?”

“Your fam-ily is per-fectly well,” said Mr. Kir-win with
gen-tle-ness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.”

I know not by what chain of thought the idea presen-ted it-self, but it
in-stantly dar-ted into my mind that the mur-derer had come to mock at my
misery and taunt me with the death of Cler-val, as a new in-cite-ment for
me to com-ply with his hellish de-sires.  I put my hand be-fore my eyes,
and cried out in agony,

“Oh! Take him away! I can-not see him; for God’s sake, do not
let him enter!”

Mr. Kir-win re-garded me with a troubled coun-ten-ance.  He could not help
re-gard-ing my ex-clam-a-tion as a pre-sump-tion of my guilt and said in
rather a severe tone,

“I should have thought, young man, that the pres-ence of your father
would have been wel-come in-stead of in-spir-ing such vi-ol-ent re-pug-nance.”

“My father!” cried I, while every fea-ture and every muscle was re-laxed
from an-guish to pleas-ure.  “Is my father in-deed come?  How kind, how
very kind!  But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?”

My change of man-ner sur-prised and pleased the ma-gis-trate; per-haps he
thought that my former ex-clam-a-tion was a mo-ment-ary re-turn of de-li-rium,
and now he in-stantly re-sumed his former be-ne-vol-ence.  He rose and
quit-ted the room with my nurse, and in a mo-ment my father entered it.

Noth-ing, at this mo-ment, could have given me greater pleas-ure than the
ar-rival of my father. I stretched out my hand to him and cried,

“Are you then safe—and El-iza-beth—and Ern-est?”

My father calmed me with as-sur-ances of their wel-fare and en-deav-oured, by
dwell-ing on these sub-jects so in-ter-est-ing to my heart, to raise my
des-pond-ing spir-its; but he soon felt that a prison can-not be the abode of
cheer-ful-ness. “What a place is this that you in-habit, my son!”
said he, look-ing mourn-fully at the barred win-dows and wretched ap-pear-ance
of the room. “You trav-elled to seek hap-pi-ness, but a fatal-ity seems
to pur-sue you. And poor Cler-val—”

The name of my un-for-tu-nate and murdered friend was an agit-a-tion too
great to be en-dured in my weak state; I shed tears.

“Alas! Yes, my father,” replied I; “some des-tiny of the
most hor-rible kind hangs over me, and I must live to ful-fil it, or surely I
should have died on the coffin of Henry.”

We were not al-lowed to con-verse for any length of time, for the
pre-cari-ous state of my health rendered every pre-cau-tion ne-ces-sary that
could en-sure tran-quil-lity.  Mr. Kir-win came in and in-sisted that my
strength should not be ex-hausted by too much ex-er-tion.  But the
ap-pear-ance of my father was to me like that of my good an-gel, and I
gradu-ally re-covered my health.

As my sick-ness quit-ted me, I was ab-sorbed by a gloomy and black
mel-an-choly that noth-ing could dis-sip-ate.  The im-age of Cler-val was
for ever be-fore me, ghastly and murdered.  More than once the agit-a-tion
into which these re-flec-tions threw me made my friends dread a dan-ger-ous
re-lapse.  Alas!  Why did they pre-serve so miser-able and de-tested a
life?  It was surely that I might ful-fil my des-tiny, which is now
draw-ing to a close.  Soon, oh, very soon, will death ex-tin-guish these
throb-bings and re-lieve me from the mighty weight of an-guish that bears
me to the dust; and, in ex-ecut-ing the award of justice, I shall also
sink to rest.  Then the ap-pear-ance of death was dis-tant, al-though the
wish was ever present to my thoughts; and I of-ten sat for hours
mo-tion-less and speech-less, wish-ing for some mighty re-volu-tion that
might bury me and my des-troyer in its ru-ins.

The sea-son of the as-sizes ap-proached.  I had already been three months
in prison, and al-though I was still weak and in con-tinual danger of a
re-lapse, I was ob-liged to travel nearly a hun-dred miles to the coun-try
town where the court was held.  Mr. Kir-win charged him-self with every
care of col-lect-ing wit-nesses and ar-ran-ging my de-fence.  I was spared
the dis-grace of ap-pear-ing pub-licly as a crim-inal, as the case was not
brought be-fore the court that de-cides on life and death.  The grand
jury re-jec-ted the bill, on its be-ing proved that I was on the Orkney
Is-lands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and a fort-night
after my re-moval I was lib-er-ated from prison.

My father was en-rap-tured on find-ing me freed from the vex-a-tions of a
crim-inal charge, that I was again al-lowed to breathe the fresh
at-mo-sphere and per-mit-ted to re-turn to my nat-ive coun-try.  I did not
par-ti-cip-ate in these feel-ings, for to me the walls of a dun-geon or a
palace were alike hate-ful.  The cup of life was poisoned for ever, and
al-though the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I
saw around me noth-ing but a dense and fright-ful dark-ness, pen-et-rated by
no light but the glim-mer of two eyes that glared upon me.  So-me-times
they were the ex-press-ive eyes of Henry, lan-guish-ing in death, the dark
orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed
them; some-times it was the wa-tery, clouded eyes of the mon-ster, as I
first saw them in my cham-ber at In-gol-stadt.

My father tried to awaken in me the feel-ings of af-fec-tion.  He talked
of Geneva, which I should soon visit, of El-iza-beth and Ern-est; but
these words only drew deep groans from me.  So-me-times, in-deed, I felt a
wish for hap-pi-ness and thought with mel-an-choly de-light of my be-loved
cousin or longed, with a de-vour-ing _maladie du pays_, to see once more
the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear to me in early
child-hood; but my gen-eral state of feel-ing was a tor-por in which a
prison was as wel-come a res-id-ence as the di-vinest scene in nature; and
these fits were sel-dom in-ter-rup-ted but by par-oxysms of an-guish and
des-pair.  At these mo-ments I of-ten en-deav-oured to put an end to the
ex-ist-ence I loathed, and it re-quired un-ceas-ing at-tend-ance and vi-gil-ance
to re-strain me from com-mit-ting some dread-ful act of vi-ol-ence.

Yet one duty re-mained to me, the re-col-lec-tion of which fi-nally
tri-umphed over my selfish des-pair.  It was ne-ces-sary that I should
re-turn without delay to Geneva, there to watch over the lives of those
I so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the mur-derer, that if any
chance led me to the place of his con-ceal-ment, or if he dared again to
blast me by his pres-ence, I might, with un-fail-ing aim, put an end to
the ex-ist-ence of the mon-strous im-age which  I had en-dued with the
mock-ery of a soul still more mon-strous.  My father still de-sired to
delay our de-par-ture, fear-ful that I could not sus-tain the fa-tigues of a
jour-ney, for I was a shattered wreck—the shadow of a hu-man be-ing.  My
strength was gone.  I was a mere skel-eton, and fever night and day
preyed upon my wasted frame.

Still, as I urged our leav-ing Ire-land with such in-quiet-ude and im-pa-tience,
my father thought it best to yield. We took our pas-sage on board a ves-sel
bound for Havre-de-Grace and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores.
It was mid-night. I lay on the deck look-ing at the stars and listen-ing to
the dash-ing of the waves. I hailed the dark-ness that shut Ire-land from my
sight, and my pulse beat with a fe-ver-ish joy when I re-flec-ted that I should
soon see Geneva. The past ap-peared to me in the light of a fright-ful dream;
yet the ves-sel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the de-tested
shore of Ire-land, and the sea which sur-roun-ded me, told me too for-cibly
that I was de-ceived by no vis-ion and that Cler-val, my friend and dearest
com-pan-ion, had fallen a vic-tim to me and the mon-ster of my cre-ation. I
re-passed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet hap-pi-ness while resid-ing
with my fam-ily in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my de-par-ture for
In-gol-stadt. I re-membered, shud-der-ing, the mad en-thu-si-asm that hur-ried me on
to the cre-ation of my hideous en-emy, and I called to mind the night in
which he first lived. I was un-able to pur-sue the train of thought; a
thou-sand feel-ings pressed upon me, and I wept bit-terly.

Ever since my re-cov-ery from the fever, I had been in the cus-tom of tak-ing
every night a small quant-ity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug
only that I was en-abled to gain the rest ne-ces-sary for the pre-ser-va-tion of
life. Op-pressed by the re-col-lec-tion of my vari-ous mis-for-tunes, I now
swal-lowed double my usual quant-ity and soon slept pro-foundly. But sleep did
not af-ford me res-pite from thought and misery; my dreams presen-ted a
thou-sand ob-jects that scared me. Towards morn-ing I was pos-sessed by a kind
of night-mare; I felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not free
my-self from it; groans and cries rang in my ears. My father, who was
watch-ing over me, per-ceiv-ing my rest-less-ness, awoke me; the dash-ing waves
were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of
se-cur-ity, a feel-ing that a truce was es-tab-lished between the present hour
and the ir-res-ist-ible, dis-astrous fu-ture im-par-ted to me a kind of calm
for-get-ful-ness, of which the hu-man mind is by its struc-ture pe-cu-li-arly
sus-cept-ible.





Chapter 22

The voy-age came to an end.  We landed, and pro-ceeded to Paris.  I soon
found that I had over-taxed my strength and that I must re-pose be-fore I
could con-tinue my jour-ney.  My father’s care and at-ten-tions were
in-defatig-able, but he did not know the ori-gin of my suf-fer-ings and
sought er-ro-neous meth-ods to rem-edy the in-cur-able ill.  He wished me to
seek amuse-ment in so-ci-ety.  I ab-horred the face of man.  Oh, not
ab-horred!  They were my brethren, my fel-low be-ings, and I felt
at-trac-ted even to the most re-puls-ive among them, as to creatures of an
an-gelic nature and ce-les-tial mech-an-ism.  But I felt that I had no right
to share their in-ter-course.  I had un-chained an en-emy among them whose
joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans.  How they
would, each and all, ab-hor me and hunt me from the world, did they know
my un-hal-lowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me!

My father yiel-ded at length to my de-sire to avoid so-ci-ety and strove by
vari-ous ar-gu-ments to ban-ish my des-pair.  So-me-times he thought that I
felt deeply the de-grad-a-tion of be-ing ob-liged to an-swer a charge of
murder, and he en-deav-oured to prove to me the fu-til-ity of pride.

“Alas!  My father,” said I, “how little do you know me. 
Hu-man be-ings, their feel-ings and pas-sions, would in-deed be de-graded if such
a wretch as I felt pride.  Justine, poor un-happy Justine, was as in-no-cent
as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am the cause
of this—I murdered her.  Wil-liam, Justine, and Henry—they all
died by my hands.”

My father had of-ten, dur-ing my im-pris-on-ment, heard me make the same
as-ser-tion; when I thus ac-cused my-self, he some-times seemed to de-sire an
ex-plan-a-tion, and at oth-ers he ap-peared to con-sider it as the off-spring of
de-li-rium, and that, dur-ing my ill-ness, some idea of this kind had presen-ted
it-self to my ima-gin-a-tion, the re-mem-brance of which I pre-served in my
con-vales-cence. I avoided ex-plan-a-tion and main-tained a con-tinual si-lence
con-cern-ing the wretch I had cre-ated. I had a per-sua-sion that I should be
sup-posed mad, and this in it-self would for ever have chained my tongue. But,
be-sides, I could not bring my-self to dis-close a secret which would fill my
hearer with con-sterna-tion and make fear and un-nat-ural hor-ror the in-mates of
his breast. I checked, there-fore, my im-pa-tient thirst for sym-pathy and was
si-lent when I would have given the world to have con-fided the fatal secret.
Yet, still, words like those I have re-cor-ded would burst un-con-trol-lably
from me. I could of-fer no ex-plan-a-tion of them, but their truth in part
re-lieved the bur-den of my mys-ter-i-ous woe.

Upon this oc-ca-sion my father said, with an ex-pres-sion of un-boun-ded won-der,
“My dearest Victor, what in-fatu-ation is this? My dear son, I en-treat
you never to make such an as-ser-tion again.”

“I am not mad,” I cried en-er-get-ic-ally; “the sun and the heav-ens, who
have viewed my op-er-a-tions, can bear wit-ness of my truth.  I am the
as-sas-sin of those most in-no-cent vic-tims; they died by my mach-in-a-tions.
A thou-sand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
saved their lives; but I could not, my father, in-deed I could not
sac-ri-fice the whole hu-man race.”

The con-clu-sion of this speech con-vinced my father that my ideas were
de-ranged, and he in-stantly changed the sub-ject of our con-ver-sa-tion and
en-deav-oured to al-ter the course of my thoughts.  He wished as much as
pos-sible to ob-lit-er-ate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in
Ire-land and never al-luded to them or suffered me to speak of my
mis-for-tunes.

As time passed away I be-came more calm; misery had her dwell-ing in my
heart, but I no longer talked in the same in-co-her-ent man-ner of my own
crimes; suf-fi-cient for me was the con-scious-ness of them.  By the ut-most
self-vi-ol-ence I curbed the im-per-i-ous voice of wretched-ness, which
some-times de-sired to de-clare it-self to the whole world, and my man-ners
were calmer and more com-posed than they had ever been since my jour-ney
to the sea of ice.

A few days be-fore we left Paris on our way to Switzer-land, I re-ceived the
fol-low-ing let-ter from El-iza-beth:

“My dear Friend,

“It gave me the greatest pleas-ure to re-ceive a let-ter from my uncle
dated at Paris; you are no longer at a for-mid-able dis-tance, and I may
hope to see you in less than a fort-night.  My poor cousin, how much you
must have suffered!  I ex-pect to see you look-ing even more ill than
when you quit-ted Geneva.  This winter has been passed most miser-ably,
tor-tured as I have been by anxious sus-pense; yet I hope to see peace in
your coun-ten-ance and to find that your heart is not totally void of
com-fort and tran-quil-lity.

“Yet I fear that the same feel-ings now ex-ist that made you so miser-able
a year ago, even per-haps aug-men-ted by time.  I would not dis-turb you at
this period, when so many mis-for-tunes weigh upon you, but a
con-ver-sa-tion that I had with my uncle pre-vi-ous to his de-par-ture renders
some ex-plan-a-tion ne-ces-sary be-fore we meet.

Ex-plan-a-tion! You may pos-sibly say, What can El-iza-beth have to ex-plain? If
you really say this, my ques-tions are answered and all my doubts sat-is-fied.
But you are dis-tant from me, and it is pos-sible that you may dread and yet
be pleased with this ex-plan-a-tion; and in a prob-ab-il-ity of this be-ing the
case, I dare not any longer post-pone writ-ing what, dur-ing your ab-sence, I
have of-ten wished to ex-press to you but have never had the cour-age to be-gin.

“You well know, Victor, that our union had been the fa-vour-ite plan of
your par-ents ever since our in-fancy.  We were told this when young, and
taught to look for-ward to it as an event that would cer-tainly take
place.  We were af-fec-tion-ate play-fel-lows dur-ing child-hood, and, I
be-lieve, dear and val-ued friends to one an-other as we grew older. But
as brother and sis-ter of-ten en-ter-tain a lively af-fec-tion to-wards each
other without de-sir-ing a more in-tim-ate union, may not such also be our
case?  Tell me, dearest Victor.  An-swer me, I con-jure you by our mu-tual
hap-pi-ness, with simple truth—Do you not love an-other?

“You have trav-elled; you have spent sev-eral years of your life at
In-gol-stadt; and I con-fess to you, my friend, that when I saw you last
au-tumn so un-happy, fly-ing to solitude from the so-ci-ety of every
creature, I could not help sup-pos-ing that you might re-gret our
con-nec-tion and be-lieve your-self bound in hon-our to ful-fil the wishes of
your par-ents, al-though they op-posed them-selves to your in-clin-a-tions.
But this is false reas-on-ing.  I con-fess to you, my friend, that I love
you and that in my airy dreams of fu-tur-ity you have been my con-stant
friend and com-pan-ion.   But it is your hap-pi-ness I de-sire as well as my
own when I de-clare to you that our mar-riage would render me etern-ally
miser-able un-less it were the dic-tate of your own free choice.  Even now
I weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest
mis-for-tunes, you may stifle, by the word _hon-our_, all hope of that
love and hap-pi-ness which would alone re-store you to your-self.  I, who
have so dis-in-ter-ested an af-fec-tion for you, may in-crease your miser-ies
ten-fold by be-ing an obstacle to your wishes.  Ah! Victor, be as-sured
that your cousin and play-mate has too sin-cere a love for you not to be
made miser-able by this sup-pos-i-tion.  Be happy, my friend; and if you
obey me in this one re-quest, re-main sat-is-fied that noth-ing on earth
will have the power to in-ter-rupt my tran-quil-lity.

“Do not let this let-ter dis-turb you; do not an-swer to-mor-row, or the
next day, or even un-til you come, if it will give you pain.  My uncle
will send me news of your health, and if I see but one smile on your
lips when we meet, oc-ca-sioned by this or any other ex-er-tion of mine, I
shall need no other hap-pi-ness.

“El-iza-beth Lavenza.



“Geneva, May 18th, 17—”



This let-ter re-vived in my memory what I had be-fore for-got-ten, the threat of
the fiend—“_I will be with you on your
wed-ding-night!_” Such was my sen-tence, and on that night would the
dæ-mon em-ploy every art to des-troy me and tear me from the glimpse of
hap-pi-ness which prom-ised partly to con-sole my suf-fer-ings. On that night he
had de-term-ined to con-sum-mate his crimes by my death. Well, be it so; a
deadly struggle would then as-suredly take place, in which if he were
vic-tori-ous I should be at peace and his power over me be at an end. If he
were van-quished, I should be a free man. Alas! What free-dom? Such as the
peas-ant en-joys when his fam-ily have been mas-sacred be-fore his eyes, his
cot-tage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, home-less,
pen-ni-less, and alone, but free. Such would be my liberty ex-cept that in my
El-iza-beth I pos-sessed a treas-ure, alas, bal-anced by those hor-rors of
re-morse and guilt which would pur-sue me un-til death.

Sweet and be-loved El-iza-beth! I read and re-read her let-ter, and some
softened feel-ings stole into my heart and dared to whis-per para-disi-acal
dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the
an-gel’s arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I would die to make
her happy. If the mon-ster ex-ecuted his threat, death was in-ev-it-able; yet,
again, I con-sidered whether my mar-riage would hasten my fate. My
de-struc-tion might in-deed ar-rive a few months sooner, but if my tor-turer
should sus-pect that I post-poned it, in-flu-enced by his men-aces, he would
surely find other and per-haps more dread-ful means of re-venge. He had vowed
_to be with me on my wed-ding-night_, yet he did not con-sider that
threat as bind-ing him to peace in the mean-time, for as if to show me that
he was not yet sa-ti-ated with blood, he had murdered Cler-val im-me-di-ately
after the enun-ci-ation of his threats. I re-solved, there-fore, that if my
im-me-di-ate union with my cousin would con-duce either to hers or my
father’s hap-pi-ness, my ad-versary’s designs against my life
should not re-tard it a single hour.

In this state of mind I wrote to El-iza-beth.  My let-ter was calm and
af-fec-tion-ate.  “I fear, my be-loved girl,” I said, “little hap-pi-ness
re-mains for us on earth; yet all that I may one day en-joy is centred in
you.  Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I con-sec-rate my life
and my en-deav-ours for con-tent-ment.  I have one secret, El-iza-beth, a
dread-ful one; when re-vealed to you, it will chill your frame with
hor-ror, and then, far from be-ing sur-prised at my misery, you will only
won-der that I sur-vive what I have en-dured.  I will con-fide this tale of
misery and ter-ror to you the day after our mar-riage shall take place,
for, my sweet cousin, there must be per-fect con-fid-ence between us.  But
un-til then, I con-jure you, do not men-tion or al-lude to it.  This I most
earn-estly en-treat, and I know you will com-ply.”

In about a week after the ar-rival of El-iza-beth’s let-ter we re-turned
to Geneva. The sweet girl wel-comed me with warm af-fec-tion, yet tears were
in her eyes as she be-held my ema-ci-ated frame and fe-ver-ish cheeks. I saw a
change in her also. She was thin-ner and had lost much of that heav-enly
vi-va-city that had be-fore charmed me; but her gen-tle-ness and soft looks of
com-pas-sion made her a more fit com-pan-ion for one blas-ted and miser-able as I
was.

The tran-quil-lity which I now en-joyed did not en-dure. Memory brought mad-ness
with it, and when I thought of what had passed, a real in-san-ity pos-sessed
me; some-times I was furi-ous and burnt with rage, some-times low and
des-pond-ent. I neither spoke nor looked at any-one, but sat mo-tion-less,
be-wildered by the mul-ti-tude of miser-ies that over-came me.

El-iza-beth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice
would soothe me when trans-por-ted by pas-sion and in-spire me with hu-man
feel-ings when sunk in tor-por. She wept with me and for me. When reason
re-turned, she would re-mon-strate and en-deav-our to in-spire me with
resig-na-tion. Ah! It is well for the un-for-tu-nate to be resigned, but for the
guilty there is no peace. The ag-on-ies of re-morse poison the lux-ury there is
oth-er-wise some-times found in in-dul-ging the ex-cess of grief.

Soon after my ar-rival my father spoke of my im-me-di-ate mar-riage with
El-iza-beth. I re-mained si-lent.

“Have you, then, some other at-tach-ment?”

“None on earth.  I love El-iza-beth and look for-ward to our union with
de-light.  Let the day there-fore be fixed; and on it I will con-sec-rate
my-self, in life or death, to the hap-pi-ness of my cousin.”

“My dear Victor, do not speak thus.  Heavy mis-for-tunes have be-fallen
us, but let us only cling closer to what re-mains and trans-fer our love
for those whom we have lost to those who yet live.  Our circle will be
small but bound close by the ties of af-fec-tion and mu-tual mis-for-tune.
And when time shall have softened your des-pair, new and dear ob-jects of
care will be born to re-place those of whom we have been so cruelly
de-prived.”

Such were the les-sons of my father.  But to me the re-mem-brance of the
threat re-turned; nor can you won-der that, om-ni-po-tent as the fiend had
yet been in his deeds of blood, I should al-most re-gard him as
in-vin-cible, and that when he had pro-nounced the words “_I shall be with
you on your wed-ding-night_,” I should re-gard the threatened fate as
un-avoid-able.  But death was no evil to me if the loss of El-iza-beth were
bal-anced with it, and I there-fore, with a con-ten-ted and even cheer-ful
coun-ten-ance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would con-sent, the
ce-re-mony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as I ima-gined,
the seal to my fate.

Great God!  If for one in-stant I had thought what might be the hellish
in-ten-tion of my fiendish ad-versary, I would rather have ban-ished my-self
for ever from my nat-ive coun-try and wandered a friend-less out-cast over
the earth than have con-sen-ted to this miser-able mar-riage.  But, as if
pos-sessed of ma-gic powers, the mon-ster had blinded me to his real
in-ten-tions; and when I thought that I had pre-pared only my own death, I
hastened that of a far dearer vic-tim.

As the period fixed for our mar-riage drew nearer, whether from cow-ardice or
a proph-etic feel-ing, I felt my heart sink within me. But I con-cealed my
feel-ings by an ap-pear-ance of hil-ar-ity that brought smiles and joy to the
coun-ten-ance of my father, but hardly de-ceived the ever-watch-ful and nicer
eye of El-iza-beth. She looked for-ward to our union with pla-cid con-tent-ment,
not un-mingled with a little fear, which past mis-for-tunes had im-pressed,
that what now ap-peared cer-tain and tan-gible hap-pi-ness might soon dis-sip-ate
into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and ever-last-ing re-gret.

Pre-par-a-tions were made for the event, con-grat-u-lat-ory vis-its were re-ceived,
and all wore a smil-ing ap-pear-ance. I shut up, as well as I could, in my own
heart the anxi-ety that preyed there and entered with seem-ing earn-est-ness
into the plans of my father, al-though they might only serve as the
dec-or-a-tions of my tragedy. Through my father’s ex-er-tions a part of
the in-her-it-ance of El-iza-beth had been re-stored to her by the Aus-trian
gov-ern-ment. A small pos-ses-sion on the shores of Como be-longed to her. It
was agreed that, im-me-di-ately after our union, we should pro-ceed to Villa
Lavenza and spend our first days of hap-pi-ness be-side the beau-ti-ful lake
near which it stood.

In the mean-time I took every pre-cau-tion to de-fend my per-son in case the
fiend should openly at-tack me.  I car-ried pis-tols and a dag-ger
con-stantly about me and was ever on the watch to pre-vent ar-ti-fice, and
by these means gained a greater de-gree of tran-quil-lity.  Indeed, as the
period ap-proached, the threat ap-peared more as a de-lu-sion, not to be
re-garded as worthy to dis-turb my peace, while the hap-pi-ness I hoped for
in my mar-riage wore a greater ap-pear-ance of cer-tainty as the day fixed
for its sol-em-nisa-tion drew nearer and I heard it con-tinu-ally spoken of
as an oc-cur-rence which no ac-ci-dent could pos-sibly pre-vent.

El-iza-beth seemed happy; my tran-quil de-mean-our con-trib-uted greatly to
calm her mind.  But on the day that was to ful-fil my wishes and my
des-tiny, she was mel-an-choly, and a presen-ti-ment of evil per-vaded her;
and per-haps also she thought of the dread-ful secret which I had
prom-ised to re-veal to her on the fol-low-ing day.  My father was in the
mean-time over-joyed, and, in the bustle of pre-par-a-tion, only re-cog-nised in
the mel-an-choly of his niece the dif-fid-ence of a bride.

After the ce-re-mony was per-formed a large party as-sembled at my
father’s, but it was agreed that El-iza-beth and I should com-mence our
jour-ney by wa-ter, sleep-ing that night at Evian and con-tinu-ing our
voy-age on the fol-low-ing day.  The day was fair, the wind fa-vour-able;
all smiled on our nup-tial em-bark-a-tion.

Those were the last mo-ments of my life dur-ing which I en-joyed the
feel-ing of hap-pi-ness.  We passed rap-idly along; the sun was hot, but we
were sheltered from its rays by a kind of can-opy while we en-joyed the
beauty of the scene, some-times on one side of the lake, where we saw
Mont Salêve, the pleas-ant banks of Mont-alè-gre, and at a dis-tance,
sur-mount-ing all, the beau-ti-ful Mont Blanc, and the as-semblage of snowy
moun-tains that in vain en-deav-our to emu-late her; some-times coast-ing the
op-pos-ite banks, we saw the mighty Jura op-pos-ing its dark side to the
am-bi-tion that would quit its nat-ive coun-try, and an al-most
in-sur-mount-able bar-rier to the in-vader who should wish to en-slave it.

I took the hand of El-iza-beth.  “You are sor-row-ful, my love.  Ah!  If
you knew what I have suffered and what I may yet en-dure, you would
en-deav-our to let me taste the quiet and free-dom from des-pair that this
one day at least per-mits me to en-joy.”

“Be happy, my dear Victor,” replied El-iza-beth; “there is, I hope,
noth-ing to dis-tress you; and be as-sured that if a lively joy is not
painted in my face, my heart is con-ten-ted.  So-mething whis-pers to me
not to de-pend too much on the pro-spect that is opened be-fore us, but I
will not listen to such a sin-is-ter voice.  Ob-serve how fast we move
along and how the clouds, which some-times ob-scure and some-times rise
above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more
in-ter-est-ing.  Look also at the in-nu-mer-able fish that are swim-ming in
the clear wa-ters, where we can dis-tin-guish every pebble that lies at
the bot-tom.  What a di-vine day!  How happy and se-rene all nature
ap-pears!”

Thus El-iza-beth en-deav-oured to di-vert her thoughts and mine from all
re-flec-tion upon mel-an-choly sub-jects.  But her tem-per was fluc-tu-at-ing;
joy for a few in-stants shone in her eyes, but it con-tinu-ally gave place
to dis-trac-tion and rev-erie.

The sun sank lower in the heav-ens; we passed the river Drance and
ob-served its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the
lower hills.  The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we ap-proached
the am-phi-theatre of moun-tains which forms its east-ern bound-ary.  The
spire of Evian shone un-der the woods that sur-roun-ded it and the range
of moun-tain above moun-tain by which it was over-hung.

The wind, which had hitherto car-ried us along with amaz-ing rapid-ity,
sank at sun-set to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the wa-ter
and caused a pleas-ant mo-tion among the trees as we ap-proached the
shore, from which it waf-ted the most de-light-ful scent of flowers and
hay.  The sun sank be-neath the ho-ri-zon as we landed, and as I touched
the shore I felt those cares and fears re-vive which soon were to clasp
me and cling to me for ever.





Chapter 23

It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the
shore, en-joy-ing the trans-it-ory light, and then re-tired to the inn and
con-tem-plated the lovely scene of wa-ters, woods, and moun-tains, ob-scured
in dark-ness, yet still dis-play-ing their black out-lines.

The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great vi-ol-ence
in the west.  The moon had reached her sum-mit in the heav-ens and was
be-gin-ning to des-cend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the
flight of the vul-ture and dimmed her rays, while the lake re-flec-ted the
scene of the busy heav-ens, rendered still busier by the rest-less waves
that were be-gin-ning to rise.  Sud-denly a heavy storm of rain des-cen-ded.

I had been calm dur-ing the day, but so soon as night ob-scured the
shapes of ob-jects, a thou-sand fears arose in my mind.  I was anxious
and watch-ful, while my right hand grasped a pis-tol which was hid-den in
my bosom; every sound ter-ri-fied me, but I re-solved that I would sell my
life dearly and not shrink from the con-flict un-til my own life or that
of my ad-versary was ex-tin-guished.

El-iza-beth ob-served my agit-a-tion for some time in timid and fear-ful si-lence,
but there was some-thing in my glance which com-mu-nic-ated ter-ror to her, and
trem-bling, she asked, “What is it that agit-ates you, my dear Victor?
What is it you fear?”

“Oh! Peace, peace, my love,” replied I; “this night, and
all will be safe; but this night is dread-ful, very dread-ful.”

I passed an hour in this state of mind, when sud-denly I re-flec-ted how
fear-ful the com-bat which I mo-ment-ar-ily ex-pec-ted would be to my wife,
and I earn-estly en-treated her to re-tire, resolv-ing not to join her
un-til I had ob-tained some know-ledge as to the situ-ation of my en-emy.

She left me, and I con-tin-ued some time walk-ing up and down the pas-sages
of the house and in-spect-ing every corner that might af-ford a re-treat to
my ad-versary.  But I dis-covered no trace of him and was be-gin-ning to
con-jec-ture that some for-tu-nate chance had in-ter-vened to pre-vent the
ex-e-cu-tion of his men-aces when sud-denly I heard a shrill and dread-ful
scream.  It came from the room into which El-iza-beth had re-tired.  As I
heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the
mo-tion of every muscle and fibre was sus-pen-ded; I could feel the blood
trick-ling in my veins and tingling in the ex-tremit-ies of my limbs. This
state las-ted but for an in-stant; the scream was re-peated, and I rushed
into the room.

Great God! Why did I not then ex-pire! Why am I here to re-late the
de-struc-tion of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? She was
there, life-less and in-an-im-ate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down
and her pale and dis-tor-ted fea-tures half covered by her hair. Every-where I
turn I see the same fig-ure—her blood-less arms and re-laxed form flung
by the mur-derer on its bridal bier. Could I be-hold this and live? Alas!
Life is ob-stin-ate and clings closest where it is most hated. For a mo-ment
only did I lose re-col-lec-tion; I fell sense-less on the ground.

When I re-covered I found my-self sur-roun-ded by the people of the inn; their
coun-ten-ances ex-pressed a breath-less ter-ror, but the hor-ror of oth-ers
ap-peared only as a mock-ery, a shadow of the feel-ings that op-pressed me. I
es-caped from them to the room where lay the body of El-iza-beth, my love, my
wife, so lately liv-ing, so dear, so worthy. She had been moved from the
pos-ture in which I had first be-held her, and now, as she lay, her head upon
her arm and a handker-chief thrown across her face and neck, I might have
sup-posed her asleep. I rushed to-wards her and em-braced her with ar-dour, but
the deadly lan-guor and cold-ness of the limbs told me that what I now held
in my arms had ceased to be the El-iza-beth whom I had loved and cher-ished.
The mur-der-ous mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the
breath had ceased to is-sue from her lips.

While I still hung over her in the agony of des-pair, I happened to look up.
The win-dows of the room had be-fore been darkened, and I felt a kind of
panic on see-ing the pale yel-low light of the moon il-lu-min-ate the cham-ber.
The shut-ters had been thrown back, and with a sen-sa-tion of hor-ror not to be
de-scribed, I saw at the open win-dow a fig-ure the most hideous and ab-horred.
A grin was on the face of the mon-ster; he seemed to jeer, as with his
fiendish fin-ger he poin-ted to-wards the corpse of my wife. I rushed to-wards
the win-dow, and draw-ing a pis-tol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me,
leaped from his sta-tion, and run-ning with the swift-ness of light-ning,
plunged into the lake.

The re-port of the pis-tol brought a crowd into the room. I poin-ted to
the spot where he had dis-ap-peared, and we fol-lowed the track with
boats; nets were cast, but in vain.  After passing sev-eral hours, we
re-turned hope-less, most of my com-pan-ions be-liev-ing it to have been a
form con-jured up by my fancy.  After hav-ing landed, they pro-ceeded to
search the coun-try, parties go-ing in dif-fer-ent dir-ec-tions among the
woods and vines.

I at-temp-ted to ac-com-pany them and pro-ceeded a short dis-tance from the
house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of a drunken
man, I fell at last in a state of ut-ter ex-haus-tion; a film covered my
eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever.  In this state I
was car-ried back and placed on a bed, hardly con-scious of what had
happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek some-thing that
I had lost.

After an in-ter-val I arose, and as if by in-stinct, crawled into the room
where the corpse of my be-loved lay.  There were wo-men weep-ing around; I
hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no
dis-tinct idea presen-ted it-self to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to
vari-ous sub-jects, re-flect-ing con-fusedly on my mis-for-tunes and their
cause.  I was be-wildered, in a cloud of won-der and hor-ror.  The death
of Wil-liam, the ex-e-cu-tion of Justine, the murder of Cler-val, and lastly
of my wife; even at that mo-ment I knew not that my only re-main-ing
friends were safe from the ma-lig-nity of the fiend; my father even now
might be writh-ing un-der his grasp, and Ern-est might be dead at his
feet.  This idea made me shud-der and re-called me to ac-tion.  I star-ted
up and re-solved to re-turn to Geneva with all pos-sible speed.

There were no horses to be pro-cured, and I must re-turn by the lake; but the
wind was un-fa-vour-able, and the rain fell in tor-rents. However, it was
hardly morn-ing, and I might reas-on-ably hope to ar-rive by night. I hired men
to row and took an oar my-self, for I had al-ways ex-per-i-enced re-lief from
men-tal tor-ment in bod-ily ex-er-cise. But the over-flow-ing misery I now felt,
and the ex-cess of agit-a-tion that I en-dured rendered me in-cap-able of any
ex-er-tion. I threw down the oar, and lean-ing my head upon my hands, gave way
to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were
fa-mil-iar to me in my hap-pier time and which I had con-tem-plated but the day
be-fore in the com-pany of her who was now but a shadow and a re-col-lec-tion.
Tears streamed from my eyes. The rain had ceased for a mo-ment, and I saw
the fish play in the wa-ters as they had done a few hours be-fore; they had
then been ob-served by El-iza-beth. Noth-ing is so pain-ful to the hu-man mind as
a great and sud-den change. The sun might shine or the clouds might lower,
but noth-ing could ap-pear to me as it had done the day be-fore. A fiend had
snatched from me every hope of fu-ture hap-pi-ness; no creature had ever been
so miser-able as I was; so fright-ful an event is single in the his-tory of
man.

But why should I dwell upon the in-cid-ents that fol-lowed this last
over-whelm-ing event? Mine has been a tale of hor-rors; I have reached their
_acme_, and what I must now re-late can but be te-di-ous to you. Know
that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; I was left des-ol-ate. My
own strength is ex-hausted, and I must tell, in a few words, what re-mains of
my hideous nar-ra-tion.

I ar-rived at Geneva. My father and Ern-est yet lived, but the former sunk
un-der the tid-ings that I bore. I see him now, ex-cel-lent and ven-er-able old
man! His eyes wandered in va-cancy, for they had lost their charm and their
de-light—his El-iza-beth, his more than daugh-ter, whom he doted on with
all that af-fec-tion which a man feels, who in the de-cline of life, hav-ing
few af-fec-tions, clings more earn-estly to those that re-main. Cursed, cursed
be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste
in wretched-ness! He could not live un-der the hor-rors that were ac-cu-mu-lated
around him; the springs of ex-ist-ence sud-denly gave way; he was un-able to
rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.

What then be-came of me?  I know not; I lost sen-sa-tion, and chains and
dark-ness were the only ob-jects that pressed upon me.  So-me-times,
in-deed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery mead-ows and pleas-ant vales
with the friends of my youth, but I awoke and found my-self in a
dun-geon.  Mel-an-choly fol-lowed, but by de-grees I gained a clear
con-cep-tion of my miser-ies and situ-ation and was then re-leased from my
prison.  For they had called me mad, and dur-ing many months, as I
un-der-stood, a sol-it-ary cell had been my hab-it-a-tion.

Liberty, how-ever, had been a use-less gift to me, had I not, as I
awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to re-venge.  As the
memory of past mis-for-tunes pressed upon me, I began to re-flect on their
cause—the mon-ster whom I had cre-ated, the miser-able dæ-mon whom I had
sent abroad into the world for my de-struc-tion.  I was pos-sessed by a
mad-den-ing rage when I thought of him, and de-sired and ar-dently prayed
that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and sig-nal
re-venge on his cursed head.

Nor did my hate long con-fine it-self to use-less wishes; I began to
re-flect on the best means of se-cur-ing him; and for this pur-pose, about
a month after my re-lease, I re-paired to a crim-inal judge in the town
and told him that I had an ac-cus-a-tion to make, that I knew the
des-troyer of my fam-ily, and that I re-quired him to ex-ert his whole
au-thor-ity for the ap-pre-hen-sion of the mur-derer.

The ma-gis-trate listened to me with at-ten-tion and kind-ness. “Be
as-sured, sir,” said he, “no pains or ex-er-tions on my part shall
be spared to dis-cover the vil-lain.”

“I thank you,” replied I; “listen, there-fore, to the
de-pos-ition that I have to make. It is in-deed a tale so strange that I
should fear you would not credit it were there not some-thing in truth
which, how-ever won-der-ful, forces con-vic-tion. The story is too con-nec-ted to
be mis-taken for a dream, and I have no motive for false-hood.” My
man-ner as I thus ad-dressed him was im-press-ive but calm; I had formed in my
own heart a res-ol-u-tion to pur-sue my des-troyer to death, and this pur-pose
quieted my agony and for an in-ter-val re-con-ciled me to life. I now re-lated
my his-tory briefly but with firm-ness and pre-ci-sion, mark-ing the dates with
ac-cur-acy and never de-vi-at-ing into in-vect-ive or ex-clam-a-tion.

The ma-gis-trate ap-peared at first per-fectly in-cred-u-lous, but as I con-tin-ued
he be-came more at-tent-ive and in-ter-ested; I saw him some-times shud-der with
hor-ror; at oth-ers a lively sur-prise, un-mingled with dis-be-lief, was painted
on his coun-ten-ance.

When I had con-cluded my nar-ra-tion, I said, “This is the be-ing whom I
ac-cuse and for whose seizure and pun-ish-ment I call upon you to ex-ert your
whole power. It is your duty as a ma-gis-trate, and I be-lieve and hope that
your feel-ings as a man will not re-volt from the ex-e-cu-tion of those
func-tions on this oc-ca-sion.”

This ad-dress caused a con-sid-er-able change in the physiognomy of my own
aud-itor. He had heard my story with that half kind of be-lief that is given
to a tale of spir-its and su-per-nat-ural events; but when he was called upon
to act of-fi-cially in con-sequence, the whole tide of his in-credu-lity
re-turned. He, how-ever, answered mildly, “I would will-ingly af-ford you
every aid in your pur-suit, but the creature of whom you speak ap-pears to
have powers which would put all my ex-er-tions to de-fi-ance. Who can fol-low an
an-imal which can tra-verse the sea of ice and in-habit caves and dens where
no man would ven-ture to in-trude? Besides, some months have elapsed since
the com-mis-sion of his crimes, and no one can con-jec-ture to what place he
has wandered or what re-gion he may now in-habit.”

“I do not doubt that he hov-ers near the spot which I in-habit, and if
he has in-deed taken refuge in the Alps, he may be hunted like the chamois
and des-troyed as a beast of prey. But I per-ceive your thoughts; you do not
credit my nar-rat-ive and do not in-tend to pur-sue my en-emy with the
pun-ish-ment which is his desert.”

As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the ma-gis-trate was in-tim-id-ated.
“You are mis-taken,” said he. “I will ex-ert my-self, and if
it is in my power to seize the mon-ster, be as-sured that he shall suf-fer
pun-ish-ment pro-por-tion-ate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have
your-self de-scribed to be his prop-er-ties, that this will prove
im-prac-tic-able; and thus, while every proper meas-ure is pur-sued, you should
make up your mind to dis-ap-point-ment.”

“That can-not be; but all that I can say will be of little avail.  My
re-venge is of no mo-ment to you; yet, while I al-low it to be a vice, I
con-fess that it is the de-vour-ing and only pas-sion of my soul.  My rage
is un-speak-able when I re-flect that the mur-derer, whom I have turned
loose upon so-ci-ety, still ex-ists.  You re-fuse my just de-mand; I have
but one re-source, and I de-vote my-self, either in my life or death, to
his de-struc-tion.”

I trembled with ex-cess of agit-a-tion as I said this; there was a frenzy
in my man-ner, and some-thing, I doubt not, of that haughty fierce-ness
which the mar-tyrs of old are said to have pos-sessed.  But to a Genevan
ma-gis-trate, whose mind was oc-cu-pied by far other ideas than those of
de-vo-tion and hero-ism, this el-ev-a-tion of mind had much the ap-pear-ance of
mad-ness.  He en-deav-oured to soothe me as a nurse does a child and
re-ver-ted to my tale as the ef-fects of de-li-rium.

“Man,” I cried, “how ig-nor-ant art thou in thy pride of
wis-dom! Cease; you know not what it is you say.”

I broke from the house angry and dis-turbed and re-tired to med-it-ate on
some other mode of ac-tion.





Chapter 24

My present situ-ation was one in which all vol-un-tary thought was
swal-lowed up and lost.  I was hur-ried away by fury; re-venge alone
en-dowed me with strength and com-pos-ure; it moul-ded my feel-ings and
al-lowed me to be cal-cu-lat-ing and calm at peri-ods when oth-er-wise
de-li-rium or death would have been my por-tion.

My first res-ol-u-tion was to quit Geneva for ever; my coun-try, which, when I
was happy and be-loved, was dear to me, now, in my ad-versity, be-came
hate-ful. I provided my-self with a sum of money, to-gether with a few jew-els
which had be-longed to my mother, and de-par-ted.

And now my wan-der-ings began which are to cease but with life. I have
tra-versed a vast por-tion of the earth and have en-dured all the hard-ships
which trav-el-lers in deserts and bar-bar-ous coun-tries are wont to meet. How I
have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my fail-ing limbs upon
the sandy plain and prayed for death. But re-venge kept me alive; I dared
not die and leave my ad-versary in be-ing.

When I quit-ted Geneva my first la-bour was to gain some clue by which I
might trace the steps of my fiendish en-emy.  But my plan was un-settled,
and I wandered many hours round the con-fines of the town, un-cer-tain
what path I should pur-sue.  As night ap-proached I found my-self at the
en-trance of the cemetery where Wil-liam, El-iza-beth, and my father
re-posed.  I entered it and ap-proached the tomb which marked their
graves.  Everything was si-lent ex-cept the leaves of the trees, which
were gently agit-ated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the
scene would have been sol-emn and af-fect-ing even to an un-in-ter-ested
ob-server.  The spir-its of the de-par-ted seemed to flit around and to
cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the
mourner.

The deep grief which this scene had at first ex-cited quickly gave way to
rage and des-pair. They were dead, and I lived; their mur-derer also lived,
and to des-troy him I must drag out my weary ex-ist-ence. I knelt on the grass
and kissed the earth and with quiv-er-ing lips ex-claimed, “By the
sac-red earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the
deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee, O Night, and the
spir-its that preside over thee, to pur-sue the dæ-mon who caused this misery,
un-til he or I shall per-ish in mor-tal con-flict. For this pur-pose I will
pre-serve my life; to ex-ecute this dear re-venge will I again be-hold the sun
and tread the green herb-age of earth, which oth-er-wise should van-ish from my
eyes for ever. And I call on you, spir-its of the dead, and on you, wan-der-ing
min-is-ters of ven-geance, to aid and con-duct me in my work. Let the cursed
and hellish mon-ster drink deep of agony; let him feel the des-pair that now
tor-ments me.”

I had be-gun my ad-jur-a-tion with solem-nity and an awe which al-most as-sured me
that the shades of my murdered friends heard and ap-proved my de-vo-tion, but
the fur-ies pos-sessed me as I con-cluded, and rage choked my ut-ter-ance.

I was answered through the still-ness of night by a loud and fiendish
laugh.  It rang on my ears long and heav-ily; the moun-tains re-echoed
it, and I felt as if all hell sur-roun-ded me with mock-ery and laughter.
Surely in that mo-ment I should have been pos-sessed by frenzy and have
des-troyed my miser-able ex-ist-ence but that my vow was heard and that I
was re-served for ven-geance.  The laughter died away, when a well-known
and ab-horred voice, ap-par-ently close to my ear, ad-dressed me in an
aud-ible whis-per, “I am sat-is-fied, miser-able wretch!  You have
de-term-ined to live, and I am sat-is-fied.”

I dar-ted to-wards the spot from which the sound pro-ceeded, but the devil
eluded my grasp.  Sud-denly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone
full upon his ghastly and dis-tor-ted shape as he fled with more than
mor-tal speed.

I pur-sued him, and for many months this has been my task.  Guided by a
slight clue, I fol-lowed the wind-ings of the Rhone, but vainly.  The
blue Medi-ter-ranean ap-peared, and by a strange chance, I saw the fiend
enter by night and hide him-self in a ves-sel bound for the Black Sea.  I
took my pas-sage in the same ship, but he es-caped, I know not how.

Amidst the wilds of Tar-tary and Rus-sia, al-though he still evaded me, I
have ever fol-lowed in his track.  So-me-times the peas-ants, scared by
this hor-rid ap-par-i-tion, in-formed me of his path; some-times he him-self,
who feared that if I lost all trace of him I should des-pair and die,
left some mark to guide me.  The snows des-cen-ded on my head, and I saw
the print of his huge step on the white plain.  To you first en-ter-ing
on life, to whom care is new and agony un-known, how can you un-der-stand
what I have felt and still feel?  Cold, want, and fa-tigue were the
least pains which I was destined to en-dure; I was cursed by some devil
and car-ried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good
fol-lowed and dir-ec-ted my steps and when I most mur-mured would sud-denly
ex-tric-ate me from seem-ingly in-sur-mount-able dif-fi-culties.  So-me-times,
when nature, over-come by hun-ger, sank un-der the ex-haus-tion, a re-past
was pre-pared for me in the desert that re-stored and in-spir-ited me.  The
fare was, in-deed, coarse, such as the peas-ants of the coun-try ate, but
I will not doubt that it was set there by the spir-its that I had
in-voked to aid me.  Often, when all was dry, the heav-ens cloud-less, and
I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would be-dim the sky, shed the
few drops that re-vived me, and van-ish.

I fol-lowed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæ-mon
gen-er-ally avoided these, as it was here that the pop-u-la-tion of the
coun-try chiefly col-lec-ted.  In other places hu-man be-ings were sel-dom
seen, and I gen-er-ally sub-sisted on the wild an-im-als that crossed my
path.  I had money with me and gained the friend-ship of the vil-la-gers
by dis-trib-ut-ing it; or I brought with me some food that I had killed,
which, after tak-ing a small part, I al-ways presen-ted to those who had
provided me with fire and utensils for cook-ing.

My life, as it passed thus, was in-deed hate-ful to me, and it was dur-ing
sleep alone that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep! Often, when most
miser-able, I sank to re-pose, and my dreams lulled me even to rap-ture. The
spir-its that guarded me had provided these mo-ments, or rather hours, of
hap-pi-ness that I might re-tain strength to ful-fil my pil-grim-age. De-prived of
this res-pite, I should have sunk un-der my hard-ships. Dur-ing the day I was
sus-tained and in-spir-ited by the hope of night, for in sleep I saw my
friends, my wife, and my be-loved coun-try; again I saw the be-ne-vol-ent
coun-ten-ance of my father, heard the sil-ver tones of my El-iza-beth’s
voice, and be-held Cler-val en-joy-ing health and youth. Often, when wear-ied by
a toil-some march, I per-suaded my-self that I was dream-ing un-til night should
come and that I should then en-joy real-ity in the arms of my dearest
friends. What ag-on-ising fond-ness did I feel for them! How did I cling to
their dear forms, as some-times they haunted even my wak-ing hours, and
per-suade my-self that they still lived! At such mo-ments ven-geance, that
burned within me, died in my heart, and I pur-sued my path to-wards the
de-struc-tion of the dæ-mon more as a task en-joined by heaven, as the
mech-an-ical im-pulse of some power of which I was un-con-scious, than as the
ar-dent de-sire of my soul.

What his feel-ings were whom I pur-sued I can-not know. So-me-times, in-deed, he
left marks in writ-ing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided
me and in-stig-ated my fury. “My reign is not yet
over”—these words were legible in one of these
in-scrip-tions—“you live, and my power is com-plete. Fol-low me; I
seek the ever-last-ing ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of
cold and frost, to which I am im-pass-ive. You will find near this place, if
you fol-low not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be re-freshed. Come on, my
en-emy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miser-able
hours must you en-dure un-til that period shall ar-rive.”

Scoff-ing devil!  Again do I vow ven-geance; again do I de-vote thee,
miser-able fiend, to tor-ture and death.  Never will I give up my search
un-til he or I per-ish; and then with what ec-stasy shall I join my
El-iza-beth and my de-par-ted friends, who even now pre-pare for me the
re-ward of my te-di-ous toil and hor-rible pil-grim-age!

As I still pur-sued my jour-ney to the north-ward, the snows thickened and the
cold in-creased in a de-gree al-most too severe to sup-port. The peas-ants were
shut up in their hov-els, and only a few of the most hardy ven-tured forth to
seize the an-im-als whom star-va-tion had forced from their hid-ing-places to
seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be
pro-cured; and thus I was cut off from my chief art-icle of main-ten-ance.

The tri-umph of my en-emy in-creased with the dif-fi-culty of my la-bours. One
in-scrip-tion that he left was in these words: “Pre-pare! Your toils
only be-gin; wrap your-self in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter
upon a jour-ney where your suf-fer-ings will sat-isfy my ever-last-ing
hatred.”

My cour-age and per-sever-ance were in-vig-or-ated by these scoff-ing words; I
re-solved not to fail in my pur-pose, and call-ing on Heaven to sup-port
me, I con-tin-ued with un-abated fer-vour to tra-verse im-mense deserts,
un-til the ocean ap-peared at a dis-tance and formed the ut-most bound-ary
of the ho-ri-zon.  Oh!  How un-like it was to the blue sea-sons of the
south!  Covered with ice, it was only to be dis-tin-guished from land by
its su-per-ior wild-ness and rug-ged-ness.  The Greeks wept for joy when
they be-held the Medi-ter-ranean from the hills of Asia, and hailed with
rap-ture the bound-ary of their toils.  I did not weep, but I knelt down
and with a full heart thanked my guid-ing spirit for con-duct-ing me in
safety to the place where I hoped, not-with-stand-ing my ad-versary’s gibe,
to meet and grapple with him.

Some weeks be-fore this period I had pro-cured a sledge and dogs and thus
tra-versed the snows with in-con-ceiv-able speed.  I know not whether the
fiend pos-sessed the same ad-vant-ages, but I found that, as be-fore I had
daily lost ground in the pur-suit, I now gained on him, so much so that
when I first saw the ocean he was but one day’s jour-ney in ad-vance, and
I hoped to in-ter-cept him be-fore he should reach the beach.  With new
cour-age, there-fore, I pressed on, and in two days ar-rived at a wretched
ham-let on the sea-shore.  I in-quired of the in-hab-it-ants con-cern-ing the
fiend and gained ac-cur-ate in-form-a-tion.  A gi-gantic mon-ster, they said,
had ar-rived the night be-fore, armed with a gun and many pis-tols,
put-ting to flight the in-hab-it-ants of a sol-it-ary cot-tage through fear of
his ter-rific ap-pear-ance.  He had car-ried off their store of winter
food, and pla-cing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a
nu-mer-ous drove of trained dogs, he had har-nessed them, and the same
night, to the joy of the hor-ror-struck vil-la-gers, had pur-sued his
jour-ney across the sea in a dir-ec-tion that led to no land; and they
con-jec-tured that he must speedily be des-troyed by the break-ing of the
ice or frozen by the eternal  frosts.

On hear-ing this in-form-a-tion I suffered a tem-por-ary ac-cess of des-pair.
He had es-caped me, and I must com-mence a de-struct-ive and al-most end-less
jour-ney across the moun-tain-ous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few
of the in-hab-it-ants could long en-dure and which I, the nat-ive of a
gen-ial and sunny cli-mate, could not hope to sur-vive.  Yet at the idea
that the fiend should live and be tri-umphant, my rage and ven-geance
re-turned, and like a mighty tide, over-whelmed every other feel-ing.
After a slight re-pose, dur-ing which the spir-its of the dead hovered
round and in-stig-ated me to toil and re-venge, I pre-pared for my jour-ney.

I ex-changed my land-sledge for one fash-ioned for the in-equal-it-ies of
the Frozen Ocean, and pur-chas-ing a plen-ti-ful stock of pro-vi-sions, I
de-par-ted from land.

I can-not guess how many days have passed since then, but I have en-dured
misery which noth-ing but the eternal sen-ti-ment of a just re-tri-bu-tion
burn-ing within my heart could have en-abled me to sup-port.  Im-mense and
rugged moun-tains of ice of-ten barred up my pas-sage, and I of-ten heard
the thun-der of the ground sea, which threatened my de-struc-tion.  But
again the frost came and made the paths of the sea se-cure.

By the quant-ity of pro-vi-sion which I had con-sumed, I should guess that
I had passed three weeks in this jour-ney; and the con-tinual pro-trac-tion
of hope, re-turn-ing back upon the heart, of-ten wrung bit-ter drops of
des-pond-ency and grief from my eyes.  Despair had in-deed al-most se-cured
her prey, and I should soon have sunk be-neath this misery.  Once, after
the poor an-im-als that con-veyed me had with in-cred-ible toil gained the
sum-mit of a slop-ing ice moun-tain, and one, sink-ing un-der his fa-tigue,
died, I viewed the ex-panse be-fore me with an-guish, when sud-denly my eye
caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain.  I strained my sight to
dis-cover what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ec-stasy when I
dis-tin-guished a sledge and the dis-tor-ted pro-por-tions of a well-known
form within.  Oh!  With what a burn-ing gush did hope re-visit my heart!
Warm tears filled my eyes, which I hast-ily wiped away, that they might
not in-ter-cept the view I had of the dæ-mon; but still my sight was
dimmed by the burn-ing drops, un-til, giv-ing way to the emo-tions that
op-pressed me, I wept aloud.

But this was not the time for delay; I dis-en-cumbered the dogs of their
dead com-pan-ion, gave them a plen-ti-ful por-tion of food, and after an
hour’s rest, which was ab-so-lutely ne-ces-sary, and yet which was bit-terly
irk-some to me, I con-tin-ued my route.  The sledge was still vis-ible, nor
did I again lose sight of it ex-cept at the mo-ments when for a short
time some ice-rock con-cealed it with its in-ter-ven-ing crags.  I in-deed
per-cept-ibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days’ jour-ney, I
be-held my en-emy at no more than a mile dis-tant, my heart bounded within
me.

But now, when I ap-peared al-most within grasp of my foe, my hopes were
sud-denly ex-tin-guished, and I lost all trace of him more ut-terly than I had
ever done be-fore. A ground sea was heard; the thun-der of its pro-gress, as
the wa-ters rolled and swelled be-neath me, be-came every mo-ment more omin-ous
and ter-rific. I pressed on, but in vain. The wind arose; the sea roared;
and, as with the mighty shock of an earth-quake, it split and cracked with a
tre-mend-ous and over-whelm-ing sound. The work was soon fin-ished; in a few
minutes a tu-mul-tu-ous sea rolled between me and my en-emy, and I was left
drift-ing on a scattered piece of ice that was con-tinu-ally lessen-ing and
thus pre-par-ing for me a hideous death.

In this man-ner many ap-palling hours passed; sev-eral of my dogs died, and I
my-self was about to sink un-der the ac-cu-mu-la-tion of dis-tress when I saw your
ves-sel rid-ing at an-chor and hold-ing forth to me hopes of suc-cour and life.
I had no con-cep-tion that ves-sels ever came so far north and was astoun-ded
at the sight. I quickly des-troyed part of my sledge to con-struct oars, and
by these means was en-abled, with in-fin-ite fa-tigue, to move my ice raft in
the dir-ec-tion of your ship. I had de-term-ined, if you were go-ing south-wards,
still to trust my-self to the mercy of the seas rather than aban-don my
pur-pose. I hoped to in-duce you to grant me a boat with which I could pur-sue
my en-emy. But your dir-ec-tion was north-wards. You took me on board when my
vigour was ex-hausted, and I should soon have sunk un-der my mul-ti-plied
hard-ships into a death which I still dread, for my task is un-ful-filled.

Oh!  When will my guid-ing spirit, in con-duct-ing me to the dæ-mon, al-low
me the rest I so much de-sire; or must I die, and he yet live?  If I do,
swear to me, Walton, that he shall not es-cape, that you will seek him
and sat-isfy my ven-geance in his death.  And do I dare to ask of you to
un-der-take my pil-grim-age, to en-dure the hard-ships that I have un-der-gone?
No; I am not so selfish.  Yet, when I am dead, if he should ap-pear, if
the min-is-ters of ven-geance should con-duct him to you, swear that he
shall not live—swear that he shall not tri-umph over my ac-cu-mu-lated
woes and sur-vive to add to the list of his dark crimes.  He is elo-quent
and per-suas-ive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but
trust him not.  His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treach-ery
and fiend-like malice.  Hear him not; call on the names of Wil-liam,
Justine, Cler-val, El-iza-beth, my father, and of the wretched Victor, and
thrust your sword into his heart.  I will hover near and dir-ect the
steel aright.

Walton, _in con-tinu-ation._


August 26th, 17—.


You have read this strange and ter-rific story, Mar-garet; and do you not
feel your blood con-geal with hor-ror, like that which even now curdles
mine?  So-me-times, seized with sud-den agony, he could not con-tinue his
tale; at oth-ers, his voice broken, yet pier-cing, uttered with
dif-fi-culty the words so re-plete with an-guish.  His fine and lovely eyes
were now lighted up with in-dig-na-tion, now sub-dued to down-cast sor-row
and quenched in in-fin-ite wretched-ness.  So-me-times he com-manded his
coun-ten-ance and tones and re-lated the most hor-rible in-cid-ents with a
tran-quil voice, sup-press-ing every mark of agit-a-tion; then, like a
vol-cano burst-ing forth, his face would sud-denly change to an ex-pres-sion
of the wild-est rage as he shrieked out im-prec-a-tions on his per-se-cutor.

His tale is con-nec-ted and told with an ap-pear-ance of the simplest truth,
yet I own to you that the let-ters of Felix and Safie, which he showed me,
and the ap-par-i-tion of the mon-ster seen from our ship, brought to me a
greater con-vic-tion of the truth of his nar-rat-ive than his as-sev-er-a-tions,
how-ever earn-est and con-nec-ted. Such a mon-ster has, then, really ex-ist-ence!
I can-not doubt it, yet I am lost in sur-prise and ad-mir-a-tion. So-me-times I
en-deav-oured to gain from Franken-stein the par-tic-u-lars of his
creature’s form-a-tion, but on this point he was im-pen-et-rable.

“Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your
sense-less curi-os-ity lead you? Would you also cre-ate for your-self and the
world a de-moni-acal en-emy? Peace, peace! Learn my miser-ies and do not seek
to in-crease your own.”

Franken-stein dis-covered that I made notes con-cern-ing his his-tory; he asked
to see them and then him-self cor-rec-ted and aug-men-ted them in many places,
but prin-cip-ally in giv-ing the life and spirit to the con-ver-sa-tions he held
with his en-emy. “Since you have pre-served my nar-ra-tion,” said
he, “I would not that a mu-til-ated one should go down to
pos-ter-ity.”

Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the strangest
tale that ever ima-gin-a-tion formed.  My thoughts and every feel-ing of my
soul have been drunk up by the in-terest for my guest which this tale
and his own el-ev-ated and gentle man-ners have cre-ated.  I wish to soothe
him, yet can I coun-sel one so in-fin-itely miser-able, so des-ti-tute of
every hope of con-sol-a-tion, to live?  Oh, no!  The only joy that he can
now know will be when he com-poses his shattered spirit to peace and
death.  Yet he en-joys one com-fort, the off-spring of solitude and
de-li-rium; he be-lieves that when in dreams he holds con-verse with his
friends and de-rives from that com-mu-nion con-sol-a-tion for his miser-ies or
ex-cite-ments to his ven-geance, that they are not the cre-ations of his
fancy, but the be-ings them-selves who visit him from the re-gions of a
re-mote world.  This faith gives a solem-nity to his rev-er-ies that render
them to me al-most as im-pos-ing and in-ter-est-ing as truth.

Our con-ver-sa-tions are not al-ways con-fined to his own his-tory and
mis-for-tunes.  On every point of gen-eral lit-er-at-ure he dis-plays
un-boun-ded know-ledge and a quick and pier-cing ap-pre-hen-sion.  His
elo-quence is for-cible and touch-ing; nor can I hear him, when he relates
a pathetic in-cid-ent or en-deav-ours to move the pas-sions of pity or love,
without tears.  What a glor-i-ous creature must he have been in the days
of his prosper-ity, when he is thus noble and god-like in ruin!  He seems
to feel his own worth and the great-ness of his fall.

“When younger,” said he, “I be-lieved my-self destined for
some great en-ter-prise. My feel-ings are pro-found, but I pos-sessed a cool-ness
of judg-ment that fit-ted me for il-lus-tri-ous achieve-ments. This sen-ti-ment of
the worth of my nature sup-por-ted me when oth-ers would have been op-pressed,
for I deemed it crim-inal to throw away in use-less grief those tal-ents that
might be use-ful to my fel-low creatures. When I re-flec-ted on the work I had
com-pleted, no less a one than the cre-ation of a sens-it-ive and ra-tional
an-imal, I could not rank my-self with the herd of com-mon pro-ject-ors. But
this thought, which sup-por-ted me in the com-mence-ment of my ca-reer, now
serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my spec-u-la-tions and hopes
are as noth-ing, and like the archangel who as-pired to om-ni-po-tence, I am
chained in an eternal hell. My ima-gin-a-tion was vivid, yet my powers of
ana-lysis and ap-plic-a-tion were in-tense; by the union of these qual-it-ies I
con-ceived the idea and ex-ecuted the cre-ation of a man. Even now I can-not
re-col-lect without pas-sion my rev-er-ies while the work was in-com-plete. I trod
heaven in my thoughts, now ex-ult-ing in my powers, now burn-ing with the idea
of their ef-fects. From my in-fancy I was im-bued with high hopes and a lofty
am-bi-tion; but how am I sunk! Oh! My friend, if you had known me as I once
was, you would not re-cog-nise me in this state of de-grad-a-tion. Despond-ency
rarely vis-ited my heart; a high des-tiny seemed to bear me on, un-til I fell,
never, never again to rise.”

Must I then lose this ad-mir-able be-ing? I have longed for a friend; I have
sought one who would sym-path-ise with and love me. Be-hold, on these desert
seas I have found such a one, but I fear I have gained him only to know his
value and lose him. I would re-con-cile him to life, but he re-pulses the idea.

“I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind in-ten-tions to-wards so
miser-able a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh
af-fec-tions, think you that any can re-place those who are gone?  Can any
man be to me as Cler-val was, or any wo-man an-other El-iza-beth?  Even
where the af-fec-tions are not strongly moved by any su-per-ior ex-cel-lence,
the com-pan-ions of our child-hood al-ways pos-sess a cer-tain power over our
minds which hardly any later friend can ob-tain.  They know our
in-fant-ine dis-pos-i-tions, which, how-ever they may be af-ter-wards mod-i-fied,
are never erad-ic-ated; and they can judge of our ac-tions with more
cer-tain con-clu-sions as to the in-teg-rity of our motives.  A sis-ter or a
brother can never, un-less in-deed such symp-toms have been shown early,
sus-pect the other of fraud or false deal-ing, when an-other friend,
how-ever strongly he may be at-tached, may, in spite of him-self, be
con-tem-plated with sus-pi-cion.  But I en-joyed friends, dear not only
through habit and as-so-ci-ation, but from their own mer-its; and wherever
I am, the sooth-ing voice of my El-iza-beth and the con-ver-sa-tion of
Cler-val will be ever whispered in my ear. They are dead, and but one
feel-ing in such a solitude can per-suade me to pre-serve my life.  If I
were en-gaged in any high un-der-tak-ing or design, fraught with ex-tens-ive
util-ity to my fel-low creatures, then could I live to ful-fil it.  But
such is not my des-tiny; I must pur-sue and des-troy the be-ing to whom I
gave ex-ist-ence; then my lot on earth will be ful-filled and I may die.”

My be-loved Sister,

Septem-ber 2d.


I write to you, en-com-passed by peril and ig-nor-ant whether I am ever
doomed to see again dear Eng-land and the dearer friends that in-habit
it.  I am sur-roun-ded by moun-tains of ice which ad-mit of no es-cape and
threaten every mo-ment to crush my ves-sel.  The brave fel-lows whom I
have per-suaded to be my com-pan-ions look to-wards me for aid, but I have
none to be-stow.  There is some-thing ter-ribly ap-palling in our
situ-ation, yet my cour-age and hopes do not desert me.  Yet it is
ter-rible to re-flect that the lives of all these men are en-dangered
through me.  If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.

And what, Mar-garet, will be the state of your mind? You will not hear of my
de-struc-tion, and you will anxiously await my re-turn. Years will pass, and
you will have vis-it-ings of des-pair and yet be tor-tured by hope. Oh! My
be-loved sis-ter, the sick-en-ing fail-ing of your heart-felt ex-pect-a-tions is,
in pro-spect, more ter-rible to me than my own death. But you have a hus-band
and lovely chil-dren; you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so!

My un-for-tu-nate guest re-gards me with the tenderest com-pas-sion.  He
en-deav-ours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a pos-ses-sion
which he val-ued.  He re-minds me how of-ten the same ac-ci-dents have
happened to other nav-ig-at-ors who have at-temp-ted this sea, and in spite
of my-self, he fills me with cheer-ful au-gur-ies.  Even the sail-ors feel
the power of his elo-quence; when he speaks, they no longer des-pair; he
rouses their en-er-gies, and while they hear his voice they be-lieve these
vast moun-tains of ice are mole-hills which will van-ish be-fore the
res-ol-u-tions of man.  These feel-ings are trans-it-ory; each day of
ex-pect-a-tion delayed fills them with fear, and I al-most dread a mutiny
caused by this des-pair.

Septem-ber 5th.


A scene has just passed of such un-com-mon in-terest that, al-though it is
highly prob-able that these pa-pers may never reach you, yet I can-not
for-bear re-cord-ing it.

We are still sur-roun-ded by moun-tains of ice, still in im-min-ent danger
of be-ing crushed in their con-flict.  The cold is ex-cess-ive, and many of
my un-for-tu-nate com-rades have already found a grave amidst this scene of
des-ol-a-tion.  Franken-stein has daily de-clined in health; a fe-ver-ish fire
still glim-mers in his eyes, but he is ex-hausted, and when sud-denly
roused to any ex-er-tion, he speedily sinks again into ap-par-ent
life-less-ness.

I men-tioned in my last let-ter the fears I en-ter-tained of a mutiny.
This morn-ing, as I sat watch-ing the wan coun-ten-ance of my friend—his
eyes half closed and his limbs hanging list-lessly—I was roused by half
a dozen of the sail-ors, who de-man-ded ad-mis-sion into the cabin.  They
entered, and their leader ad-dressed me.  He told me that he and his
com-pan-ions had been chosen by the other sail-ors to come in depu-ta-tion
to me to make me a re-quis-i-tion which, in justice, I could not re-fuse.
We were im-mured in ice and should prob-ably never es-cape, but they
feared that if, as was pos-sible, the ice should dis-sip-ate and a free
pas-sage be opened, I should be rash enough to con-tinue my voy-age and
lead them into fresh dangers, after they might hap-pily have sur-moun-ted
this.  They in-sisted, there-fore, that I should en-gage with a sol-emn
prom-ise that if the ves-sel should be freed I would in-stantly dir-ect my
course south-wards.

This speech troubled me.  I had not des-paired, nor had I yet con-ceived
the idea of re-turn-ing if set free.  Yet could I, in justice, or even in
pos-sib-il-ity, re-fuse this de-mand?  I hes-it-ated be-fore I answered, when
Franken-stein, who had at first been si-lent, and in-deed ap-peared hardly
to have force enough to at-tend, now roused him-self; his eyes sparkled,
and his cheeks flushed with mo-ment-ary vigour.  Turn-ing to-wards the men,
he said,

“What do you mean? What do you de-mand of your cap-tain? Are you, then,
so eas-ily turned from your design? Did you not call this a glor-i-ous
ex-ped-i-tion? “And where-fore was it glor-i-ous? Not be-cause the way was
smooth and pla-cid as a south-ern sea, but be-cause it was full of dangers and
ter-ror, be-cause at every new in-cid-ent your forti-tude was to be called forth
and your cour-age ex-hib-ited, be-cause danger and death sur-roun-ded it, and
these you were to brave and over-come. For this was it a glor-i-ous, for this
was it an hon-our-able un-der-tak-ing. You were here-after to be hailed as the
be-ne-fact-ors of your spe-cies, your names ad-ored as be-long-ing to brave men
who en-countered death for hon-our and the be-ne-fit of man-kind. And now,
be-hold, with the first ima-gin-a-tion of danger, or, if you will, the first
mighty and ter-rific trial of your cour-age, you shrink away and are con-tent
to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to en-dure cold and
peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and re-turned to their warm
firesides. Why, that re-quires not this pre-par-a-tion; ye need not have come
thus far and dragged your cap-tain to the shame of a de-feat merely to prove
yourselves cow-ards. Oh! Be men, or be more than men. Be steady to your
pur-poses and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your
hearts may be; it is mut-able and can-not with-stand you if you say that it
shall not. Do not re-turn to your fam-il-ies with the stigma of dis-grace
marked on your brows. Return as her-oes who have fought and conquered and
who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe.”

He spoke this with a voice so mod-u-lated to the dif-fer-ent feel-ings ex-pressed
in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and hero-ism, that can
you won-der that these men were moved? They looked at one an-other and were
un-able to reply. I spoke; I told them to re-tire and con-sider of what had
been said, that I would not lead them farther north if they strenu-ously
de-sired the con-trary, but that I hoped that, with re-flec-tion, their cour-age
would re-turn.

They re-tired and I turned to-wards my friend, but he was sunk in lan-guor and
al-most de-prived of life.

How all this will ter-min-ate, I know not, but I had rather die than
re-turn shame-fully, my pur-pose un-ful-filled.  Yet I fear such will be my
fate; the men, un-sup-por-ted by ideas of glory and hon-our, can never
will-ingly con-tinue to en-dure their present hard-ships.

Septem-ber 7th.


The die is cast; I have con-sen-ted to re-turn if we are not des-troyed.
Thus are my hopes blas-ted by cow-ardice and in-de-cision; I come back
ig-nor-ant and dis-ap-poin-ted.  It re-quires more philo-sophy than I pos-sess
to bear this in-justice with pa-tience.

Septem-ber 12th.


It is past; I am re-turn-ing to Eng-land.  I have lost my hopes of util-ity
and glory; I have lost my friend.  But I will en-deav-our to de-tail these
bit-ter cir-cum-stances to you, my dear sis-ter; and while I am waf-ted
to-wards Eng-land and to-wards you, I will not des-pond.

Septem-ber 9th, the ice began to move, and roar-ings like thun-der were heard
at a dis-tance as the is-lands split and cracked in every dir-ec-tion. We were
in the most im-min-ent peril, but as we could only re-main pass-ive, my chief
at-ten-tion was oc-cu-pied by my un-for-tu-nate guest whose ill-ness in-creased in
such a de-gree that he was en-tirely con-fined to his bed. The ice cracked
be-hind us and was driven with force to-wards the north; a breeze sprang from
the west, and on the 11th the pas-sage to-wards the south be-came per-fectly
free. When the sail-ors saw this and that their re-turn to their nat-ive
coun-try was ap-par-ently as-sured, a shout of tu-mul-tu-ous joy broke from them,
loud and long-con-tin-ued. Franken-stein, who was doz-ing, awoke and asked the
cause of the tu-mult. “They shout,” I said, “be-cause they
will soon re-turn to Eng-land.”

“Do you, then, really re-turn?”

“Alas!  Yes; I can-not with-stand their de-mands.  I can-not lead them
un-will-ingly to danger, and I must re-turn.”

“Do so, if you will; but I will not.  You may give up your pur-pose, but
mine is as-signed to me by Heaven, and I dare not.  I am weak, but
surely the spir-its who as-sist my ven-geance will en-dow me with
suf-fi-cient strength.”  Say-ing this, he en-deav-oured to spring from the
bed, but the ex-er-tion was too great for him; he fell back and fain-ted.

It was long be-fore he was re-stored, and I of-ten thought that life was
en-tirely ex-tinct.  At length he opened his eyes; he breathed with
dif-fi-culty and was un-able to speak.  The sur-geon gave him a com-pos-ing
draught and ordered us to leave him un-dis-turbed. In the mean-time he
told me that my friend had cer-tainly not many hours to live.

His sen-tence was pro-nounced, and I could only grieve and be pa-tient. I sat
by his bed, watch-ing him; his eyes were closed, and I thought he slept; but
presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and bid-ding me come near,
said, “Alas! The strength I re-lied on is gone; I feel that I shall
soon die, and he, my en-emy and per-se-cutor, may still be in be-ing. Think
not, Walton, that in the last mo-ments of my ex-ist-ence I feel that burn-ing
hatred and ar-dent de-sire of re-venge I once ex-pressed; but I feel my-self
jus-ti-fied in de-sir-ing the death of my ad-versary. Dur-ing these last days I
have been oc-cu-pied in ex-amin-ing my past con-duct; nor do I find it blam-able.
In a fit of en-thu-si-astic mad-ness I cre-ated a ra-tional creature and was
bound to-wards him to as-sure, as far as was in my power, his hap-pi-ness and
well-be-ing. This was my duty, but there was an-other still para-mount to
that. My du-ties to-wards the be-ings of my own spe-cies had greater claims to
my at-ten-tion be-cause they in-cluded a greater pro-por-tion of hap-pi-ness or
misery. Urged by this view, I re-fused, and I did right in re-fus-ing, to
cre-ate a com-pan-ion for the first creature. He showed un-par-alleled ma-lig-nity
and selfish-ness in evil; he des-troyed my friends; he de-voted to de-struc-tion
be-ings who pos-sessed ex-quis-ite sen-sa-tions, hap-pi-ness, and wis-dom; nor do I
know where this thirst for ven-geance may end. Miser-able him-self that he may
render no other wretched, he ought to die. The task of his de-struc-tion was
mine, but I have failed. When ac-tu-ated by selfish and vi-cious motives, I
asked you to un-der-take my un-fin-ished work, and I re-new this re-quest now,
when I am only in-duced by reason and vir-tue.

“Yet I can-not ask you to re-nounce your coun-try and friends to ful-fil
this task; and now that you are re-turn-ing to Eng-land, you will have
little chance of meet-ing with him.  But the con-sid-er-a-tion of these
points, and the well bal-an-cing of what you may es-teem your du-ties, I
leave to you; my judg-ment and ideas are already dis-turbed by the near
ap-proach of death.  I dare not ask you to do what I think right, for I
may still be misled by pas-sion.

“That he should live to be an in-stru-ment of mis-chief dis-turbs me; in
other re-spects, this hour, when I mo-ment-ar-ily ex-pect my re-lease, is the
only happy one which I have en-joyed for sev-eral years.  The forms of
the be-loved dead flit be-fore me, and I hasten to their arms.  Farewell,
Walton!  Seek hap-pi-ness in tran-quil-lity and avoid am-bi-tion, even if it
be only the ap-par-ently in-no-cent one of dis-tin-guish-ing your-self in
sci-ence and dis-cov-er-ies.  Yet why do I say this?  I have my-self been
blas-ted in these hopes, yet an-other may suc-ceed.”

His voice be-came fainter as he spoke, and at length, ex-hausted by his
ef-fort, he sank into si-lence.  About half an hour af-ter-wards he
at-temp-ted again to speak but was un-able; he pressed my hand feebly, and
his eyes closed for ever, while the ir-ra-di-ation of a gentle smile passed
away from his lips.

Mar-garet, what com-ment can I make on the un-timely ex-tinc-tion of this
glor-i-ous spirit?  What can I say that will en-able you to un-der-stand the
depth of my sor-row?  All that I should ex-press would be in-ad-equate and
feeble.  My tears flow; my mind is over-shad-owed by a cloud of
dis-ap-point-ment.  But I jour-ney to-wards Eng-land, and I may there find
con-sol-a-tion.

I am in-ter-rup-ted.  What do these sounds por-tend?  It is mid-night; the
breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir.  Again there
is a sound as of a hu-man voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin
where the re-mains of Franken-stein still lie.  I must arise and ex-am-ine.
Good night, my sis-ter.

Great God! what a scene has just taken place! I am yet dizzy with the
re-mem-brance of it. I hardly know whether I shall have the power to de-tail
it; yet the tale which I have re-cor-ded would be in-com-plete without this
fi-nal and won-der-ful cata-strophe.

I entered the cabin where lay the re-mains of my ill-fated and ad-mir-able
friend. Over him hung a form which I can-not find words to
de-scribe—gi-gantic in stature, yet un-couth and dis-tor-ted in its
pro-por-tions. As he hung over the coffin, his face was con-cealed by long
locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was ex-ten-ded, in col-our and
ap-par-ent tex-ture like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound of my
ap-proach, he ceased to ut-ter ex-clam-a-tions of grief and hor-ror and sprung
to-wards the win-dow. Never did I be-hold a vis-ion so hor-rible as his face, of
such loath-some yet ap-palling hideous-ness. I shut my eyes in-vol-un-tar-ily and
en-deav-oured to re-col-lect what were my du-ties with re-gard to this des-troyer.
I called on him to stay.

He paused, look-ing on me with won-der, and again turn-ing to-wards the
life-less form of his cre-ator, he seemed to for-get my pres-ence, and
every fea-ture and ges-ture seemed in-stig-ated by the wild-est rage of some
un-con-trol-lable pas-sion.

“That is also my vic-tim!” he ex-claimed. “In his murder my
crimes are con-sum-mated; the miser-able series of my be-ing is wound to its
close! Oh, Franken-stein! Gen-er-ous and self-de-voted be-ing! What does it
avail that I now ask thee to par-don me? I, who ir-re-triev-ably des-troyed thee
by des-troy-ing all thou lovedst. Alas! He is cold, he can-not an-swer
me.”

His voice seemed suf-foc-ated, and my first im-pulses, which had sug-ges-ted to
me the duty of obey-ing the dy-ing re-quest of my friend in des-troy-ing his
en-emy, were now sus-pen-ded by a mix-ture of curi-os-ity and com-pas-sion. I
ap-proached this tre-mend-ous be-ing; I dared not again raise my eyes to his
face, there was some-thing so scar-ing and un-earthly in his ugli-ness. I
at-temp-ted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The mon-ster
con-tin-ued to ut-ter wild and in-co-her-ent self-re-proaches. At length I
gathered res-ol-u-tion to ad-dress him in a pause of the tem-pest of his pas-sion.

“Your re-pent-ance,” I said, “is now su-per-flu-ous. If you
had listened to the voice of con-science and heeded the stings of re-morse
be-fore you had urged your diabol-ical ven-geance to this ex-tremity,
Franken-stein would yet have lived.”

“And do you dream?” said the dæ-mon.  “Do you think that I was then
dead to agony and re-morse?  He,” he con-tin-ued, point-ing to the corpse,
“he suffered not in the con-sum-ma-tion of the deed. Oh!  Not the
ten-thou-sandth por-tion of the an-guish that was mine dur-ing the
linger-ing de-tail of its ex-e-cu-tion.  A fright-ful selfish-ness hur-ried me
on, while my heart was poisoned with re-morse.  Think you that the
groans of Cler-val were mu-sic to my ears?  My heart was fash-ioned to be
sus-cept-ible of love and sym-pathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice
and hatred, it did not en-dure the vi-ol-ence of the change without
tor-ture such as you can-not even ima-gine.

“After the murder of Cler-val I re-turned to Switzer-land, heart-broken
and over-come.  I pit-ied Franken-stein; my pity amoun-ted to hor-ror; I
ab-horred my-self.  But when I dis-covered that he, the au-thor at once of
my ex-ist-ence and of its un-speak-able tor-ments, dared to hope for
hap-pi-ness, that while he ac-cu-mu-lated wretched-ness and des-pair upon me
he sought his own en-joy-ment in feel-ings and pas-sions from the
in-dul-gence of which I was for ever barred, then im-pot-ent envy and bit-ter
in-dig-na-tion filled me with an in-sa-ti-able thirst for ven-geance.  I
re-col-lec-ted my threat and re-solved that it should be ac-com-plished.  I
knew that I was pre-par-ing for my-self a deadly tor-ture, but I was the
slave, not the mas-ter, of an im-pulse which I de-tested yet could not
dis-obey.  Yet when she died!  Nay, then I was not miser-able.  I had
cast off all feel-ing, sub-dued all an-guish, to riot in the ex-cess of my
des-pair.  Evil thence-forth be-came my good.  Urged thus far, I had no
choice but to ad-apt my nature to an ele-ment which I had will-ingly
chosen.  The com-ple-tion of my de-moni-acal design be-came an in-sa-ti-able
pas-sion.  And now it is ended; there is my last vic-tim!”

I was at first touched by the ex-pres-sions of his misery; yet, when I called
to mind what Franken-stein had said of his powers of elo-quence and
per-sua-sion, and when I again cast my eyes on the life-less form of my
friend, in-dig-na-tion was re-kindled within me. “Wretch!” I said.
“It is well that you come here to whine over the des-ol-a-tion that you
have made. You throw a torch into a pile of build-ings, and when they are
con-sumed, you sit among the ru-ins and lament the fall. Hy-po-crit-ical fiend!
If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the ob-ject, again would
he be-come the prey, of your ac-cursed ven-geance. It is not pity that you
feel; you lament only be-cause the vic-tim of your ma-lig-nity is with-drawn
from your power.”

“Oh, it is not thus—not thus,” in-ter-rup-ted the be-ing.
“Yet such must be the im-pres-sion con-veyed to you by what ap-pears to
be the pur-port of my ac-tions. Yet I seek not a fel-low feel-ing in my misery.
No sym-pathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the love of
vir-tue, the feel-ings of hap-pi-ness and af-fec-tion with which my whole be-ing
over-flowed, that I wished to be par-ti-cip-ated. But now that vir-tue has
be-come to me a shadow, and that hap-pi-ness and af-fec-tion are turned into
bit-ter and loath-ing des-pair, in what should I seek for sym-pathy? I am
con-tent to suf-fer alone while my suf-fer-ings shall en-dure; when I die, I am
well sat-is-fied that ab-hor-rence and op-pro-brium should load my memory. Once
my fancy was soothed with dreams of vir-tue, of fame, and of en-joy-ment. Once
I falsely hoped to meet with be-ings who, par-don-ing my out-ward form, would
love me for the ex-cel-lent qual-it-ies which I was cap-able of un-fold-ing. I was
nour-ished with high thoughts of hon-our and de-vo-tion. But now crime has
de-graded me be-neath the mean-est an-imal. No guilt, no mis-chief, no
ma-lig-nity, no misery, can be found com-par-able to mine. When I run over the
fright-ful cata-logue of my sins, I can-not be-lieve that I am the same
creature whose thoughts were once filled with sub-lime and tran-scend-ent
vis-ions of the beauty and the majesty of good-ness. But it is even so; the
fallen an-gel be-comes a ma-lig-nant devil. Yet even that en-emy of God and man
had friends and as-so-ci-ates in his des-ol-a-tion; I am alone.

“You, who call Franken-stein your friend, seem to have a know-ledge of my
crimes and his mis-for-tunes. But in the de-tail which he gave you of them
he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I en-dured
wast-ing in im-pot-ent pas-sions. For while I des-troyed his hopes, I did
not sat-isfy my own de-sires. They were for ever ar-dent and crav-ing; still
I de-sired love and fel-low-ship, and I was still spurned.  Was there no
in-justice in this? Am I to be thought the only crim-inal, when all
hu-man-kind sinned against me? Why do you not hate Felix, who drove his
friend from his door with con-tumely? Why do you not ex-ec-rate the rus-tic
who sought to des-troy the sa-viour of his child? Nay, these are vir-tu-ous
and im-macu-late be-ings! I, the miser-able and the aban-doned, am an
abor-tion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. Even now my
blood boils at the re-col-lec-tion of this in-justice.

“But it is true that I am a wretch. I have murdered the lovely and
the help-less; I have strangled the in-no-cent as they slept and grasped to
death his throat who never in-jured me or any other liv-ing thing. I have
de-voted my cre-ator, the se-lect spe-ci-men of all that is worthy of love and
ad-mir-a-tion among men, to misery; I have pur-sued him even to that
ir-re-medi-able ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me, but
your ab-hor-rence can-not equal that with which I re-gard my-self. I look on the
hands which ex-ecuted the deed; I think on the heart in which the
ima-gin-a-tion of it was con-ceived and long for the mo-ment when these hands
will meet my eyes, when that ima-gin-a-tion will haunt my thoughts no more.

“Fear not that I shall be the in-stru-ment of fu-ture mis-chief. My work
is nearly com-plete. Neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to
con-sum-mate the series of my be-ing and ac-com-plish that which must be done,
but it re-quires my own. Do not think that I shall be slow to per-form this
sac-ri-fice. I shall quit your ves-sel on the ice raft which brought me
thither and shall seek the most north-ern ex-tremity of the globe; I shall
col-lect my fu-neral pile and con-sume to ashes this miser-able frame, that its
re-mains may af-ford no light to any curi-ous and un-hal-lowed wretch who would
cre-ate such an-other as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the
ag-on-ies which now con-sume me or be the prey of feel-ings un-sat-is-fied, yet
un-quenched. He is dead who called me into be-ing; and when I shall be no
more, the very re-mem-brance of us both will speedily van-ish. I shall no
longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light,
feel-ing, and sense will pass away; and in this con-di-tion must I find my
hap-pi-ness. Some years ago, when the im-ages which this world af-fords first
opened upon me, when I felt the cheer-ing warmth of sum-mer and heard the
rust-ling of the leaves and the warb-ling of the birds, and these were all to
me, I should have wept to die; now it is my only con-sol-a-tion. Pol-luted by
crimes and torn by the bitterest re-morse, where can I find rest but in
death?

“Farewell!  I leave you, and in you the last of hu-man-kind whom these
eyes will ever be-hold. Farewell, Franken-stein! If thou wert yet alive
and yet cher-ished a de-sire of re-venge against me, it would be bet-ter
sa-ti-ated in my life than in my de-struc-tion. But it was not so; thou
didst seek my ex-tinc-tion, that I might not cause greater wretched-ness;
and if yet, in some mode un-known to me, thou hadst not ceased to think
and feel, thou wouldst not de-sire against me a ven-geance greater than
that which I feel. Blas-ted as thou wert, my agony was still su-per-ior to
thine, for the bit-ter sting of re-morse will not cease to rankle in my
wounds un-til death shall close them for ever.

“But soon,” he cried with sad and sol-emn en-thu-si-asm, “I
shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burn-ing
miser-ies will be ex-tinct. I shall as-cend my fu-neral pile tri-umphantly and
ex-ult in the agony of the tor-tur-ing flames. The light of that con-flag-ra-tion
will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. My spirit
will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
Farewell.”

He sprang from the cabin-win-dow as he said this, upon the ice raft
which lay close to the ves-sel.  He was soon borne away by the waves and
lost in dark-ness and dis-tance.
