I


One morn-ing, when Gregor Samsa woke from troubled dreams, he found
him-self trans-formed in his bed into a hor-rible ver-min.  He lay on
his ar-mour-like back, and if he lif-ted his head a little he could
see his brown belly, slightly domed and di-vided by arches into stiff
sec-tions.  The bed-ding was hardly able to cover it and seemed ready
to slide off any mo-ment.  His many legs, pi-ti-fully thin com-pared
with the size of the rest of him, waved about help-lessly as he
looked.

"What's happened to me?" he thought.  It wasn't a dream.  His room,
a proper hu-man room al-though a little too small, lay peace-fully
between its four fa-mil-iar walls.  A col-lec-tion of tex-tile samples
lay spread out on the table - Samsa was a trav-el-ling sales-man - and
above it there hung a pic-ture that he had re-cently cut out of an
il-lus-trated magazine and housed in a nice, gil-ded frame.  It showed
a lady fit-ted out with a fur hat and fur boa who sat up-right,
rais-ing a heavy fur muff that covered the whole of her lower arm
to-wards the viewer.

Gregor then turned to look out the win-dow at the dull weather.
Drops of rain could be heard hit-ting the pane, which made him feel
quite sad.  "How about if I sleep a little bit longer and for-get all
this non-sense", he thought, but that was some-thing he was un-able to
do be-cause he was used to sleep-ing on his right, and in his present
state couldn't get into that po-s-i-tion.  However hard he threw
him-self onto his right, he al-ways rolled back to where he was.  He
must have tried it a hun-dred times, shut his eyes so that he
wouldn't have to look at the flounder-ing legs, and only stopped when
he began to feel a mild, dull pain there that he had never felt
be-fore.

"Oh, God", he thought, "what a strenu-ous ca-reer it is that I've
chosen! Trav-el-ling day in and day out.  Do-ing busi-ness like this
takes much more ef-fort than do-ing your own busi-ness at home, and on
top of that there's the curse of trav-el-ling, wor-ries about mak-ing
train con-nec-tions, bad and ir-reg-u-lar food, con-tact with dif-fer-ent
people all the time so that you can never get to know any-one or
be-come friendly with them.  It can all go to Hell!"  He felt a
slight itch up on his belly; pushed him-self slowly up on his back
to-wards the head-board so that he could lift his head bet-ter; found
where the itch was, and saw that it was covered with lots of little
white spots which he didn't know what to make of; and when he tried
to feel the place with one of his legs he drew it quickly back
be-cause as soon as he touched it he was over-come by a cold shud-der.

He slid back into his former po-s-i-tion.  "Get-ting up early all the
time", he thought, "it makes you stu-pid.  You've got to get enough
sleep.  Other trav-el-ling sales-men live a life of lux-ury.  For
in-stance, whenever I go back to the guest house dur-ing the morn-ing
to copy out the con-tract, these gen-tle-men are al-ways still sit-ting
there eat-ing their break-fasts.  I ought to just try that with my
boss; I'd get kicked out on the spot.  But who knows, maybe that
would be the best thing for me.  If I didn't have my par-ents to
think about I'd have given in my no-tice a long time ago, I'd have
gone up to the boss and told him just what I think, tell him
everything I would, let him know just what I feel.  He'd fall right
off his desk! And it's a funny sort of busi-ness to be sit-ting up
there at your desk, talk-ing down at your sub-or-din-ates from up there,
es-pe-cially when you have to go right up close be-cause the boss is
hard of hear-ing.  Well, there's still some hope; once I've got the
money to-gether to pay off my par-ents' debt to him - an-other five or
six years I sup-pose - that's def-in-itely what I'll do.  That's when
I'll make the big change.  First of all though, I've got to get up,
my train leaves at five."

And he looked over at the alarm clock, tick-ing on the chest of
draw-ers.  "God in Heaven!" he thought.  It was half past six and the
hands were quietly mov-ing for-wards, it was even later than half
past, more like quarter to seven.  Had the alarm clock not rung? He
could see from the bed that it had been set for four o'clock as it
should have been; it cer-tainly must have rung.  Yes, but was it
pos-sible to quietly sleep through that fur-niture-rat-tling noise?
True, he had not slept peace-fully, but prob-ably all the more deeply
be-cause of that.  What should he do now? The next train went at
seven; if he were to catch that he would have to rush like mad and
the col-lec-tion of samples was still not packed, and he did not at
all feel par-tic-u-larly fresh and lively.  And even if he did catch
the train he would not avoid his boss's an-ger as the of-fice
as-sist-ant would have been there to see the five o'clock train go, he
would have put in his re-port about Gregor's not be-ing there a long
time ago.  The of-fice as-sist-ant was the boss's man, spine-less, and
with no un-der-stand-ing.  What about if he re-por-ted sick? But that
would be ex-tremely strained and sus-pi-cious as in fif-teen years of
ser-vice Gregor had never once yet been ill.  His boss would
cer-tainly come round with the doc-tor from the med-ical in-sur-ance
com-pany, ac-cuse his par-ents of hav-ing a lazy son, and ac-cept the
doc-tor's re-com-mend-a-tion not to make any claim as the doc-tor be-lieved
that no-one was ever ill but that many were work-shy.  And what's
more, would he have been en-tirely wrong in this case? Gregor did in
fact, apart from ex-cess-ive sleep-i-ness after sleep-ing for so long,
feel com-pletely well and even felt much hun-grier than usual.

He was still hur-riedly think-ing all this through, un-able to de-cide
to get out of the bed, when the clock struck quarter to seven.
There was a cau-tious knock at the door near his head.  "Gregor",
some-body called - it was his mother - "it's quarter to seven.
Didn't you want to go some-where?"  That gentle voice! Gregor was
shocked when he heard his own voice an-swer-ing, it could hardly be
re-cog-nised as the voice he had had be-fore.  As if from deep in-side
him, there was a pain-ful and un-con-trol-lable squeak-ing mixed in with
it, the words could be made out at first but then there was a sort
of echo which made them un-clear, leav-ing the hearer un-sure whether
he had heard prop-erly or not.  Gregor had wanted to give a full
an-swer and ex-plain everything, but in the cir-cum-stances con-ten-ted
him-self with say-ing: "Yes, mother, yes, thank-you, I'm get-ting up
now."  The change in Gregor's voice prob-ably could not be no-ticed
out-side through the wooden door, as his mother was sat-is-fied with
this ex-plan-a-tion and shuffled away.  But this short con-ver-sa-tion
made the other mem-bers of the fam-ily aware that Gregor, against
their ex-pect-a-tions was still at home, and soon his father came
knock-ing at one of the side doors, gently, but with his fist.
"Gregor, Gregor", he called, "what's wrong?"  And after a short
while he called again with a warn-ing deep-ness in his voice: "Gregor!
Gregor!"  At the other side door his sis-ter came plaint-ively:
"Gregor? Aren't you well? Do you need any-thing?"  Gregor answered to
both sides: "I'm ready, now", mak-ing an ef-fort to re-move all the
strange-ness from his voice by enun-ci-at-ing very care-fully and put-ting
long pauses between each, in-di-vidual word.  His father went back to
his break-fast, but his sis-ter whispered: "Gregor, open the door, I
beg of you."  Gregor, how-ever, had no thought of open-ing the door,
and in-stead con-grat-u-lated him-self for his cau-tious habit, ac-quired
from his trav-el-ling, of lock-ing all doors at night even when he was
at home.

The first thing he wanted to do was to get up in peace without be-ing
dis-turbed, to get dressed, and most of all to have his break-fast.
Only then would he con-sider what to do next, as he was well aware
that he would not bring his thoughts to any sens-ible con-clu-sions by
ly-ing in bed.  He re-membered that he had of-ten felt a slight pain in
bed, per-haps caused by ly-ing awk-wardly, but that had al-ways turned
out to be pure ima-gin-a-tion and he wondered how his ima-gin-ings would
slowly re-solve them-selves today.  He did not have the slight-est
doubt that the change in his voice was noth-ing more than the first
sign of a ser-i-ous cold, which was an oc-cu-pa-tional haz-ard for
trav-el-ling sales-men.

It was a simple mat-ter to throw off the cov-ers; he only had to blow
him-self up a little and they fell off by them-selves.  But it be-came
dif-fi-cult after that, es-pe-cially as he was so ex-cep-tion-ally broad.
He would have used his arms and his hands to push him-self up; but
in-stead of them he only had all those little legs con-tinu-ously
mov-ing in dif-fer-ent dir-ec-tions, and which he was moreover un-able to
con-trol.  If he wanted to bend one of them, then that was the first
one that would stretch it-self out; and if he fi-nally man-aged to do
what he wanted with that leg, all the oth-ers seemed to be set free
and would move about pain-fully.  "This is some-thing that can't be
done in bed", Gregor said to him-self, "so don't keep try-ing to do
it".

The first thing he wanted to do was get the lower part of his body
out of the bed, but he had never seen this lower part, and could not
ima-gine what it looked like; it turned out to be too hard to move;
it went so slowly; and fi-nally, al-most in a frenzy, when he
care-lessly shoved him-self for-wards with all the force he could
gather, he chose the wrong dir-ec-tion, hit hard against the lower
bed-post, and learned from the burn-ing pain he felt that the lower
part of his body might well, at present, be the most sens-it-ive.

So then he tried to get the top part of his body out of the bed
first, care-fully turn-ing his head to the side.  This he man-aged
quite eas-ily, and des-pite its breadth and its weight, the bulk of
his body even-tu-ally fol-lowed slowly in the dir-ec-tion of the head.
But when he had at last got his head out of the bed and into the
fresh air it oc-curred to him that if he let him-self fall it would be
a mir-acle if his head were not in-jured, so he be-came afraid to carry
on push-ing him-self for-ward the same way.  And he could not knock
him-self out now at any price; bet-ter to stay in bed than lose
con-scious-ness.

It took just as much ef-fort to get back to where he had been
earlier, but when he lay there sigh-ing, and was once more watch-ing
his legs as they struggled against each other even harder than
be-fore, if that was pos-sible, he could think of no way of bring-ing
peace and or-der to this chaos.  He told him-self once more that it
was not pos-sible for him to stay in bed and that the most sens-ible
thing to do would be to get free of it in whatever way he could at
whatever sac-ri-fice.  At the same time, though, he did not for-get to
re-mind him-self that calm con-sid-er-a-tion was much bet-ter than rush-ing
to des-per-ate con-clu-sions.  At times like this he would dir-ect his
eyes to the win-dow and look out as clearly as he could, but
un-for-tu-nately, even the other side of the nar-row street was
en-vel-oped in morn-ing fog and the view had little con-fid-ence or cheer
to of-fer him.  "Seven o'clock, already", he said to him-self when the
clock struck again, "seven o'clock, and there's still a fog like
this."  And he lay there quietly a while longer, breath-ing lightly
as if he per-haps ex-pec-ted the total still-ness to bring things back
to their real and nat-ural state.

But then he said to him-self: "Be-fore it strikes quarter past seven
I'll def-in-itely have to have got prop-erly out of bed.  And by then
some-body will have come round from work to ask what's happened to me
as well, as they open up at work be-fore seven o'clock."  And so he
set him-self to the task of swinging the en-tire length of his body
out of the bed all at the same time.  If he suc-ceeded in fall-ing out
of bed in this way and kept his head raised as he did so he could
prob-ably avoid in-jur-ing it.  His back seemed to be quite hard, and
prob-ably noth-ing would hap-pen to it fall-ing onto the car-pet.  His
main con-cern was for the loud noise he was bound to make, and which
even through all the doors would prob-ably raise con-cern if not
alarm.  But it was some-thing that had to be risked.

When Gregor was already stick-ing half way out of the bed - the new
method was more of a game than an ef-fort, all he had to do was rock
back and forth - it oc-curred to him how simple everything would be
if some-body came to help him.  Two strong people - he had his father
and the maid in mind - would have been more than enough; they would
only have to push their arms un-der the dome of his back, peel him
away from the bed, bend down with the load and then be pa-tient and
care-ful as he swang over onto the floor, where, hope-fully, the
little legs would find a use.  Should he really call for help
though, even apart from the fact that all the doors were locked?
Des-pite all the dif-fi-culty he was in, he could not sup-press a smile
at this thought.

After a while he had already moved so far across that it would have
been hard for him to keep his bal-ance if he rocked too hard.  The
time was now ten past seven and he would have to make a fi-nal
de-cision very soon.  Then there was a ring at the door of the flat.
"That'll be someone from work", he said to him-self, and froze very
still, al-though his little legs only be-came all the more lively as
they danced around.  For a mo-ment everything re-mained quiet.
"They're not open-ing the door", Gregor said to him-self, caught in
some non-sensical hope.  But then of course, the maid's firm steps
went to the door as ever and opened it.  Gregor only needed to hear
the vis-itor's first words of greet-ing and he knew who it was - the
chief clerk him-self.  Why did Gregor have to be the only one
con-demned to work for a com-pany where they im-me-di-ately be-came highly
sus-pi-cious at the slight-est short-com-ing? Were all em-ploy-ees, every
one of them, louts, was there not one of them who was faith-ful and
de-voted who would go so mad with pangs of con-science that he
couldn't get out of bed if he didn't spend at least a couple of
hours in the morn-ing on com-pany busi-ness? Was it really not enough
to let one of the train-ees make en-quir-ies - as-sum-ing en-quir-ies were
even ne-ces-sary - did the chief clerk have to come him-self, and did
they have to show the whole, in-no-cent fam-ily that this was so
sus-pi-cious that only the chief clerk could be trus-ted to have the
wis-dom to in-vest-ig-ate it? And more be-cause these thoughts had made
him up-set than through any proper de-cision, he swang him-self with
all his force out of the bed.  There was a loud thump, but it wasn't
really a loud noise.  His fall was softened a little by the car-pet,
and Gregor's back was also more elastic than he had thought, which
made the sound muffled and not too no-tice-able.  He had not held his
head care-fully enough, though, and hit it as he fell; an-noyed and in
pain, he turned it and rubbed it against the car-pet.

"So-mething's fallen down in there", said the chief clerk in the room
on the left.  Gregor tried to ima-gine whether some-thing of the sort
that had happened to him today could ever hap-pen to the chief clerk
too; you had to con-cede that it was pos-sible.  But as if in gruff
reply to this ques-tion, the chief clerk's firm foot-steps in his
highly pol-ished boots could now be heard in the ad-join-ing room.
From the room on his right, Gregor's sis-ter whispered to him to let
him know: "Gregor, the chief clerk is here."  "Yes, I know", said
Gregor to him-self; but without dar-ing to raise his voice loud enough
for his sis-ter to hear him.

"Gregor", said his father now from the room to his left, "the chief
clerk has come round and wants to know why you didn't leave on the
early train.  We don't know what to say to him.  And any-way, he
wants to speak to you per-son-ally.  So please open up this door.  I'm
sure he'll be good enough to for-give the un-tidi-ness of your room."
Then the chief clerk called "Good morn-ing,  Mr. Samsa". "He isn't
well", said his mother to the chief clerk, while his father
con-tin-ued to speak through the door.  "He isn't well, please be-lieve
me.  Why else would Gregor have missed a train! The lad only ever
thinks about the busi-ness.  It nearly makes me cross the way he
never goes out in the even-ings; he's been in town for a week now but
stayed home every even-ing.  He sits with us in the kit-chen and just
reads the pa-per or stud-ies train timetables.  His idea of re-lax-a-tion
is work-ing with his fret-saw.  He's made a little frame, for
in-stance, it only took him two or three even-ings, you'll be amazed
how nice it is; it's hanging up in his room; you'll see it as soon
as Gregor opens the door.  Any-way, I'm glad you're here; we wouldn't
have been able to get Gregor to open the door by ourselves; he's so
stub-born; and I'm sure he isn't well, he said this morn-ing that he
is, but he isn't."  "I'll be there in a mo-ment", said Gregor slowly
and thought-fully, but without mov-ing so that he would not miss any
word of the con-ver-sa-tion.  "Well I can't think of any other way of
ex-plain-ing it,  Mrs. Samsa", said the chief clerk, "I hope it's
noth-ing ser-i-ous.  But on the other hand, I must say that if we
people in com-merce ever be-come slightly un-well then, for-tu-nately or
un-for-tu-nately as you like, we simply have to over-come it be-cause of
busi-ness con-sid-er-a-tions."  "Can the chief clerk come in to see you
now then?", asked his father im-pa-tiently, knock-ing at the door
again.  "No", said Gregor.  In the room on his right there fol-lowed
a pain-ful si-lence; in the room on his left his sis-ter began to cry.

So why did his sis-ter not go and join the oth-ers? She had prob-ably
only just got up and had not even be-gun to get dressed.  And why was
she cry-ing? Was it be-cause he had not got up, and had not let the
chief clerk in, be-cause he was in danger of los-ing his job and if
that happened his boss would once more pur-sue their par-ents with the
same de-mands as be-fore? There was no need to worry about things like
that yet.  Gregor was still there and had not the slight-est
in-ten-tion of abandon-ing his fam-ily.  For the time be-ing he just lay
there on the car-pet, and no-one who knew the con-di-tion he was in
would ser-i-ously have ex-pec-ted him to let the chief clerk in.  It was
only a minor dis-cour-tesy, and a suit-able ex-cuse could eas-ily be
found for it later on, it was not some-thing for which Gregor could
be sacked on the spot.  And it seemed to Gregor much more sens-ible
to leave him now in peace in-stead of dis-turb-ing him with talk-ing at
him and cry-ing.  But the oth-ers didn't know what was hap-pen-ing, they
were wor-ried, that would ex-cuse their be-ha-viour.

The chief clerk now raised his voice, "Mr. Samsa", he called to him,
"what is wrong? You bar-ri-cade your-self in your room, give us no more
than yes or no for an an-swer, you are caus-ing ser-i-ous and
un-ne-ces-sary con-cern to your par-ents and you fail - and I men-tion
this just by the way - you fail to carry out your busi-ness du-ties in
a way that is quite un-heard of.  I'm speak-ing here on be-half of your
par-ents and of your em-ployer, and really must re-quest a clear and
im-me-di-ate ex-plan-a-tion.  I am as-ton-ished, quite as-ton-ished.  I
thought I knew you as a calm and sens-ible per-son, and now you
sud-denly seem to be show-ing off with pe-cu-liar whims.  This morn-ing,
your em-ployer did sug-gest a pos-sible reason for your fail-ure to
ap-pear, it's true - it had to do with the money that was re-cently
en-trus-ted to you - but I came near to giv-ing him my word of hon-our
that that could not be the right ex-plan-a-tion.  But now that I see
your in-com-pre-hens-ible stub-born-ness I no longer feel any wish
what-so-ever to in-ter-cede on your be-half.  And nor is your po-s-i-tion
all that se-cure.  I had ori-gin-ally in-ten-ded to say all this to you
in private, but since you cause me to waste my time here for no good
reason I don't see why your par-ents should not also learn of it.
Your turnover has been very un-sat-is-fact-ory of late; I grant you that
it's not the time of year to do es-pe-cially good busi-ness, we
re-cog-nise that; but there simply is no time of year to do no
busi-ness at all,  Mr. Samsa, we can-not al-low there to be."

"But Sir", called Gregor, be-side him-self and for-get-ting all else in
the ex-cite-ment, "I'll open up im-me-di-ately, just a mo-ment.  I'm
slightly un-well, an at-tack of dizzi-ness, I haven't been able to get
up.  I'm still in bed now.  I'm quite fresh again now, though.  I'm
just get-ting out of bed.  Just a mo-ment.  Be pa-tient! It's not quite
as easy as I'd thought.  I'm quite al-right now, though.  It's
shock-ing, what can sud-denly hap-pen to a per-son! I was quite al-right
last night, my par-ents know about it, per-haps bet-ter than me, I had
a small symp-tom of it last night already.  They must have no-ticed
it.  I don't know why I didn't let you know at work! But you al-ways
think you can get over an ill-ness without stay-ing at home.  Please,
don't make my par-ents suf-fer! There's no basis for any of the
ac-cus-a-tions you're mak-ing; nobody's ever said a word to me about any
of these things.  Maybe you haven't read the latest con-tracts I sent
in.  I'll set off with the eight o'clock train, as well, these few
hours of rest have given me strength.  You don't need to wait, sir;
I'll be in the of-fice soon after you, and please be so good as to
tell that to the boss and re-com-mend me to him!"

And while Gregor gushed out these words, hardly know-ing what he was
say-ing, he made his way over to the chest of draw-ers - this was
eas-ily done, prob-ably be-cause of the prac-tise he had already had in
bed - where he now tried to get him-self up-right.  He really did want
to open the door, really did want to let them see him and to speak
with the chief clerk; the oth-ers were be-ing so in-sist-ent, and he was
curi-ous to learn what they would say when they caught sight of him.
If they were shocked then it would no longer be Gregor's
re-spons-ib-il-ity and he could rest.  If, how-ever, they took everything
calmly he would still have no reason to be up-set, and if he hur-ried
he really could be at the sta-tion for eight o'clock.  The first few
times he tried to climb up on the smooth chest of draw-ers he just
slid down again, but he fi-nally gave him-self one last swing and
stood there up-right; the lower part of his body was in ser-i-ous pain
but he no longer gave any at-ten-tion to it.  Now he let him-self fall
against the back of a nearby chair and held tightly to the edges of
it with his little legs.  By now he had also calmed down, and kept
quiet so that he could listen to what the chief clerk was say-ing.

"Did you un-der-stand a word of all that?" the chief clerk asked his
par-ents, "surely he's not try-ing to make fools of us". "Oh, God!"
called his mother, who was already in tears, "he could be ser-i-ously
ill and we're mak-ing him suf-fer.  Grete! Grete!" she then cried.
"Mother?" his sis-ter called from the other side.  They com-mu-nic-ated
across Gregor's room.  "You'll have to go for the doc-tor straight
away.  Gregor is ill.  Quick, get the doc-tor.  Did you hear the way
Gregor spoke just now?"  "That was the voice of an an-imal", said the
chief clerk, with a calmness that was in con-trast with his mother's
screams.  "Anna! Anna!" his father called into the kit-chen through
the en-trance hall, clap-ping his hands, "get a lock-smith here, now!"
And the two girls, their skirts swish-ing, im-me-di-ately ran out
through the hall, wrench-ing open the front door of the flat as they
went.  How had his sis-ter man-aged to get dressed so quickly? There
was no sound of the door banging shut again; they must have left it
open;  people of-ten do in homes where some-thing aw-ful has happened.

Gregor, in con-trast, had be-come much calmer.  So they couldn't
un-der-stand his words any more, al-though they seemed clear enough to
him, clearer than be-fore - per-haps his ears had be-come used to the
sound.  They had real-ised, though, that there was some-thing wrong
with him, and were ready to help.  The first re-sponse to his
situ-ation had been con-fid-ent and wise, and that made him feel
bet-ter.  He felt that he had been drawn back in among people, and
from the doc-tor and the lock-smith he ex-pec-ted great and sur-pris-ing
achieve-ments - al-though he did not really dis-tin-guish one from the
other.  Whatever was said next would be cru-cial, so, in or-der to
make his voice as clear as pos-sible, he coughed a little, but tak-ing
care to do this not too loudly as even this might well sound
dif-fer-ent from the way that a hu-man coughs and he was no longer sure
he could judge this for him-self.  Mean-while, it had be-come very
quiet in the next room.  Per-haps his par-ents were sat at the table
whis-per-ing with the chief clerk, or per-haps they were all pressed
against the door and listen-ing.

Gregor slowly pushed his way over to the door with the chair.  Once
there he let go of it and threw him-self onto the door, hold-ing
him-self up-right against it us-ing the ad-hes-ive on the tips of his
legs.  He res-ted there a little while to re-cover from the ef-fort
in-volved and then set him-self to the task of turn-ing the key in the
lock with his mouth.  He seemed, un-for-tu-nately, to have no proper
teeth - how was he, then, to grasp the key? - but the lack of teeth
was, of course, made up for with a very strong jaw; us-ing the jaw,
he really was able to start the key turn-ing, ig-nor-ing the fact that
he must have been caus-ing some kind of dam-age as a brown fluid came
from his mouth, flowed over the key and dripped onto the floor.
"Listen", said the chief clerk in the next room, "he's turn-ing the
key."  Gregor was greatly en-cour-aged by this; but they all should
have been call-ing to him, his father and his mother too: "Well done,
Gregor", they should have cried, "keep at it, keep hold of the
lock!"  And with the idea that they were all ex-citedly fol-low-ing his
ef-forts, he bit on the key with all his strength, pay-ing no
at-ten-tion to the pain he was caus-ing him-self.  As the key turned
round he turned around the lock with it, only hold-ing him-self
up-right with his mouth, and hung onto the key or pushed it down
again with the whole weight of his body as needed.  The clear sound
of the lock as it snapped back was Gregor's sign that he could break
his con-cen-tra-tion, and as he re-gained his breath he said to him-self:
"So, I didn't need the lock-smith after all". Then he lay his head on
the handle of the door to open it com-pletely.

Be-cause he had to open the door in this way, it was already wide
open be-fore he could be seen.  He had first to slowly turn him-self
around one of the double doors, and he had to do it very care-fully
if he did not want to fall flat on his back be-fore en-ter-ing the
room.  He was still oc-cu-pied with this dif-fi-cult move-ment, un-able to
pay at-ten-tion to any-thing else, when he heard the chief clerk
ex-claim a loud "Oh!", which soun-ded like the sough-ing of the wind.
Now he also saw him - he was the nearest to the door - his hand
pressed against his open mouth and slowly re-treat-ing as if driven by
a steady and in-vis-ible force.  Gregor's mother, her hair still
dishevelled from bed des-pite the chief clerk's be-ing there, looked
at his father.  Then she un-fol-ded her arms, took two steps for-ward
to-wards Gregor and sank down onto the floor into her skirts that
spread them-selves out around her as her head dis-ap-peared down onto
her breast.  His father looked hos-tile, and clenched his fists as if
want-ing to knock Gregor back into his room.  Then he looked
un-cer-tainly round the liv-ing room, covered his eyes with his hands
and wept so that his power-ful chest shook.

So Gregor did not go into the room, but leant against the in-side of
the other door which was still held bolted in place.  In this way
only half of his body could be seen, along with his head above it
which he leant over to one side as he peered out at the oth-ers.
Mean-while the day had be-come much lighter; part of the end-less,
grey-black build-ing on the other side of the street - which was a
hos-pital - could be seen quite clearly with the aus-tere and reg-u-lar
line of win-dows pier-cing its facade; the rain was still
fall-ing, now throw-ing down large, in-di-vidual droplets which hit the
ground one at a time.  The wash-ing up from break-fast lay on the
table; there was so much of it be-cause, for Gregor's father,
break-fast was the most im-port-ant meal of the day and he would
stretch it out for sev-eral hours as he sat read-ing a num-ber of
dif-fer-ent news-pa-pers.  On the wall ex-actly op-pos-ite there was
pho-to-graph of Gregor when he was a lieu-ten-ant in the army, his sword
in his hand and a care-free smile on his face as he called forth
re-spect for his uni-form and bear-ing.  The door to the en-trance hall
was open and as the front door of the flat was also open he could
see onto the land-ing and the stairs where they began their way down
be-low.

"Now, then", said Gregor, well aware that he was the only one to
have kept calm, "I'll get dressed straight away now, pack up my
samples and set off.  Will you please just let me leave? You can
see", he said to the chief clerk, "that I'm not stub-born and I
like to do my job; be-ing a com-mer-cial trav-el-ler is ar-du-ous but
without trav-el-ling I couldn't earn my liv-ing.  So where are you
go-ing, in to the of-fice? Yes? Will you re-port everything ac-cur-ately,
then? It's quite pos-sible for someone to be tem-por-ar-ily un-able to
work, but that's just the right time to re-mem-ber what's been
achieved in the past and con-sider that later on, once the dif-fi-culty
has been re-moved, he will cer-tainly work with all the more di-li-gence
and con-cen-tra-tion.  You're well aware that I'm ser-i-ously in debt to
our em-ployer as well as hav-ing to look after my par-ents and my
sis-ter, so that I'm trapped in a dif-fi-cult situ-ation, but I will
work my way out of it again.  Please don't make things any harder
for me than they are already, and don't take sides against me at the
of-fice.  I know that nobody likes the trav-el-lers.  They think we
earn an enorm-ous wage as well as hav-ing a soft time of it.  That's
just pre-ju-dice but they have no par-tic-u-lar reason to think bet-ter of
it.  But you, sir, you have a bet-ter over-view than the rest of the
staff, in fact, if I can say this in con-fid-ence, a bet-ter over-view
than the boss him-self - it's very easy for a busi-ness-man like him to
make mis-takes about his em-ploy-ees and judge them more harshly than
he should.  And you're also well aware that we trav-el-lers spend
al-most the whole year away from the of-fice, so that we can very
eas-ily fall vic-tim to gos-sip and chance and ground-less com-plaints,
and it's al-most im-possible to de-fend your-self from that sort of
thing, we don't usu-ally even hear about them, or if at all it's when
we ar-rive back home ex-hausted from a trip, and that's when we feel
the harm-ful ef-fects of what's been go-ing on without even know-ing
what caused them.  Please, don't go away, at least first say
some-thing to show that you grant that I'm at least partly right!"

But the chief clerk had turned away as soon as Gregor had star-ted to
speak, and, with pro-trud-ing lips, only stared back at him over his
trem-bling shoulders as he left.  He did not keep still for a mo-ment
while Gregor was speak-ing, but moved stead-ily to-wards the door
without tak-ing his eyes off him.  He moved very gradu-ally, as if
there had been some secret pro-hib-i-tion on leav-ing the room.  It was
only when he had reached the en-trance hall that he made a sud-den
move-ment, drew his foot from the liv-ing room, and rushed for-ward in
a panic.  In the hall, he stretched his right hand far out to-wards
the stair-way as if out there, there were some su-per-nat-ural force
wait-ing to save him.

Gregor real-ised that it was out of the ques-tion to let the chief
clerk go away in this mood if his po-s-i-tion in the firm was not to be
put into ex-treme danger.  That was some-thing his par-ents did not
un-der-stand very well; over the years, they had be-come con-vinced that
this job would provide for Gregor for his en-tire life, and be-sides,
they had so much to worry about at present that they had lost sight
of any thought for the fu-ture.  Gregor, though, did think about the
fu-ture.  The chief clerk had to be held back, calmed down, con-vinced
and fi-nally won over; the fu-ture of Gregor and his fam-ily de-pended
on it! If only his sis-ter were here! She was clever; she was already
in tears while Gregor was still ly-ing peace-fully on his back.  And
the chief clerk was a lover of wo-men, surely she could per-suade him;
she would close the front door in the en-trance hall and talk him out
of his shocked state.  But his sis-ter was not there, Gregor would
have to do the job him-self.  And without con-sid-er-ing that he still
was not fa-mil-iar with how well he could move about in his present
state, or that his speech still might not - or prob-ably would not -
be un-der-stood, he let go of the door; pushed him-self through the
open-ing; tried to reach the chief clerk on the land-ing who,
ri-dicu-lously, was hold-ing on to the ban-is-ter with both hands; but
Gregor fell im-me-di-ately over and, with a little scream as he sought
some-thing to hold onto, landed on his nu-mer-ous little legs.  Hardly
had that happened than, for the first time that day, he began to
feel al-right with his body; the little legs had the solid ground
un-der them; to his pleas-ure, they did ex-actly as he told them; they
were even mak-ing the ef-fort to carry him where he wanted to go; and
he was soon be-liev-ing that all his sor-rows would soon be fi-nally at
an end.  He held back the urge to move but swayed from side to side
as he crouched there on the floor.  His mother was not far away in
front of him and seemed, at first, quite en-grossed in her-self, but
then she sud-denly jumped up with her arms out-stretched and her
fin-gers spread shout-ing: "Help, for pity's sake, Help!"  The way she
held her head sug-ges-ted she wanted to see Gregor bet-ter, but the
un-think-ing way she was hur-ry-ing back-wards showed that she did not;
she had for-got-ten that the table was be-hind her with all the
break-fast things on it; when she reached the table she sat quickly
down on it without know-ing what she was do-ing; without even seem-ing
to no-tice that the cof-fee pot had been knocked over and a gush of
cof-fee was pour-ing down onto the car-pet.

"Mother, mother", said Gregor gently, look-ing up at her.  He had
com-pletely for-got-ten the chief clerk for the mo-ment, but could not
help him-self snap-ping in the air with his jaws at the sight of the
flow of cof-fee.  That set his mother scream-ing anew, she fled from
the table and into the arms of his father as he rushed to-wards her.
Gregor, though, had no time to spare for his par-ents now; the chief
clerk had already reached the stairs; with his chin on the ban-is-ter,
he looked back for the last time.  Gregor made a run for him; he
wanted to be sure of reach-ing him; the chief clerk must have
ex-pec-ted some-thing, as he leapt down sev-eral steps at once and
dis-ap-peared; his shouts re-sound-ing all around the stair-case.  The
flight of the chief clerk seemed, un-for-tu-nately, to put Gregor's
father into a panic as well.  Until then he had been re-l-at-ively self
con-trolled, but now, in-stead of run-ning after the chief clerk
him-self, or at least not im-ped-ing Gregor as he ran after him,
Gregor's father seized the chief clerk's stick in his right hand
(the chief clerk had left it be-hind on a chair, along with his hat
and over-coat), picked up a large news-pa-per from the table with his
left, and used them to drive Gregor back into his room, stamp-ing his
foot at him as he went.  Gregor's ap-peals to his father were of no
help, his ap-peals were simply not un-der-stood, how-ever much he humbly
turned his head his father merely stamped his foot all the harder.
Across the room, des-pite the chilly weather, Gregor's mother had
pulled open a win-dow, leant far out of it and pressed her hands to
her face.  A strong draught of air flew in from the street to-wards
the stair-way, the cur-tains flew up, the news-pa-pers on the table
fluttered and some of them were blown onto the floor.  Noth-ing would
stop Gregor's father as he drove him back, mak-ing hiss-ing noises at
him like a wild man.  Gregor had never had any prac-tice in mov-ing
back-wards and was only able to go very slowly.  If Gregor had only
been al-lowed to turn round he would have been back in his room
straight away, but he was afraid that if he took the time to do that
his father would be-come im-pa-tient, and there was the threat of a
lethal blow to his back or head from the stick in his father's hand
any mo-ment.  Even-tu-ally, though, Gregor real-ised that he had no
choice as he saw, to his dis-gust, that he was quite in-cap-able of
go-ing back-wards in a straight line; so he began, as quickly as
pos-sible and with fre-quent anxious glances at his father, to turn
him-self round.  It went very slowly, but per-haps his father was able
to see his good in-ten-tions as he did noth-ing to hinder him, in fact
now and then he used the tip of his stick to give dir-ec-tions from a
dis-tance as to which way to turn.  If only his father would stop
that un-bear-able hiss-ing! It was mak-ing Gregor quite con-fused.  When
he had nearly fin-ished turn-ing round, still listen-ing to that
hiss-ing, he made a mis-take and turned him-self back a little the way
he had just come.  He was pleased when he fi-nally had his head in
front of the door-way, but then saw that it was too nar-row, and his
body was too broad to get through it without fur-ther dif-fi-culty.  In
his present mood, it ob-vi-ously did not oc-cur to his father to open
the other of the double doors so that Gregor would have enough space
to get through.  He was merely fixed on the idea that Gregor should
be got back into his room as quickly as pos-sible.  Nor would he ever
have al-lowed Gregor the time to get him-self up-right as pre-par-a-tion
for get-ting through the door-way.  What he did, mak-ing more noise
than ever, was to drive Gregor for-wards all the harder as if there
had been noth-ing in the way; it soun-ded to Gregor as if there was
now more than one father be-hind him; it was not a pleas-ant
ex-per-i-ence, and Gregor pushed him-self into the door-way without
re-gard for what might hap-pen.  One side of his body lif-ted it-self,
he lay at an angle in the door-way, one flank scraped on the white
door and was pain-fully in-jured, leav-ing vile brown flecks on it,
soon he was stuck fast and would not have been able to move at all
by him-self, the little legs along one side hung quiv-er-ing in the air
while those on the other side were pressed pain-fully against the
ground.  Then his father gave him a hefty shove from be-hind which
re-leased him from where he was held and sent him fly-ing, and heav-ily
bleed-ing, deep into his room.  The door was slammed shut with the
stick, then, fi-nally, all was quiet.



II


It was not un-til it was get-ting dark that even-ing that Gregor awoke
from his deep and coma-like sleep.  He would have woken soon
af-ter-wards any-way even if he hadn't been dis-turbed, as he had had
enough sleep and felt fully res-ted.  But he had the im-pres-sion that
some hur-ried steps and the sound of the door lead-ing into the front
room be-ing care-fully shut had woken him.  The light from the
elec-tric street lamps shone palely here and there onto the ceil-ing
and tops of the fur-niture, but down be-low, where Gregor was, it was
dark.  He pushed him-self over to the door, feel-ing his way clum-sily
with his an-ten-nae - of which he was now be-gin-ning to learn the value
- in or-der to see what had been hap-pen-ing there.  The whole of his
left side seemed like one, pain-fully stretched scar,  and he limped
badly on his two rows of legs.  One of the legs had been badly
in-jured in the events of that morn-ing - it was nearly a mir-acle that
only one of them had been - and dragged along life-lessly.

It was only when he had reached the door that he real-ised what it
ac-tu-ally was that had drawn him over to it; it was the smell of
some-thing to eat.  By the door there was a dish filled with
sweetened milk with little pieces of white bread float-ing in it.  He
was so pleased he al-most laughed, as he was even hun-grier than he
had been that morn-ing, and im-me-di-ately dipped his head into the
milk, nearly cov-er-ing his eyes with it.  But he soon drew his head
back again in dis-ap-point-ment; not only did the pain in his tender
left side make it dif-fi-cult to eat the food - he was only able to
eat if his whole body worked to-gether as a snuff-ling whole - but the
milk did not taste at all nice.  Milk like this was nor-mally his
fa-vour-ite drink, and his sis-ter had cer-tainly left it there for him
be-cause of that, but he turned, al-most against his own will, away
from the dish and crawled back into the centre of the room.

Through the crack in the door, Gregor could see that the gas had
been lit in the liv-ing room.  His father at this time would nor-mally
be sat with his even-ing pa-per, read-ing it out in a loud voice to
Gregor's mother, and some-times to his sis-ter, but there was now not
a sound to be heard.  Gregor's sis-ter would of-ten write and tell him
about this read-ing, but maybe his father had lost the habit in
re-cent times.  It was so quiet all around too, even though there
must have been some-body in the flat.  "What a quiet life it is the
fam-ily lead", said Gregor to him-self, and, gaz-ing into the dark-ness,
felt a great pride that he was able to provide a life like that in
such a nice home for his sis-ter and par-ents.  But what now, if all
this peace and wealth and com-fort should come to a hor-rible and
fright-en-ing end? That was some-thing that Gregor did not want to
think about too much, so he star-ted to move about, crawl-ing up and
down the room.

Once dur-ing that long even-ing, the door on one side of the room was
opened very slightly and hur-riedly closed again; later on the door
on the other side did the same; it seemed that someone needed to
enter the room but thought bet-ter of it.  Gregor went and waited
im-me-di-ately by the door, re-solved either to bring the timor-ous
vis-itor into the room in some way or at least to find out who it
was; but the door was opened no more that night and Gregor waited in
vain.  The pre-vi-ous morn-ing while the doors were locked every-one had
wanted to get in there to him, but now, now that he had opened up
one of the doors and the other had clearly been un-locked some time
dur-ing the day, no-one came, and the keys were in the other sides.

It was not un-til late at night that the gas-light in the liv-ing room
was put out, and now it was easy to see that his par-ents and sis-ter had
stayed awake all that time, as they all could be dis-tinctly heard as
they went away to-gether on tip-toe.  It was clear that no-one would
come into Gregor's room any more un-til morn-ing; that gave him plenty
of time to think un-dis-turbed about how he would have to re-ar-range
his life.  For some reason, the tall, empty room where he was forced
to re-main made him feel un-easy as he lay there flat on the floor,
even though he had been liv-ing in it for five years.  Hardly aware
of what he was do-ing other than a slight feel-ing of shame, he
hur-ried un-der the couch.  It pressed down on his back a little, and
he was no longer able to lift his head, but he non-ethe-less felt
im-me-di-ately at ease and his only re-gret was that his body was too
broad to get it all un-der-neath.

He spent the whole night there.  Some of the time he passed in a
light sleep, al-though he fre-quently woke from it in alarm be-cause of
his hun-ger, and some of the time was spent in wor-ries and vague
hopes which, how-ever, al-ways led to the same con-clu-sion: for the
time be-ing he must re-main calm, he must show pa-tience and the
greatest con-sid-er-a-tion so that his fam-ily could bear the
un-pleas-ant-ness that he, in his present con-di-tion, was forced to
im-pose on them.

Gregor soon had the op-por-tun-ity to test the strength of his
de-cisions, as early the next morn-ing, al-most be-fore the night had
ended, his sis-ter, nearly fully dressed, opened the door from the
front room and looked anxiously in.  She did not see him straight
away, but when she did no-tice him un-der the couch - he had to be
some-where, for God's sake, he couldn't have flown away - she was so
shocked that she lost con-trol of her-self and slammed the door shut
again from out-side.  But she seemed to re-gret her be-ha-viour, as she
opened the door again straight away and came in on tip-toe as if
en-ter-ing the room of someone ser-i-ously ill or even of a stranger.
Gregor had pushed his head for-ward, right to the edge of the couch,
and watched her.  Would she no-tice that he had left the milk as it
was, real-ise that it was not from any lack of hun-ger and bring him
in some other food that was more suit-able? If she didn't do it
her-self he would rather go hungry than draw her at-ten-tion to it,
al-though he did feel a ter-rible urge to rush for-ward from un-der the
couch, throw him-self at his sis-ter's feet and beg her for some-thing
good to eat.  However, his sis-ter no-ticed the full dish im-me-di-ately
and looked at it and the few drops of milk splashed around it with
some sur-prise.  She im-me-di-ately picked it up - us-ing a rag,
not her bare hands - and car-ried it out.  Gregor was ex-tremely
curi-ous as to what she would bring in its place, ima-gin-ing the
wild-est pos-sib-il-it-ies, but he never could have guessed what his
sis-ter, in her good-ness, ac-tu-ally did bring.  In or-der to test his
taste, she brought him a whole se-lec-tion of things, all spread out
on an old news-pa-per.  There were old, half-rot-ten ve-get-ables; bones
from the even-ing meal, covered in white sauce that had gone hard; a
few rais-ins and al-monds; some cheese that Gregor had de-clared
in-ed-ible two days be-fore; a dry roll and some bread spread with
but-ter and salt.  As well as all that she had poured some wa-ter into
the dish, which had prob-ably been per-man-ently set aside for Gregor's
use, and placed it be-side them.  Then, out of con-sid-er-a-tion for
Gregor's feel-ings, as she knew that he would not eat in front of
her, she hur-ried out again and even turned the key in the lock so
that Gregor would know he could make things as com-fort-able for
him-self as he liked.  Gregor's little legs whirred, at last he could
eat.  What's more, his in-jur-ies must already have com-pletely healed
as he found no dif-fi-culty in mov-ing.  This amazed him, as more than
a month earlier he had cut his fin-ger slightly with a knife, he
thought of how his fin-ger had still hurt the day be-fore yes-ter-day.
"Am I less sens-it-ive than I used to be, then?", he thought, and was
already suck-ing greed-ily at the cheese which had im-me-di-ately, al-most
com-pel-lingly, at-trac-ted him much more than the other foods on the
news-pa-per.  Quickly one after an-other, his eyes wa-ter-ing with
pleas-ure, he con-sumed the cheese, the ve-get-ables and the sauce; the
fresh foods, on the other hand, he didn't like at all, and even
dragged the things he did want to eat a little way away from them
be-cause he couldn't stand the smell.  Long after he had fin-ished
eat-ing and lay leth-ar-gic in the same place, his sis-ter slowly turned
the key in the lock as a sign to him that he should with-draw.  He
was im-me-di-ately startled, al-though he had been half asleep, and he
hur-ried back un-der the couch.  But he needed great self-con-trol to
stay there even for the short time that his sis-ter was in the room,
as eat-ing so much food had roun-ded out his body a little and he
could hardly breathe in that nar-row space.  Half suf-foc-at-ing, he
watched with bul-ging eyes as his sis-ter un-self-con-sciously took a
broom and swept up the left-overs, mix-ing them in with the food he
had not even touched at all as if it could not be used any more.
She quickly dropped it all into a bin, closed it with its wooden
lid, and car-ried everything out.  She had hardly turned her back
be-fore Gregor came out again from un-der the couch and stretched
him-self.

This was how Gregor re-ceived his food each day now, once in the
morn-ing while his par-ents and the maid were still asleep, and the
second time after every-one had eaten their meal at mid-day as his
par-ents would sleep for a little while then as well, and Gregor's
sis-ter would send the maid away on some er-rand.  Gregor's father and
mother cer-tainly did not want him to starve either, but per-haps it
would have been more than they could stand to have any more
ex-per-i-ence of his feed-ing than be-ing told about it, and per-haps his
sis-ter wanted to spare them what dis-tress she could as they were
in-deed suf-fer-ing enough.

It was im-possible for Gregor to find out what they had told the
doc-tor and the lock-smith that first morn-ing to get them out of the
flat.  As nobody could un-der-stand him, nobody, not even his sis-ter,
thought that he could un-der-stand them, so he had to be con-tent to
hear his sis-ter's sighs and ap-peals to the saints as she moved about
his room.  It was only later, when she had be-come a little more used
to everything - there was, of course, no ques-tion of her ever
be-com-ing fully used to the situ-ation - that Gregor would some-times
catch a friendly com-ment, or at least a com-ment that could be
con-strued as friendly.  "He's en-joyed his din-ner today", she might
say when he had di-li-gently cleared away all the food left for him,
or if he left most of it, which slowly be-came more and more
fre-quent, she would of-ten say, sadly, "now everything's just been
left there again".

Al-though Gregor wasn't able to hear any news dir-ectly he did listen
to much of what was said in the next rooms, and whenever he heard
any-one speak-ing he would scurry straight to the ap-pro-pri-ate door and
press his whole body against it.  There was sel-dom any con-ver-sa-tion,
es-pe-cially at first, that was not about him in some way, even if
only in secret.  For two whole days, all the talk at every meal-time
was about what they should do now; but even between meals they spoke
about the same sub-ject as there were al-ways at least two mem-bers of
the fam-ily at home - nobody wanted to be at home by them-selves and
it was out of the ques-tion to leave the flat en-tirely empty.  And on
the very first day the maid had fallen to her knees and begged
Gregor's mother to let her go without delay.  It was not very clear
how much she knew of what had happened but she left within a quarter
of an hour, tear-fully thank-ing Gregor's mother for her dis-missal as
if she had done her an enorm-ous ser-vice.  She even swore
em-phat-ic-ally not to tell any-one the slight-est about what had
happened, even though no-one had asked that of her.

Now Gregor's sis-ter also had to help his mother with the cook-ing;
al-though that was not so much bother as no-one ate very much.
Gregor of-ten heard how one of them would un-suc-cess-fully urge an-other
to eat, and re-ceive no more an-swer than "no thanks, I've had enough"
or some-thing sim-ilar.  No-one drank very much either.  His sis-ter
would some-times ask his father whether he would like a beer, hop-ing
for the chance to go and fetch it her-self.  When his father then
said noth-ing she would add, so that he would not feel selfish, that
she could send the house-keeper for it, but then his father would
close the mat-ter with a big, loud "No", and no more would be said.

Even be-fore the first day had come to an end, his father had
ex-plained to Gregor's mother and sis-ter what their fin-ances and
pro-spects were.  Now and then he stood up from the table and took
some re-ceipt or doc-u-ment from the little cash box he had saved from
his busi-ness when it had col-lapsed five years earlier.  Gregor heard
how he opened the com-plic-ated lock and then closed it again after he
had taken the item he wanted.  What he heard his father say was some
of the first good news that Gregor heard since he had first been
in-car-cer-ated in his room.  He had thought that noth-ing at all
re-mained from his father's busi-ness, at least he had never told him
any-thing dif-fer-ent, and Gregor had never asked him about it any-way.
Their busi-ness mis-for-tune had re-duced the fam-ily to a state of total
des-pair, and Gregor's only con-cern at that time had been to ar-range
things so that they could all for-get about it as quickly as
pos-sible.  So then he star-ted work-ing es-pe-cially hard, with a fiery
vigour that raised him from a ju-nior sales-man to a trav-el-ling
rep-res-ent-at-ive al-most overnight, bring-ing with it the chance to earn
money in quite dif-fer-ent ways.  Gregor con-ver-ted his suc-cess at work
straight into cash that he could lay on the table at home for the
be-ne-fit of his as-ton-ished and de-lighted fam-ily.  They had been good
times and they had never come again, at least not with the same
splend-our, even though Gregor had later earned so much that he was
in a po-s-i-tion to bear the costs of the whole fam-ily, and did bear
them.  They had even got used to it, both Gregor and the fam-ily,
they took the money with grat-it-ude and he was glad to provide it,
al-though there was no longer much warm af-fec-tion given in re-turn.
Gregor only re-mained close to his sis-ter now.  Un-like him, she was
very fond of mu-sic and a gif-ted and ex-press-ive vi-ol-in-ist, it was his
secret plan to send her to the con-ser-vat-ory next year even though it
would cause great ex-pense that would have to be made up for in some
other way.  Dur-ing Gregor's short peri-ods in town, con-ver-sa-tion with
his sis-ter would of-ten turn to the con-ser-vat-ory but it was only ever
men-tioned as a lovely dream that could never be real-ised.  Their
par-ents did not like to hear this in-no-cent talk, but Gregor thought
about it quite hard and de-cided he would let them know what he
planned with a grand an-nounce-ment of it on Christ-mas day.

That was the sort of totally point-less thing that went through his
mind in his present state, pressed up-right against the door and
listen-ing.  There were times when he simply be-came too tired to
con-tinue listen-ing, when his head would fall wear-ily against the
door and he would pull it up again with a start, as even the
slight-est noise he caused would be heard next door and they would
all go si-lent.  "What's that he's do-ing now", his father would say
after a while, clearly hav-ing gone over to the door, and only then
would the in-ter-rup-ted con-ver-sa-tion slowly be taken up again.

When ex-plain-ing things, his father re-peated him-self sev-eral times,
partly be-cause it was a long time since he had been oc-cu-pied with
these mat-ters him-self and partly be-cause Gregor's mother did not
un-der-stand everything the first time.  From these re-peated ex-plan-a-tions
Gregor learned, to his pleas-ure, that des-pite all their mis-for-tunes
there was still some money avail-able from the old days.  It was not
a lot, but it had not been touched in the mean-time and some in-terest
had ac-cu-mu-lated.  Besides that, they had not been us-ing up all the
money that Gregor had been bring-ing home every month, keep-ing only a
little for him-self, so that that, too, had been ac-cu-mu-lat-ing.
Be-hind the door, Gregor nod-ded with en-thu-si-asm in his pleas-ure at
this un-ex-pec-ted thrift and cau-tion.  He could ac-tu-ally have used
this sur-plus money to re-duce his father's debt to his boss, and the
day when he could have freed him-self from that job would have come
much closer, but now it was cer-tainly bet-ter the way his father had
done things.

This money, how-ever, was cer-tainly not enough to en-able the fam-ily
to live off the in-terest; it was enough to main-tain them for,
per-haps, one or two years, no more.  That's to say, it was money
that should not really be touched but set aside for emer-gen-cies;
money to live on had to be earned.  His father was healthy but old,
and lack-ing in self con-fid-ence.  Dur-ing the five years that he had
not been work-ing - the first hol-i-day in a life that had been full of
strain and no suc-cess - he had put on a lot of weight and be-come
very slow and clumsy.  Would Gregor's eld-erly mother now have to go
and earn money? She suffered from asthma and it was a strain for her
just to move about the home, every other day would be spent
strug-gling for breath on the sofa by the open win-dow.  Would his
sis-ter have to go and earn money? She was still a child of
sev-en-teen, her life up till then had been very en-vi-able, con-sist-ing
of wear-ing nice clothes, sleep-ing late, help-ing out in the busi-ness,
join-ing in with a few mod-est pleas-ures and most of all play-ing the
vi-olin.  Whenever they began to talk of the need to earn money,
Gregor would al-ways first let go of the door and then throw him-self
onto the cool, leather sofa next to it, as he be-came quite hot with
shame and re-gret.

He would of-ten lie there the whole night through, not sleep-ing a
wink but scratch-ing at the leather for hours on end.  Or he might go
to all the ef-fort of push-ing a chair to the win-dow, climb-ing up onto
the sill and, propped up in the chair, lean-ing on the win-dow to
stare out of it.  He had used to feel a great sense of free-dom from
do-ing this, but do-ing it now was ob-vi-ously some-thing more re-membered
than ex-per-i-enced,  as what he ac-tu-ally saw in this way was be-com-ing
less dis-tinct every day, even things that were quite near; he had
used to curse the ever-present view of the hos-pital across the
street, but now he could not see it at all, and if he had not known
that he lived in Char-lot-ten-strasse, which was a quiet street des-pite
be-ing in the middle of the city, he could have thought that he was
look-ing out the win-dow at a bar-ren waste where the grey sky and the
grey earth mingled in-sep-ar-ably.  His ob-ser-v-ant sis-ter only needed to
no-tice the chair twice be-fore she would al-ways push it back to its
ex-act po-s-i-tion by the win-dow after she had ti-died up the room, and
even left the in-ner pane of the win-dow open from then on.

If Gregor had only been able to speak to his sis-ter and thank her
for all that she had to do for him it would have been easier for him
to bear it; but as it was it caused him pain.  His sis-ter,
nat-ur-ally, tried as far as pos-sible to pre-tend there was noth-ing
bur-den-some about it, and the longer it went on, of course, the
bet-ter she was able to do so, but as time went by Gregor was also
able to see through it all so much bet-ter.  It had even be-come very
un-pleas-ant for him, now, whenever she entered the room.  No sooner
had she come in than she would quickly close the door as a
pre-cau-tion so that no-one would have to suf-fer the view into
Gregor's room, then she would go straight to the win-dow and pull it
hur-riedly open al-most as if she were suf-foc-at-ing.  Even if it was
cold, she would stay at the win-dow breath-ing deeply for a little
while.  She would alarm Gregor twice a day with this run-ning about
and noise mak-ing; he would stay un-der the couch shiv-er-ing the whole
while, know-ing full well that she would cer-tainly have liked to
spare him this or-deal, but it was im-possible for her to be in the
same room with him with the win-dows closed.

One day, about a month after Gregor's trans-form-a-tion when his sis-ter
no longer had any par-tic-u-lar reason to be shocked at his ap-pear-ance,
she came into the room a little earlier than usual and found him
still star-ing out the win-dow, mo-tion-less, and just where he would be
most hor-rible.  In it-self, his sis-ter's not com-ing into the room
would have been no sur-prise for Gregor as it would have been
dif-fi-cult for her to im-me-di-ately open the win-dow while he was still
there, but not only did she not come in, she went straight back and
closed the door be-hind her, a stranger would have thought he had
threatened her and tried to bite her.  Gregor went straight to hide
him-self un-der the couch, of course, but he had to wait un-til mid-day
be-fore his sis-ter came back and she seemed much more un-easy than
usual.  It made him real-ise that she still found his ap-pear-ance
un-bear-able and would con-tinue to do so, she prob-ably even had to
over-come the urge to flee when she saw the little bit of him that
pro-truded from un-der the couch.  One day, in or-der to spare her even
this sight, he spent four hours car-ry-ing the bed-sheet over to the
couch on his back and ar-ranged it so that he was com-pletely covered
and his sis-ter would not be able to see him even if she bent down.
If she did not think this sheet was ne-ces-sary then all she had to do
was take it off again, as it was clear enough that it was no
pleas-ure for Gregor to cut him-self off so com-pletely.  She left the
sheet where it was.  Gregor even thought he glimpsed a look of
grat-it-ude one time when he care-fully looked out from un-der the sheet
to see how his sis-ter liked the new ar-range-ment.

For the first four-teen days, Gregor's par-ents could not bring
them-selves to come into the room to see him.  He would of-ten hear
them say how they ap-pre-ci-ated all the new work his sis-ter was do-ing
even though, be-fore, they had seen her as a girl who was some-what
use-less and fre-quently been an-noyed with her.  But now the two of
them, father and mother, would of-ten both wait out-side the door of
Gregor's room while his sis-ter ti-died up in there, and as soon as
she went out again she would have to tell them ex-actly how
everything looked, what Gregor had eaten, how he had be-haved this
time and whether, per-haps, any slight im-prove-ment could be seen.
His mother also wanted to go in and visit Gregor re-l-at-ively soon but
his father and sis-ter at first per-suaded her against it.  Gregor
listened very closely to all this, and ap-proved fully.  Later,
though, she had to be held back by force, which made her call out:
"Let me go and see Gregor, he is my un-for-tu-nate son! Can't you
un-der-stand I have to see him?", and Gregor would think to him-self
that maybe it would be bet-ter if his mother came in, not every day
of course, but one day a week, per-haps; she could un-der-stand
everything much bet-ter than his sis-ter who, for all her cour-age, was
still just a child after all, and really might not have had an
adult's ap-pre-ci-ation of the bur-den-some job she had taken on.

Gregor's wish to see his mother was soon real-ised.  Out of
con-sid-er-a-tion for his par-ents, Gregor wanted to avoid be-ing seen at
the win-dow dur-ing the day, the few square meters of the floor did
not give him much room to crawl about, it was hard to just lie
quietly through the night, his food soon stopped giv-ing him any
pleas-ure at all, and so, to en-ter-tain him-self, he got into the habit
of crawl-ing up and down the walls and ceil-ing.  He was es-pe-cially
fond of hanging from the ceil-ing; it was quite dif-fer-ent from ly-ing
on the floor; he could breathe more freely; his body had a light
swing to it; and up there, re-laxed and al-most happy, it might hap-pen
that he would sur-prise even him-self by let-ting go of the ceil-ing and
land-ing on the floor with a crash.  But now, of course, he had far
bet-ter con-trol of his body than be-fore and, even with a fall as
great as that, caused him-self no dam-age.  Very soon his sis-ter
no-ticed Gregor's new way of en-ter-tain-ing him-self - he had, after
all, left traces of the ad-hes-ive from his feet as he crawled about -
and got it into her head to make it as easy as pos-sible for him by
re-mov-ing the fur-niture that got in his way, es-pe-cially the chest of
draw-ers and the desk.  Now, this was not some-thing that she would be
able to do by her-self; she did not dare to ask for help from her
father; the six-teen year old maid had car-ried on bravely since the
cook had left but she cer-tainly would not have helped in this, she
had even asked to be al-lowed to keep the kit-chen locked at all times
and never to have to open the door un-less it was es-pe-cially
im-port-ant; so his sis-ter had no choice but to choose some time when
Gregor's father was not there and fetch his mother to help her.  As
she ap-proached the room, Gregor could hear his mother ex-press her
joy, but once at the door she went si-lent.  First, of course, his
sis-ter came in and looked round to see that everything in the room
was al-right; and only then did she let her mother enter.  Gregor had
hur-riedly pulled the sheet down lower over the couch and put more
folds into it so that everything really looked as if it had just
been thrown down by chance.  Gregor also re-frained, this time, from
spy-ing out from un-der the sheet; he gave up the chance to see his
mother un-til later and was simply glad that she had come.  "You can
come in, he can't be seen", said his sis-ter, ob-vi-ously lead-ing her
in by the hand.  The old chest of draw-ers was too heavy for a pair
of feeble wo-men to be heav-ing about, but Gregor listened as they
pushed it from its place, his sis-ter al-ways tak-ing on the heav-iest
part of the work for her-self and ig-nor-ing her mother's warn-ings that
she would strain her-self.  This las-ted a very long time.  After
la-bour-ing at it for fif-teen minutes or more his mother said it would
be bet-ter to leave the chest where it was, for one thing it was too
heavy for them to get the job fin-ished be-fore Gregor's father got
home and leav-ing it in the middle of the room it would be in his way
even more, and for an-other thing it wasn't even sure that tak-ing the
fur-niture away would really be any help to him.  She thought just
the op-pos-ite; the sight of the bare walls saddened her right to her
heart; and why wouldn't Gregor feel the same way about it, he'd been
used to this fur-niture in his room for a long time and it would make
him feel aban-doned to be in an empty room like that.  Then, quietly,
al-most whis-per-ing as if want-ing Gregor (whose where-abouts she did
not know) to hear not even the tone of her voice, as she was
con-vinced that he did not un-der-stand her words, she ad-ded "and by
tak-ing the fur-niture away, won't it seem like we're show-ing that
we've given up all hope of im-prove-ment and we're abandon-ing him to
cope for him-self? I think it'd be best to leave the room ex-actly the
way it was be-fore so that when Gregor comes back to us again he'll
find everything un-changed and he'll be able to for-get the time in
between all the easier".

Hear-ing these words from his mother made Gregor real-ise that the
lack of any dir-ect hu-man com-mu-nic-a-tion, along with the mono-ton-ous
life led by the fam-ily dur-ing these two months, must have made him
con-fused - he could think of no other way of ex-plain-ing to him-self
why he had ser-i-ously wanted his room emp-tied out.  Had he really
wanted to trans-form his room into a cave, a warm room fit-ted out
with the nice fur-niture he had in-her-ited? That would have let him
crawl around un-im-peded in any dir-ec-tion, but it would also have let
him quickly for-get his past when he had still been hu-man.  He had
come very close to for-get-ting, and it had only been the voice of his
mother, un-heard for so long, that had shaken him out of it.  Noth-ing
should be re-moved; everything had to stay; he could not do without
the good in-flu-ence the fur-niture had on his con-di-tion; and if the
fur-niture made it dif-fi-cult for him to crawl about mind-lessly that
was not a loss but a great ad-vant-age.

His sis-ter, un-for-tu-nately, did not agree; she had be-come used to the
idea, not without reason, that she was Gregor's spokes-man to his
par-ents about the things that con-cerned him.  This meant that his
mother's ad-vice now was suf-fi-cient reason for her to in-sist on
re-mov-ing not only the chest of draw-ers and the desk, as she had
thought at first, but all the fur-niture apart from the all-im-port-ant
couch.  It was more than child-ish per-versity, of course, or the
un-ex-pec-ted con-fid-ence she had re-cently ac-quired, that made her
in-sist; she had in-deed no-ticed that Gregor needed a lot of room to
crawl about in, whereas the fur-niture, as far as any-one could see,
was of no use to him at all.  Girls of that age, though, do be-come
en-thu-si-astic about things and feel they must get their way whenever
they can.  Per-haps this was what temp-ted Grete to make Gregor's
situ-ation seem even more shock-ing than it was so that she could do
even more for him.  Grete would prob-ably be the only one who would
dare enter a room dom-in-ated by Gregor crawl-ing about the bare walls
by him-self.

So she re-fused to let her mother dis-suade her.  Gregor's mother
already looked un-easy in his room, she soon stopped speak-ing and
helped Gregor's sis-ter to get the chest of draw-ers out with what
strength she had.  The chest of draw-ers was some-thing that Gregor
could do without if he had to, but the writ-ing desk had to stay.
Hardly had the two wo-men pushed the chest of draw-ers, groan-ing, out
of the room than Gregor poked his head out from un-der the couch to
see what he could do about it.  He meant to be as care-ful and
con-sid-er-ate as he could, but, un-for-tu-nately, it was his mother who
came back first while Grete in the next room had her arms round the
chest, push-ing and pulling at it from side to side by her-self
without, of course, mov-ing it an inch.  His mother was not used to
the sight of Gregor, he might have made her ill, so Gregor hur-ried
back-wards to the far end of the couch.  In his star-tle-ment, though,
he was not able to pre-vent the sheet at its front from mov-ing a
little.  It was enough to at-tract his mother's at-ten-tion.  She stood
very still, re-mained there a mo-ment, and then went back out to
Grete.

Gregor kept try-ing to as-sure him-self that noth-ing un-usual was
hap-pen-ing, it was just a few pieces of fur-niture be-ing moved after
all, but he soon had to ad-mit that the wo-men go-ing to and fro, their
little calls to each other, the scrap-ing of the fur-niture on the
floor, all these things made him feel as if he were be-ing as-sailed
from all sides.  With his head and legs pulled in against him and
his body pressed to the floor, he was forced to ad-mit to him-self
that he could not stand all of this much longer.  They were empty-ing
his room out; tak-ing away everything that was dear to him; they had
already taken out the chest con-tain-ing his fret-saw and other tools;
now they threatened to re-move the writ-ing desk with its place
clearly worn into the floor, the desk where he had done his home-work
as a busi-ness trainee, at high school, even while he had been at
in-fant school--he really could not wait any longer to see whether
the two wo-men's in-ten-tions were good.  He had nearly for-got-ten they
were there any-way, as they were now too tired to say any-thing while
they worked and he could only hear their feet as they stepped
heav-ily on the floor.

So, while the wo-men were leant against the desk in the other room
catch-ing their breath, he sal-lied out, changed dir-ec-tion four times
not know-ing what he should save first be-fore his at-ten-tion was
sud-denly caught by the pic-ture on the wall - which was already
de-nuded of everything else that had been on it - of the lady dressed
in co-pi-ous fur.  He hur-ried up onto the pic-ture and pressed him-self
against its glass, it held him firmly and felt good on his hot
belly.  This pic-ture at least, now totally covered by Gregor, would
cer-tainly be taken away by no-one.  He turned his head to face the
door into the liv-ing room so that he could watch the wo-men when they
came back.

They had not al-lowed them-selves a long rest and came back quite
soon; Grete had put her arm around her mother and was nearly
car-ry-ing her.  "What shall we take now, then?", said Grete and
looked around.  Her eyes met those of Gregor on the wall.  Per-haps
only be-cause her mother was there, she re-mained calm, bent her face
to her so that she would not look round and said, al-beit hur-riedly
and with a tremor in her voice: "Come on, let's go back in the
liv-ing room for a while?"  Gregor could see what Grete had in mind,
she wanted to take her mother some-where safe and then chase him down
from the wall.  Well, she could cer-tainly try it! He sat un-yield-ing
on his pic-ture.  He would rather jump at Grete's face.

But Grete's words had made her mother quite wor-ried, she stepped to
one side, saw the enorm-ous brown patch against the flowers of the
wall-pa-per, and be-fore she even real-ised it was Gregor that she saw
screamed: "Oh God, oh God!"  Arms out-stretched, she fell onto the
couch as if she had given up everything and stayed there im-mob-ile.
"Gregor!" shouted his sis-ter, glower-ing at him and shak-ing her fist.
 That was the first word she had spoken to him dir-ectly since his
trans-form-a-tion.  She ran into the other room to fetch some kind of
smelling salts to bring her mother out of her faint; Gregor wanted
to help too - he could save his pic-ture later, al-though he stuck
fast to the glass and had to pull him-self off by force; then he,
too, ran into the next room as if he could ad-vise his sis-ter like in
the old days; but he had to just stand be-hind her do-ing noth-ing; she
was look-ing into vari-ous bottles, he startled her when she turned
round; a bottle fell to the ground and broke; a splinter cut
Gregor's face, some kind of caustic medi-cine splashed all over him;
now, without delay-ing any longer, Grete took hold of all the bottles
she could and ran with them in to her mother; she slammed the door
shut with her foot.  So now Gregor was shut out from his mother,
who, be-cause of him, might be near to death; he could not open the
door if he did not want to chase his sis-ter away, and she had to
stay with his mother; there was noth-ing for him to do but wait; and,
op-pressed with anxi-ety and self-re-proach, he began to crawl about,
he crawled over everything, walls, fur-niture, ceil-ing, and fi-nally
in his con-fu-sion as the whole room began to spin around him he fell
down into the middle of the din-ner table.

He lay there for a while, numb and im-mob-ile, all around him it was
quiet, maybe that was a good sign.  Then there was someone at the
door.  The maid, of course, had locked her-self in her kit-chen so
that Grete would have to go and an-swer it.  His father had ar-rived
home.  "What's happened?" were his first words; Grete's ap-pear-ance
must have made everything clear to him.  She answered him with
sub-dued voice, and openly pressed her face into his chest: "Mother's
fain-ted, but she's bet-ter now.  Gregor got out."  "Just as I
ex-pec-ted", said his father, "just as I al-ways said, but you wo-men
wouldn't listen, would you."  It was clear to Gregor that Grete had
not said enough and that his father took it to mean that some-thing
bad had happened, that he was re-spons-ible for some act of vi-ol-ence.
That meant Gregor would now have to try to calm his father, as he
did not have the time to ex-plain things to him even if that had been
pos-sible.  So he fled to the door of his room and pressed him-self
against it so that his father, when he came in from the hall, could
see straight away that Gregor had the best in-ten-tions and would go
back into his room without delay, that it would not be ne-ces-sary to
drive him back but that they had only to open the door and he would
dis-ap-pear.

His father, though, was not in the mood to no-tice sub-tleties like
that; "Ah!", he shouted as he came in, sound-ing as if he were both
angry and glad at the same time.  Gregor drew his head back from the
door and lif-ted it to-wards his father.  He really had not ima-gined
his father the way he stood there now; of late, with his new habit
of crawl-ing about, he had neg-lected to pay at-ten-tion to what was
go-ing on the rest of the flat the way he had done be-fore.  He really
ought to have ex-pec-ted things to have changed, but still, still, was
that really his father? The same tired man as used to be lay-ing
there en-tombed in his bed when Gregor came back from his busi-ness
trips, who would re-ceive him sit-ting in the arm-chair in his
night-gown when he came back in the even-ings; who was hardly even
able to stand up but, as a sign of his pleas-ure, would just raise
his arms and who, on the couple of times a year when they went for a
walk to-gether on a Sunday or pub-lic hol-i-day wrapped up tightly in
his over-coat between Gregor and his mother, would al-ways la-bour his
way for-ward a little more slowly than them, who were already walk-ing
slowly for his sake; who would place his stick down care-fully and,
if he wanted to say some-thing would in-vari-ably stop and gather his
com-pan-ions around him.  He was stand-ing up straight enough now;
dressed in a smart blue uni-form with gold but-tons, the sort worn by
the em-ploy-ees at the bank-ing in-sti-tute; above the high, stiff col-lar
of the coat his strong double-chin emerged; un-der the bushy
eye-brows, his pier-cing, dark eyes looked out fresh and alert; his
nor-mally un-kempt white hair was combed down pain-fully close to his
scalp.  He took his cap, with its gold mono-gram from, prob-ably, some
bank, and threw it in an arc right across the room onto the sofa,
put his hands in his trouser pock-ets, push-ing back the bot-tom of his
long uni-form coat, and, with look of de-term-in-a-tion, walked to-wards
Gregor.  He prob-ably did not even know him-self what he had in mind,
but non-ethe-less lif-ted his feet un-usu-ally high.  Gregor was amazed
at the enorm-ous size of the soles of his boots, but wasted no time
with that - he knew full well, right from the first day of his new
life, that his father thought it ne-ces-sary to al-ways be ex-tremely
strict with him.  And so he ran up to his father, stopped when his
father stopped, scur-ried for-wards again when he moved, even
slightly.  In this way they went round the room sev-eral times
without any-thing de-cis-ive hap-pen-ing, without even giv-ing the
im-pres-sion of a chase as everything went so slowly.  Gregor re-mained
all this time on the floor, largely be-cause he feared his father
might see it as es-pe-cially pro-vok-ing if he fled onto the wall or
ceil-ing.  Whatever he did, Gregor had to ad-mit that he cer-tainly
would not be able to keep up this run-ning about for long, as for
each step his father took he had to carry out count-less move-ments.
He be-came no-tice-ably short of breath, even in his earlier life his
lungs had not been very re-li-able.  Now, as he lurched about in his
ef-forts to muster all the strength he could for run-ning he could
hardly keep his eyes open; his thoughts be-came too slow for him to
think of any other way of sav-ing him-self than run-ning; he al-most
for-got that the walls were there for him to use al-though, here, they
were con-cealed be-hind care-fully carved fur-niture full of notches and
pro-tru-sions - then, right be-side him, lightly tossed, some-thing flew
down and rolled in front of him.  It was an apple; then an-other one
im-me-di-ately flew at him; Gregor froze in shock; there was no longer
any point in run-ning as his father had de-cided to bom-bard him.  He
had filled his pock-ets with fruit from the bowl on the side-board and
now, without even tak-ing the time for care-ful aim, threw one apple
after an-other.  These little, red apples rolled about on the floor,
knock-ing into each other as if they had elec-tric mo-tors.  An apple
thrown without much force glanced against Gregor's back and slid off
without do-ing any harm.  Another one how-ever, im-me-di-ately fol-low-ing
it, hit squarely and lodged in his back; Gregor wanted to drag
him-self away, as if he could re-move the sur-pris-ing, the in-cred-ible
pain by chan-ging his po-s-i-tion; but he felt as if nailed to the spot
and spread him-self out, all his senses in con-fu-sion.  The last thing
he saw was the door of his room be-ing pulled open, his sis-ter was
scream-ing, his mother ran out in front of her in her blouse (as his
sis-ter had taken off some of her clothes after she had fain-ted to
make it easier for her to breathe), she ran to his father, her
skirts un-fastened and slid-ing one after an-other to the ground,
stum-bling over the skirts she pushed her-self to his father, her arms
around him, unit-ing her-self with him totally - now Gregor lost his
abil-ity to see any-thing - her hands be-hind his father's head beg-ging
him to spare Gregor's life.



III


No-one dared to re-move the apple lodged in Gregor's flesh, so it
re-mained there as a vis-ible re-minder of his in-jury.  He had suffered
it there for more than a month, and his con-di-tion seemed ser-i-ous
enough to re-mind even his father that Gregor, des-pite his cur-rent
sad and re-volt-ing form, was a fam-ily mem-ber who could not be treated
as an en-emy.  On the con-trary, as a fam-ily there was a duty to
swal-low any re-vul-sion for him and to be pa-tient, just to be pa-tient.

Be-cause of his in-jur-ies, Gregor had lost much of his mo-bil-ity -
prob-ably per-man-ently.  He had been re-duced to the con-di-tion of an
an-cient in-valid and it took him long, long minutes to crawl across
his room - crawl-ing over the ceil-ing was out of the ques-tion - but
this de-teri-or-a-tion in his con-di-tion was fully (in his opin-ion) made
up for by the door to the liv-ing room be-ing left open every even-ing.
 He got into the habit of closely watch-ing it for one or two hours
be-fore it was opened and then, ly-ing in the dark-ness of his room
where he could not be seen from the liv-ing room, he could watch the
fam-ily in the light of the din-ner table and listen to their
con-ver-sa-tion - with every-one's per-mis-sion, in a way, and thus quite
dif-fer-ently from be-fore.

They no longer held the lively con-ver-sa-tions of earlier times, of
course, the ones that Gregor al-ways thought about with long-ing when
he was tired and get-ting into the damp bed in some small hotel room.
 All of them were usu-ally very quiet nowadays.  Soon after din-ner,
his father would go to sleep in his chair; his mother and sis-ter
would urge each other to be quiet; his mother, bent deeply un-der the
lamp, would sew fancy un-der-wear for a fash-ion shop; his sis-ter, who
had taken a sales job, learned short-hand and French in the even-ings
so that she might be able to get a bet-ter po-s-i-tion later on.
So-me-times his father would wake up and say to Gregor's mother
"you're do-ing so much sew-ing again today!", as if he did not know
that he had been doz-ing - and then he would go back to sleep again
while mother and sis-ter would ex-change a tired grin.

With a kind of stub-born-ness, Gregor's father re-fused to take his
uni-form off even at home; while his night-gown hung un-used on its peg
Gregor's father would slum-ber where he was, fully dressed, as if
al-ways ready to serve and ex-pect-ing to hear the voice of his
su-per-ior even here.  The uni-form had not been new to start with, but
as a res-ult of this it slowly be-came even shab-bier des-pite the
ef-forts of Gregor's mother and sis-ter to look after it.  Gregor
would of-ten spend the whole even-ing look-ing at all the stains on
this coat, with its gold but-tons al-ways kept pol-ished and shiny,
while the old man in it would sleep, highly un-com-fort-able but
peace-ful.

As soon as it struck ten, Gregor's mother would speak gently to his
father to wake him and try to per-suade him to go to bed, as he
couldn't sleep prop-erly where he was and he really had to get his
sleep if he was to be up at six to get to work.  But since he had
been in work he had be-come more ob-stin-ate and would al-ways in-sist on
stay-ing longer at the table, even though he reg-u-larly fell asleep
and it was then harder than ever to per-suade him to ex-change the
chair for his bed.  Then, how-ever much mother and sis-ter would
im-por-tune him with little re-proaches and warn-ings he would keep
slowly shak-ing his head for a quarter of an hour with his eyes
closed and re-fus-ing to get up.  Gregor's mother would tug at his
sleeve, whis-per en-dear-ments into his ear, Gregor's sis-ter would
leave her work to help her mother, but noth-ing would have any ef-fect
on him.  He would just sink deeper into his chair.  Only when the
two wo-men took him un-der the arms he would ab-ruptly open his eyes,
look at them one after the other and say: "What a life! This is what
peace I get in my old age!"  And sup-por-ted by the two wo-men he would
lift him-self up care-fully as if he were car-ry-ing the greatest load
him-self, let the wo-men take him to the door, send them off and carry
on by him-self while Gregor's mother would throw down her needle and
his sis-ter her pen so that they could run after his father and
con-tinue be-ing of help to him.

Who, in this tired and over-worked fam-ily, would have had time to
give more at-ten-tion to Gregor than was ab-so-lutely ne-ces-sary? The
house-hold budget be-came even smal-ler; so now the maid was dis-missed;
an enorm-ous, thick-boned char-wo-man with white hair that flapped
around her head came every morn-ing and even-ing to do the heav-iest
work; everything else was looked after by Gregor's mother on top of
the large amount of sew-ing work she did.  Gregor even learned,
listen-ing to the even-ing con-ver-sa-tion about what price they had
hoped for, that sev-eral items of jew-ellery be-long-ing to the fam-ily
had been sold, even though both mother and sis-ter had been very fond
of wear-ing them at func-tions and cel-eb-ra-tions.  But the loudest
com-plaint was that al-though the flat was much too big for their
present cir-cum-stances, they could not move out of it, there was no
ima-gin-able way of trans-fer-ring Gregor to the new ad-dress.  He could
see quite well, though, that there were more reas-ons than
con-sid-er-a-tion for him that made it dif-fi-cult for them to move, it
would have been quite easy to trans-port him in any suit-able crate
with a few air holes in it; the main thing hold-ing the fam-ily back
from their de-cision to move was much more to do with their total
des-pair, and the thought that they had been struck with a mis-for-tune
un-like any-thing ex-per-i-enced by any-one else they knew or were re-lated
to.  They car-ried out ab-so-lutely everything that the world ex-pects
from poor people, Gregor's father brought bank em-ploy-ees their
break-fast, his mother sac-ri-ficed her-self by wash-ing clothes for
strangers, his sis-ter ran back and forth be-hind her desk at the
be-hest of the cus-tom-ers, but they just did not have the strength to
do any more.  And the in-jury in Gregor's back began to hurt as much
as when it was new.  After they had come back from tak-ing his father
to bed Gregor's mother and sis-ter would now leave their work where
it was and sit close to-gether, cheek to cheek; his mother would
point to Gregor's room and say "Close that door, Grete", and then,
when he was in the dark again, they would sit in the next room and
their tears would mingle, or they would simply sit there star-ing
dry-eyed at the table.

Gregor hardly slept at all, either night or day.  So-me-times he would
think of tak-ing over the fam-ily's af-fairs, just like be-fore, the
next time the door was opened; he had long for-got-ten about his boss
and the chief clerk, but they would ap-pear again in his thoughts,
the sales-men and the ap-pren-tices, that stu-pid te-a-boy, two or three
friends from other busi-nesses, one of the cham-ber-maids from a
pro-vin-cial hotel, a tender memory that ap-peared and dis-ap-peared
again, a cash-ier from a hat shop for whom his at-ten-tion had been
ser-i-ous but too slow, - all of them ap-peared to him, mixed to-gether
with strangers and oth-ers he had for-got-ten, but in-stead of help-ing
him and his fam-ily they were all of them in-ac-cess-ible, and he was
glad when they dis-ap-peared.  Other times he was not at all in the
mood to look after his fam-ily, he was filled with simple rage about
the lack of at-ten-tion he was shown, and al-though he could think of
noth-ing he would have wanted, he made plans of how he could get into
the pantry where he could take all the things he was en-titled to,
even if he was not hungry.  Gregor's sis-ter no longer thought about
how she could please him but would hur-riedly push some food or other
into his room with her foot be-fore she rushed out to work in the
morn-ing and at mid-day, and in the even-ing she would sweep it away
again with the broom, in-dif-fer-ent as to whether it had been eaten or
- more of-ten than not - had been left totally un-touched.  She still
cleared up the room in the even-ing, but now she could not have been
any quicker about it.  Smears of dirt were left on the walls, here
and there were little balls of dust and filth.  At first, Gregor
went into one of the worst of these places when his sis-ter ar-rived
as a re-proach to her, but he could have stayed there for weeks
without his sis-ter do-ing any-thing about it; she could see the dirt
as well as he could but she had simply de-cided to leave him to it.
At the same time she be-came touchy in a way that was quite new for
her and which every-one in the fam-ily un-der-stood - clean-ing up
Gregor's room was for her and her alone.  Gregor's mother did once
thor-oughly clean his room, and needed to use sev-eral buck-et-fuls of
wa-ter to do it - al-though that much damp-ness also made Gregor ill
and he lay flat on the couch, bit-ter and im-mob-ile.  But his mother
was to be pun-ished still more for what she had done, as hardly had
his sis-ter ar-rived home in the even-ing than she no-ticed the change
in Gregor's room and, highly ag-grieved, ran back into the liv-ing
room where, des-pite her moth-ers raised and im-plor-ing hands, she
broke into con-vuls-ive tears.  Her father, of course, was startled
out of his chair and the two par-ents looked on as-ton-ished and
help-less; then they, too, be-came agit-ated; Gregor's father, stand-ing
to the right of his mother, ac-cused her of not leav-ing the clean-ing
of Gregor's room to his sis-ter; from her left, Gregor's sis-ter
screamed at her that she was never to clean Gregor's room again;
while his mother tried to draw his father, who was be-side him-self
with an-ger, into the bed-room; his sis-ter, quak-ing with tears,
thumped on the table with her small fists; and Gregor hissed in
an-ger that no-one had even thought of clos-ing the door to save him
the sight of this and all its noise.

Gregor's sis-ter was ex-hausted from go-ing out to work, and look-ing
after Gregor as she had done be-fore was even more work for her, but
even so his mother ought cer-tainly not to have taken her place.
Gregor, on the other hand, ought not to be neg-lected.  Now, though,
the char-wo-man was here.  This eld-erly widow, with a ro-bust bone
struc-ture that made her able to with-stand the hard-est of things in
her long life, wasn't really re-pelled by Gregor.  Just by chance one
day, rather than any real curi-os-ity, she opened the door to Gregor's
room and found her-self face to face with him.  He was taken totally
by sur-prise, no-one was chas-ing him but he began to rush to and fro
while she just stood there in amazement with her hands crossed in
front of her.  From then on she never failed to open the door
slightly every even-ing and morn-ing and look briefly in on him.  At
first she would call to him as she did so with words that she
prob-ably con-sidered friendly, such as "come on then, you old
dung-beetle!", or "look at the old dung-beetle there!"  Gregor never
re-spon-ded to be-ing spoken to in that way, but just re-mained where he
was without mov-ing as if the door had never even been opened.  If
only they had told this char-wo-man to clean up his room every day
in-stead of let-ting her dis-turb him for no reason whenever she felt
like it! One day, early in the morn-ing while a heavy rain struck the
win-dowpanes, per-haps in-dic-at-ing that spring was com-ing, she began to
speak to him in that way once again.  Gregor was so re-sent-ful of it
that he star-ted to move to-ward her, he was slow and in-firm, but it
was like a kind of at-tack.  In-stead of be-ing afraid, the char-wo-man
just lif-ted up one of the chairs from near the door and stood there
with her mouth open, clearly in-tend-ing not to close her mouth un-til
the chair in her hand had been slammed down into Gregor's back.
"Aren't you com-ing any closer, then?", she asked when Gregor turned
round again, and she calmly put the chair back in the corner.

Gregor had al-most en-tirely stopped eat-ing.  Only if he happened to
find him-self next to the food that had been pre-pared for him he
might take some of it into his mouth to play with it, leave it there
a few hours and then, more of-ten than not, spit it out again.  At
first he thought it was dis-tress at the state of his room that
stopped him eat-ing, but he had soon got used to the changes made
there.  They had got into the habit of put-ting things into this room
that they had no room for any-where else, and there were now many
such things as one of the rooms in the flat had been ren-ted out to
three gen-tle-men.  These earn-est gen-tle-men - all three of them had
full beards, as Gregor learned peer-ing through the crack in the door
one day - were pain-fully in-sist-ent on things' be-ing tidy.  This
meant not only in their own room but, since they had taken a room in
this es-tab-lish-ment, in the en-tire flat and es-pe-cially in the
kit-chen.  Un-ne-ces-sary clut-ter was some-thing they could not tol-er-ate,
es-pe-cially if it was dirty.  They had moreover brought most of their
own fur-nish-ings and equip-ment with them.  For this reason, many
things had be-come su-per-flu-ous which, al-though they could not be
sold, the fam-ily did not wish to dis-card.  All these things found
their way into Gregor's room.  The dust-bins from the kit-chen found
their way in there too.  The char-wo-man was al-ways in a hurry, and
any-thing she couldn't use for the time be-ing she would just chuck in
there.  He, for-tu-nately, would usu-ally see no more than the ob-ject
and the hand that held it.  The wo-man most likely meant to fetch the
things back out again when she had time and the op-por-tun-ity, or to
throw everything out in one go, but what ac-tu-ally happened was that
they were left where they landed when they had first been thrown
un-less Gregor made his way through the junk and moved it some-where
else.  At first he moved it be-cause, with no other room free where
he could crawl about, he was forced to, but later on he came to
en-joy it al-though mov-ing about in that way left him sad and tired to
death, and he would re-main im-mob-ile for hours af-ter-wards.

The gen-tle-men who ren-ted the room would some-times take their even-ing
meal at home in the liv-ing room that was used by every-one, and so
the door to this room was of-ten kept closed in the even-ing.  But
Gregor found it easy to give up hav-ing the door open, he had, after
all, of-ten failed to make use of it when it was open and, without
the fam-ily hav-ing no-ticed it, lain in his room in its darkest
corner.  One time, though, the char-wo-man left the door to the liv-ing
room slightly open, and it re-mained open when the gen-tle-men who
ren-ted the room came in in the even-ing and the light was put on.
They sat up at the table where, formerly, Gregor had taken his meals
with his father and mother, they un-fol-ded the ser-vi-ettes and picked
up their knives and forks.  Gregor's mother im-me-di-ately ap-peared in
the door-way with a dish of meat and soon be-hind her came his sis-ter
with a dish piled high with pota-toes.  The food was steam-ing, and
filled the room with its smell.  The gen-tle-men bent over the dishes
set in front of them as if they wanted to test the food be-fore
eat-ing it, and the gen-tle-man in the middle, who seemed to count as
an au-thor-ity for the other two, did in-deed cut off a piece of meat
while it was still in its dish, clearly wish-ing to es-tab-lish whether
it was suf-fi-ciently cooked or whether it should be sent back to the
kit-chen.  It was to his sat-is-fac-tion, and Gregor's mother and
sis-ter, who had been look-ing on anxiously, began to breathe again
and smiled.

The fam-ily them-selves ate in the kit-chen.  Non-ethe-less, Gregor's
father came into the liv-ing room be-fore he went into the kit-chen,
bowed once with his cap in his hand and did his round of the table.
The gen-tle-men stood as one, and mumbled some-thing into their beards.
 Then, once they were alone, they ate in near per-fect si-lence.  It
seemed re-mark-able to Gregor that above all the vari-ous noises of
eat-ing their chew-ing teeth could still be heard, as if they had
wanted to show Gregor that you need teeth in or-der to eat and it was
not pos-sible to per-form any-thing with jaws that are tooth-less
how-ever nice they might be.  "I'd like to eat some-thing", said
Gregor anxiously, "but not any-thing like they're eat-ing.  They do
feed them-selves.  And here I am, dy-ing!"

Throughout all this time, Gregor could not re-mem-ber hav-ing heard the
vi-olin be-ing played, but this even-ing it began to be heard from the
kit-chen.  The three gen-tle-men had already fin-ished their meal, the
one in the middle had pro-duced a news-pa-per, given a page to each of
the oth-ers, and now they leant back in their chairs read-ing them and
smoking.  When the vi-olin began play-ing they be-came at-tent-ive, stood
up and went on tip-toe over to the door of the hall-way where they
stood pressed against each other.  Someone must have heard them in
the kit-chen, as Gregor's father called out: "Is the play-ing per-haps
un-pleas-ant for the gen-tle-men? We can stop it straight away."  "On
the con-trary", said the middle gen-tle-man, "would the young lady not
like to come in and play for us here in the room, where it is, after
all, much more cosy and com-fort-able?"  "Oh yes, we'd love to",
called back Gregor's father as if he had been the vi-olin player
him-self.  The gen-tle-men stepped back into the room and waited.
Gregor's father soon ap-peared with the mu-sic stand, his mother with
the mu-sic and his sis-ter with the vi-olin.  She calmly pre-pared
everything for her to be-gin play-ing; his par-ents, who had never
ren-ted a room out be-fore and there-fore showed an ex-ag-ger-ated
cour-tesy to-wards the three gen-tle-men, did not even dare to sit on
their own chairs; his father leant against the door with his right
hand pushed in between two but-tons on his uni-form coat; his mother,
though, was offered a seat by one of the gen-tle-men and sat - leav-ing
the chair where the gen-tle-man happened to have placed it - out of
the way in a corner.

His sis-ter began to play; father and mother paid close at-ten-tion,
one on each side, to the move-ments of her hands.  Drawn in by the
play-ing, Gregor had dared to come for-ward a little and already had
his head in the liv-ing room.  Be-fore, he had taken great pride in
how con-sid-er-ate he was but now it hardly oc-curred to him that he had
be-come so thought-less about the oth-ers.  What's more, there was now
all the more reason to keep him-self hid-den as he was covered in the
dust that lay every-where in his room and flew up at the slight-est
move-ment; he car-ried threads, hairs, and re-mains of food about on
his back and sides; he was much too in-dif-fer-ent to everything now to
lay on his back and wipe him-self on the car-pet like he had used to
do sev-eral times a day.  And des-pite this con-di-tion, he was not too
shy to move for-ward a little onto the im-macu-late floor of the liv-ing
room.

No-one no-ticed him, though.  The fam-ily was totally pre-oc-cu-pied with
the vi-olin play-ing; at first, the three gen-tle-men had put their
hands in their pock-ets and come up far too close be-hind the mu-sic
stand to look at all the notes be-ing played, and they must have
dis-turbed Gregor's sis-ter, but soon, in con-trast with the fam-ily,
they  with-drew back to the win-dow with their heads sunk and talk-ing
to each other at half volume, and they stayed by the win-dow while
Gregor's father ob-served them anxiously.  It really now seemed very
ob-vi-ous that they had ex-pec-ted to hear some beau-ti-ful or
en-ter-tain-ing vi-olin play-ing but had been dis-ap-poin-ted, that they had
had enough of the whole per-form-ance and it was only now out of
po-lite-ness that they al-lowed their peace to be dis-turbed.  It was
es-pe-cially un-nerv-ing, the way they all blew the smoke from their
ci-gar-ettes up-wards from their mouth and noses.  Yet Gregor's sis-ter
was play-ing so beau-ti-fully.  Her face was leant to one side,
fol-low-ing the lines of mu-sic with a care-ful and mel-an-choly
ex-pres-sion.  Gregor crawled a little fur-ther for-ward, keep-ing his
head close to the ground so that he could meet her eyes if the
chance came.  Was he an an-imal if mu-sic could cap-tiv-ate him so? It
seemed to him that he was be-ing shown the way to the un-known
nour-ish-ment he had been yearn-ing for.  He was de-term-ined to make his
way for-ward to his sis-ter and tug at her skirt to show her she might
come into his room with her vi-olin, as no-one ap-pre-ci-ated her
play-ing here as much as he would.  He never wanted to let her out of
his room, not while he lived, any-way; his shock-ing ap-pear-ance
should, for once, be of some use to him; he wanted to be at every
door of his room at once to hiss and spit at the at-tack-ers; his
sis-ter should not be forced to stay with him, though, but stay of
her own free will; she would sit be-side him on the couch with her
ear bent down to him while he told her how he had al-ways in-ten-ded to
send her to the con-ser-vat-ory, how he would have told every-one about
it last Christ-mas - had Christ-mas really come and gone already? - if
this mis-for-tune hadn't got in the way, and re-fuse to let any-one
dis-suade him from it.  On hear-ing all this, his sis-ter would break
out in tears of emo-tion, and Gregor would climb up to her shoulder
and kiss her neck, which, since she had been go-ing out to work, she
had kept free without any neck-lace or col-lar.

"Mr. Samsa!", shouted the middle gen-tle-man to Gregor's father,
point-ing, without wast-ing any more words, with his fore-finger at
Gregor as he slowly moved for-ward.  The vi-olin went si-lent, the
middle of the three gen-tle-men first smiled at his two friends,
shak-ing his head, and then looked back at Gregor.  His father seemed
to think it more im-port-ant to calm the three gen-tle-men be-fore
driv-ing Gregor out, even though they were not at all up-set and
seemed to think Gregor was more en-ter-tain-ing than the vi-olin play-ing
had been.  He rushed up to them with his arms spread out and
at-temp-ted to drive them back into their room at the same time as
try-ing to block their view of Gregor with his body.  Now they did
be-come a little an-noyed, and it was not clear whether it was his
father's be-ha-viour that an-noyed them or the dawn-ing real-isa-tion that
they had had a neigh-bour like Gregor in the next room without
know-ing it.  They asked Gregor's father for ex-plan-a-tions, raised
their arms like he had, tugged ex-citedly at their beards and moved
back to-wards their room only very slowly.  Mean-while Gregor's sis-ter
had over-come the des-pair she had fallen into when her play-ing was
sud-denly in-ter-rup-ted.  She had let her hands drop and let vi-olin and
bow hang limply for a while but con-tin-ued to look at the mu-sic as if
still play-ing, but then she sud-denly pulled her-self to-gether, lay
the in-stru-ment on her mother's lap who still sat la-bor-i-ously
strug-gling for breath where she was, and ran into the next room
which, un-der pres-sure from her father, the three gen-tle-men were more
quickly mov-ing to-ward.  Under his sis-ter's ex-per-i-enced hand, the
pil-lows and cov-ers on the beds flew up and were put into or-der and
she had already fin-ished mak-ing the beds and slipped out again
be-fore the three gen-tle-men had reached the room.  Gregor's father
seemed so ob-sessed with what he was do-ing that he for-got all the
re-spect he owed to his ten-ants.  He urged them and pressed them
un-til, when he was already at the door of the room, the middle of
the three gen-tle-men shouted like thun-der and stamped his foot and
thereby brought Gregor's father to a halt.  "I de-clare here and
now", he said, rais-ing his hand and glan-cing at Gregor's mother and
sis-ter to gain their at-ten-tion too, "that with re-gard to the
re-pug-nant con-di-tions that pre-vail in this flat and with this fam-ily"
- here he looked briefly but de-cis-ively at the floor - "I give
im-me-di-ate no-tice on my room.  For the days that I have been liv-ing
here I will, of course, pay noth-ing at all, on the con-trary I will
con-sider whether to pro-ceed with some kind of ac-tion for dam-ages
from you, and be-lieve me it would be very easy to set out the
grounds for such an ac-tion."  He was si-lent and looked straight
ahead as if wait-ing for some-thing.  And in-deed, his two friends
joined in with the words: "And we also give im-me-di-ate no-tice."  With
that, he took hold of the door handle and slammed the door.

Gregor's father staggered back to his seat, feel-ing his way with his
hands, and fell into it; it looked as if he was stretch-ing him-self
out for his usual even-ing nap but from the un-con-trolled way his head
kept nod-ding it could be seen that he was not sleep-ing at all.
Throughout all this, Gregor had lain still where the three gen-tle-men
had first seen him.  His dis-ap-point-ment at the fail-ure of his plan,
and per-haps also be-cause he was weak from hun-ger, made it im-possible
for him to move.  He was sure that every-one would turn on him any
mo-ment, and he waited.  He was not even startled out of this state
when the vi-olin on his mother's lap fell from her trem-bling fin-gers
and landed loudly on the floor.

"Father, Mother", said his sis-ter, hit-ting the table with her hand
as in-tro-duc-tion, "we can't carry on like this.  Maybe you can't see
it, but I can.  I don't want to call this mon-ster my brother, all I
can say is: we have to try and get rid of it.  We've done all that's
hu-manly pos-sible to look after it and be pa-tient, I don't think
any-one could ac-cuse us of do-ing any-thing wrong."

"She's ab-so-lutely right", said Gregor's father to him-self.  His
mother, who still had not had time to catch her breath, began to
cough dully, her hand held out in front of her and a de-ranged
ex-pres-sion in her eyes.

Gregor's sis-ter rushed to his mother and put her hand on her
fore-head.  Her words seemed to give Gregor's father some more
def-in-ite ideas.  He sat up-right, played with his uni-form cap between
the plates left by the three gen-tle-men after their meal, and
oc-ca-sion-ally looked down at Gregor as he lay there im-mob-ile.

"We have to try and get rid of it", said Gregor's sis-ter, now
speak-ing only to her father, as her mother was too oc-cu-pied with
cough-ing to listen, "it'll be the death of both of you, I can see it
com-ing.  We can't all work as hard as we have to and then come home
to be tor-tured like this, we can't en-dure it.  I can't en-dure it any
more."  And she broke out so heav-ily in tears that they flowed down
the face of her mother, and she wiped them away with mech-an-ical hand
move-ments.

"My child", said her father with sym-pathy and ob-vi-ous un-der-stand-ing,
"what are we to do?"

His sis-ter just shrugged her shoulders as a sign of the help-less-ness
and tears that had taken hold of her, dis-pla-cing her earlier
cer-tainty.

"If he could just un-der-stand us", said his father al-most as a
ques-tion; his sis-ter shook her hand vig-or-ously through her tears as
a sign that of that there was no ques-tion.

"If he could just un-der-stand us", re-peated Gregor's father, clos-ing
his eyes in ac-cept-ance of his sis-ter's cer-tainty that that was quite
im-possible, "then per-haps we could come to some kind of ar-range-ment
with him.  But as it is ..."

"It's got to go", shouted his sis-ter, "that's the only way, Father.
You've got to get rid of the idea that that's Gregor.  We've only
harmed ourselves by be-liev-ing it for so long.  How can that be
Gregor? If it were Gregor he would have seen long ago that it's not
pos-sible for hu-man be-ings to live with an an-imal like that and he
would have gone of his own free will.  We wouldn't have a brother
any more, then, but we could carry on with our lives and re-mem-ber
him with re-spect.  As it is this an-imal is per-se-cut-ing us, it's
driven out our ten-ants, it ob-vi-ously wants to take over the whole
flat and force us to sleep on the streets.  Father, look, just
look", she sud-denly screamed, "he's start-ing again!"   In her alarm,
which was totally bey-ond Gregor's com-pre-hen-sion, his sis-ter even
aban-doned his mother as she pushed her-self vig-or-ously out of her
chair as if more will-ing to sac-ri-fice her own mother than stay
any-where near Gregor.  She rushed over to be-hind her father, who had
be-come ex-cited merely be-cause she was and stood up half rais-ing his
hands in front of Gregor's sis-ter as if to pro-tect her.

But Gregor had had no in-ten-tion of fright-en-ing any-one, least of all
his sis-ter.  All he had done was be-gin to turn round so that he
could go back into his room, al-though that was in it-self quite
start-ling as his pain-wracked con-di-tion meant that turn-ing round
re-quired a great deal of ef-fort and he was us-ing his head to help
him-self do it, re-peatedly rais-ing it and strik-ing it against the
floor.  He stopped and looked round.  They seemed to have real-ised
his good in-ten-tion and had only been alarmed briefly.  Now they all
looked at him in un-happy si-lence.  His mother lay in her chair with
her legs stretched out and pressed against each other, her eyes
nearly closed with ex-haus-tion; his sis-ter sat next to his father
with her arms around his neck.

"Maybe now they'll let me turn round", thought Gregor and went back
to work.  He could not help pant-ing loudly with the ef-fort and had
some-times to stop and take a rest.  No-one was mak-ing him rush any
more, everything was left up to him.  As soon as he had fi-nally
fin-ished turn-ing round he began to move straight ahead.  He was
amazed at the great dis-tance that sep-ar-ated him from his room, and
could not un-der-stand how he had covered that dis-tance in his weak
state a little while be-fore and al-most without no-ti-cing it.  He
con-cen-trated on crawl-ing as fast as he could and hardly no-ticed that
there was not a word, not any cry, from his fam-ily to dis-tract him.
He did not turn his head un-til he had reached the door-way.  He did
not turn it all the way round as he felt his neck be-com-ing stiff,
but it was non-ethe-less enough to see that noth-ing be-hind him had
changed, only his sis-ter had stood up.  With his last glance he saw
that his mother had now fallen com-pletely asleep.

He was hardly in-side his room be-fore the door was hur-riedly shut,
bolted and locked.  The sud-den noise be-hind Gregor so startled him
that his little legs col-lapsed un-der him.  It was his sis-ter who had
been in so much of a rush.  She had been stand-ing there wait-ing and
sprung for-ward lightly, Gregor had not heard her com-ing at all, and
as she turned the key in the lock she said loudly to her par-ents "At
last!".

"What now, then?", Gregor asked him-self as he looked round in the
dark-ness.  He soon made the dis-cov-ery that he could no longer move
at all.  This was no sur-prise to him, it seemed rather that be-ing
able to ac-tu-ally move around on those spindly little legs un-til then
was un-nat-ural.  He also felt re-l-at-ively com-fort-able.  It is true
that his en-tire body was aching, but the pain seemed to be slowly
get-ting weaker and weaker and would fi-nally dis-ap-pear al-to-gether.
He could already hardly feel the de-cayed apple in his back or the
in-flamed area around it, which was en-tirely covered in white dust.
He thought back of his fam-ily with emo-tion and love.  If it was
pos-sible, he felt that he must go away even more strongly than his
sis-ter.  He re-mained in this state of empty and peace-ful ru-min-a-tion
un-til he heard the clock tower strike three in the morn-ing.  He
watched as it slowly began to get light every-where out-side the
win-dow too.  Then, without his will-ing it, his head sank down
com-pletely, and his last breath flowed weakly from his nos-trils.

When the cleaner came in early in the morn-ing - they'd of-ten asked
her not to keep slam-ming the doors but with her strength and in her
hurry she still did, so that every-one in the flat knew when she'd
ar-rived and from then on it was im-possible to sleep in peace - she
made her usual brief look in on Gregor and at first found noth-ing
spe-cial.  She thought he was lay-ing there so still on pur-pose,
play-ing the mar-tyr; she at-trib-uted all pos-sible un-der-stand-ing to
him.  She happened to be hold-ing the long broom in her hand, so she
tried to tickle Gregor with it from the door-way.  When she had no
suc-cess with that she tried to make a nuis-ance of her-self and poked
at him a little, and only when she found she could shove him across
the floor with no res-ist-ance at all did she start to pay at-ten-tion.
She soon real-ised what had really happened, opened her eyes wide,
whistled to her-self, but did not waste time to yank open the bed-room
doors and shout loudly into the dark-ness of the bed-rooms: "Come and
'ave a look at this, it's dead, just ly-ing there, stone dead!"

Mr. and  Mrs. Samsa sat up-right there in their mar-riage bed and had
to make an ef-fort to get over the shock caused by the cleaner be-fore
they could grasp what she was say-ing.  But then, each from his own
side, they hur-ried out of bed.  Mr. Samsa threw the blanket over his
shoulders,  Mrs. Samsa just came out in her night-dress; and that is
how they went into Gregor's room.  On the way they opened the door
to the liv-ing room where Grete had been sleep-ing since the three
gen-tle-men had moved in; she was fully dressed as if she had never
been asleep, and the pale-ness of her face seemed to con-firm this.
"Dead?", asked  Mrs. Samsa, look-ing at the char-wo-man en-quir-ingly,
even though she could have checked for her-self and could have known
it even without check-ing.  "That's what I said",  replied the
cleaner, and to prove it she gave Gregor's body an-other shove with
the broom, send-ing it side-ways across the floor.  Mrs. Samsa made a
move-ment as if she wanted to hold back the broom, but did not
com-plete it.  "Now then", said  Mr. Samsa, "let's give thanks to God
for that". He crossed him-self, and the three wo-men fol-lowed his
ex-ample.  Grete, who had not taken her eyes from the corpse, said:
"Just look how thin he was.  He didn't eat any-thing for so long.
The food came out again just the same as when it went in". Gregor's
body was in-deed com-pletely dried up and flat, they had not seen it
un-til then, but now he was not lif-ted up on his little legs, nor did
he do any-thing to make them look away.

"Grete, come with us in here for a little while", said  Mrs. Samsa
with a pained smile, and Grete fol-lowed her par-ents into the bed-room
but not without look-ing back at the body.  The cleaner shut the door
and opened the win-dow wide.  Al-though it was still early in the
morn-ing the fresh air had some-thing of warmth mixed in with it.  It
was already the end of March, after all.

The three gen-tle-men stepped out of their room and looked round in
amazement for their break-fasts;  they had been for-got-ten about.
"Where is our break-fast?", the middle gen-tle-man asked the cleaner
ir-rit-ably.  She just put her fin-ger on her lips and made a quick and
si-lent sign to the men that they might like to come into Gregor's
room.  They did so, and stood around Gregor's corpse with their
hands in the pock-ets of their well-worn coats. It was now quite
light in the room.

Then the door of the bed-room opened and  Mr. Samsa ap-peared in his
uni-form with his wife on one arm and his daugh-ter on the other.  All
of them had been cry-ing a little; Grete now and then pressed her
face against her father's arm.

"Leave my home.  Now!", said  Mr. Samsa, in-dic-at-ing the door and
without let-ting the wo-men from him.  "What do you mean?", asked the
middle of the three gen-tle-men some-what dis-con-cer-ted, and he smiled
sweetly.  The other two held their hands be-hind their backs and
con-tinu-ally rubbed them to-gether in glee-ful an-ti-cip-a-tion of a loud
quar-rel which could only end in their fa-vour.  "I mean just what I
said", answered  Mr. Samsa, and, with his two com-pan-ions, went in a
straight line to-wards the man.  At first, he stood there still,
look-ing at the ground as if the con-tents of his head were
re-arran-ging them-selves into new po-s-i-tions.  "Al-right, we'll go
then", he said, and looked up at  Mr. Samsa as if he had been
sud-denly over-come with hu-mil-ity and wanted per-mis-sion again from
Mr. Samsa for his de-cision.  Mr. Samsa merely opened his eyes wide
and briefly nod-ded to him sev-eral times.  At that, and without
delay, the man ac-tu-ally did take long strides into the front
hall-way; his two friends had stopped rub-bing their hands some time
be-fore and had been listen-ing to what was be-ing said.  Now they
jumped off after their friend as if taken with a sud-den fear that
Mr. Samsa might go into the hall-way in front of them and break the
con-nec-tion with their leader.  Once there, all three took their hats
from the stand, took their sticks from the holder, bowed without a
word and left the premises.  Mr. Samsa and the two wo-men fol-lowed
them out onto the land-ing; but they had had no reason to mis-trust
the men's in-ten-tions and as they leaned over the land-ing they saw how
the three gen-tle-men made slow but steady pro-gress down the many
steps.  As they turned the corner on each floor they dis-ap-peared and
would re-appear a few mo-ments later; the fur-ther down they went, the
more that the Samsa fam-ily lost in-terest in them; when a butcher's
boy, proud of pos-ture with his tray on his head, passed them on his
way up and came nearer than they were,  Mr. Samsa and the wo-men came
away from the land-ing and went, as if re-lieved, back into the flat.

They de-cided the best way to make use of that day was for re-lax-a-tion
and to go for a walk; not only had they earned a break from work but
they were in ser-i-ous need of it.  So they sat at the table and wrote
three let-ters of ex-cusal,  Mr. Samsa to his em-ploy-ers,  Mrs. Samsa
to her con-tractor and Grete to her prin-cipal.  The cleaner came in
while they were writ-ing to tell them she was go-ing, she'd fin-ished
her work for that morn-ing.  The three of them at first just nod-ded
without look-ing up from what they were writ-ing, and it was only when
the cleaner still did not seem to want to leave that they looked up
in ir-rit-a-tion.  "Well?", asked  Mr. Samsa.  The char-wo-man stood in
the door-way with a smile on her face as if she had some tre-mend-ous
good news to re-port, but would only do it if she was clearly asked
to.  The al-most ver-tical little os-trich feather on her hat, which
had been a source of ir-rit-a-tion to  Mr. Samsa all the time she had
been work-ing for them, swayed gently in all dir-ec-tions.  "What is it
you want then?", asked  Mrs. Samsa, whom the cleaner had the most
re-spect for.  "Yes", she answered, and broke into a friendly laugh
that made her un-able to speak straight away, "well then, that thing
in there, you needn't worry about how you're go-ing to get rid of it.
 That's all been sor-ted out."   Mrs. Samsa and Grete bent down over
their let-ters as if in-tent on con-tinu-ing with what they were
writ-ing;  Mr. Samsa saw that the cleaner wanted to start de-scrib-ing
everything in de-tail but, with out-stretched hand, he made it quite
clear that she was not to.  So, as she was pre-ven-ted from telling
them all about it, she sud-denly re-membered what a hurry she was in
and, clearly peeved, called out "Cheerio then, every-one", turned
round sharply and left, slam-ming the door ter-ribly as she went.

"To-night she gets sacked", said  Mr. Samsa, but he re-ceived no reply
from either his wife or his daugh-ter as the char-wo-man seemed to have
des-troyed the peace they had only just gained.  They got up and went
over to the win-dow where they re-mained with their arms around each
other.  Mr. Samsa twis-ted round in his chair to look at them and sat
there watch-ing for a while.  Then he called out: "Come here, then.
Let's for-get about all that old stuff, shall we.  Come and give me a
bit of at-ten-tion". The two wo-men im-me-di-ately did as he said,
hur-ry-ing over to him where they kissed him and hugged him and then
they quickly fin-ished their let-ters.

After that, the three of them left the flat to-gether, which was
some-thing they had not done for months, and took the tram out to the
open coun-try out-side the town.  They had the tram, filled with warm
sun-shine, all to them-selves.  Leant back com-fort-ably on their seats,
they dis-cussed their pro-spects and found that on closer ex-am-in-a-tion
they were not at all bad - un-til then they had never asked each
other about their work but all three had jobs which were very good
and held par-tic-u-larly good prom-ise for the fu-ture.  The greatest
im-prove-ment for the time be-ing, of course, would be achieved quite
eas-ily by mov-ing house; what they needed now was a flat that was
smal-ler and cheaper than the cur-rent one which had been chosen by
Gregor, one that was in a bet-ter loc-a-tion and, most of all, more
prac-tical.  All the time, Grete was be-com-ing live-lier.  With all the
worry they had been hav-ing of late her cheeks had be-come pale, but,
while they were talk-ing,  Mr. and  Mrs. Samsa were struck, al-most
sim-ul-tan-eously, with the thought of how their daugh-ter was
blos-som-ing into a well built and beau-ti-ful young lady.  They be-came
quieter.  Just from each other's glance and al-most without know-ing
it they agreed that it would soon be time to find a good man for
her.  And, as if in con-firm-a-tion of their new dreams and good
in-ten-tions, as soon as they reached their des-tin-a-tion Grete was the
first to get up and stretch out her young body.
