CHAPTER 1. Loom-ings.

Call me Ish-mael. Some years ago—never mind how long pre-cisely—hav-ing
little or no money in my purse, and noth-ing par-tic-u-lar to in-terest me
on shore, I thought I would sail about a little and see the wa-tery part
of the world. It is a way I have of driv-ing off the spleen and
reg-u-lat-ing the cir-cu-la-tion. Whenever I find my-self grow-ing grim about
the mouth; whenever it is a damp, drizzly Novem-ber in my soul; whenever
I find my-self in-vol-un-tar-ily paus-ing be-fore coffin ware-houses, and
bring-ing up the rear of every fu-neral I meet; and es-pe-cially whenever
my hy-pos get such an up-per hand of me, that it re-quires a strong moral
prin-ciple to pre-vent me from de-lib-er-ately step-ping into the street, and
meth-od-ic-ally knock-ing people’s hats off—then, I ac-count it high time to
get to sea as soon as I can. This is my sub-sti-tute for pis-tol and ball.
With a philo-soph-ical flour-ish Cato throws him-self upon his sword; I
quietly take to the ship. There is noth-ing sur-pris-ing in this. If they
but knew it, al-most all men in their de-gree, some time or other,
cher-ish very nearly the same feel-ings to-wards the ocean with me.

There now is your in-su-lar city of the Man-hat-toes, belted round by
wharves as In-dian isles by coral reefs—com-merce sur-rounds it with her
surf. Right and left, the streets take you wa-ter-ward. Its ex-treme
down-town is the bat-tery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, and
cooled by breezes, which a few hours pre-vi-ous were out of sight of
land. Look at the crowds of wa-ter-gazers there.

Cir-cum-am-bu-late the city of a dreamy Sab-bath af-ter-noon. Go from Cor-lears
Hook to Coen-ties Slip, and from thence, by White-hall, north-ward. What
do you see?—Pos-ted like si-lent sen-tinels all around the town, stand
thou-sands upon thou-sands of mor-tal men fixed in ocean rev-er-ies. Some
lean-ing against the spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads; some
look-ing over the bul-warks of ships from Ch-ina; some high aloft in the
rig-ging, as if striv-ing to get a still bet-ter sea-ward peep. But these
are all lands-men; of week days pent up in lath and plaster—tied to
coun-ters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks. How then is this? Are
the green fields gone? What do they here?

But look! here come more crowds, pa-cing straight for the wa-ter, and
seem-ingly bound for a dive. Strange! Noth-ing will con-tent them but the
ex-tremest limit of the land; loiter-ing un-der the shady lee of yon-der
ware-houses will not suf-fice. No. They must get just as nigh the wa-ter
as they pos-sibly can without fall-ing in. And there they stand—miles of
them—leagues. In-land-ers all, they come from lanes and al-leys, streets
and av-en-ues—north, east, south, and west. Yet here they all unite. Tell
me, does the mag-netic vir-tue of the needles of the com-passes of all
those ships at-tract them thither?

Once more. Say you are in the coun-try; in some high land of lakes. Take
al-most any path you please, and ten to one it car-ries you down in a
dale, and leaves you there by a pool in the stream. There is ma-gic in
it. Let the most ab-sent-minded of men be plunged in his deep-est
rev-er-ies—stand that man on his legs, set his feet a-go-ing, and he will
in-fal-libly lead you to wa-ter, if wa-ter there be in all that re-gion.
Should you ever be athirst in the great Amer-ican desert, try this
ex-per-i-ment, if your cara-van hap-pen to be sup-plied with a meta-phys-ical
pro-fessor. Yes, as every one knows, med-it-a-tion and wa-ter are wed-ded for
ever.

But here is an artist. He de-sires to paint you the dream-i-est, shadiest,
quietest, most en-chant-ing bit of ro-mantic land-scape in all the val-ley
of the Saco. What is the chief ele-ment he em-ploys? There stand his
trees, each with a hol-low trunk, as if a her-mit and a cru-ci-fix were
within; and here sleeps his meadow, and there sleep his cattle; and up
from yon-der cot-tage goes a sleepy smoke. Deep into dis-tant wood-lands
winds a mazy way, reach-ing to over-lap-ping spurs of moun-tains bathed in
their hill-side blue. But though the pic-ture lies thus tranced, and
though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon this
shep-herd’s head, yet all were vain, un-less the shep-herd’s eye were
fixed upon the ma-gic stream be-fore him. Go visit the Prair-ies in June,
when for scores on scores of miles you wade knee-deep among
Ti-ger-lilies—what is the one charm want-ing?—Water—there is not a drop
of wa-ter there! Were Niagara but a catar-act of sand, would you travel
your thou-sand miles to see it? Why did the poor poet of Ten-nessee, upon
sud-denly re-ceiv-ing two hand-fuls of sil-ver, de-lib-er-ate whether to buy
him a coat, which he sadly needed, or in-vest his money in a ped-es-trian
trip to Rock-away Beach? Why is al-most every ro-bust healthy boy with a
ro-bust healthy soul in him, at some time or other crazy to go to sea?
Why upon your first voy-age as a pas-sen-ger, did you your-self feel such a
mys-tical vi-bra-tion, when first told that you and your ship were now out
of sight of land? Why did the old Per-sians hold the sea holy? Why did
the Greeks give it a sep-ar-ate deity, and own brother of Jove? Surely
all this is not without mean-ing. And still deeper the mean-ing of that
story of Nar-cissus, who be-cause he could not grasp the tor-ment-ing, mild
im-age he saw in the foun-tain, plunged into it and was drowned. But that
same im-age, we ourselves see in all rivers and oceans. It is the im-age
of the un-grasp-able phantom of life; and this is the key to it all.

Now, when I say that I am in the habit of go-ing to sea whenever I be-gin
to grow hazy about the eyes, and be-gin to be over con-scious of my
lungs, I do not mean to have it in-ferred that I ever go to sea as a
pas-sen-ger. For to go as a pas-sen-ger you must needs have a purse, and a
purse is but a rag un-less you have some-thing in it. Besides, pas-sen-gers
get sea-sick—grow quar-rel-some—don’t sleep of nights—do not en-joy
them-selves much, as a gen-eral thing;—no, I never go as a pas-sen-ger;
nor, though I am some-thing of a salt, do I ever go to sea as a
Com-modore, or a Cap-tain, or a Cook. I aban-don the glory and dis-tinc-tion
of such of-fices to those who like them. For my part, I ab-om-in-ate all
hon-or-able re-spect-able toils, tri-als, and tribu-la-tions of every kind
what-so-ever. It is quite as much as I can do to take care of my-self,
without tak-ing care of ships, barques, brigs, schoon-ers, and what not.
And as for go-ing as cook,—though I con-fess there is con-sid-er-able glory
in that, a cook be-ing a sort of of-ficer on ship-board—yet, some-how, I
never fan-cied broil-ing fowls;—though once broiled, ju-di-ciously
buttered, and judg-mat-ic-ally salted and peppered, there is no one who
will speak more re-spect-fully, not to say rev-er-en-tially, of a broiled
fowl than I will. It is out of the id-ol-at-rous dot-ings of the old
Egyp-tians upon broiled ibis and roas-ted river horse, that you see the
mum-mies of those creatures in their huge bake-houses the pyr-am-ids.

No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right be-fore the mast,
plumb down into the fore-castle, aloft there to the royal mast-head.
True, they rather or-der me about some, and make me jump from spar to
spar, like a grasshop-per in a May meadow. And at first, this sort of
thing is un-pleas-ant enough. It touches one’s sense of honor,
par-tic-u-larly if you come of an old es-tab-lished fam-ily in the land, the
Van Rens-selaers, or Ran-dolphs, or Hardic-a-nutes. And more than all, if
just pre-vi-ous to put-ting your hand into the tar-pot, you have been
lord-ing it as a coun-try school-mas-ter, mak-ing the tallest boys stand in
awe of you. The trans-ition is a keen one, I as-sure you, from a
school-mas-ter to a sailor, and re-quires a strong de-coc-tion of Seneca and
the Stoics to en-able you to grin and bear it. But even this wears off
in time.

What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-cap-tain or-ders me to get a broom
and sweep down the decks? What does that in-dig-nity amount to, weighed,
I mean, in the scales of the New Testa-ment? Do you think the archangel
Gab-riel thinks any-thing the less of me, be-cause I promptly and
re-spect-fully obey that old hunks in that par-tic-u-lar in-stance? Who ain’t
a slave? Tell me that. Well, then, how-ever the old sea-cap-tains may
or-der me about—how-ever they may thump and punch me about, I have the
sat-is-fac-tion of know-ing that it is all right; that every-body else is
one way or other served in much the same way—either in a phys-ical or
meta-phys-ical point of view, that is; and so the uni-ver-sal thump is
passed round, and all hands should rub each other’s shoulder-blades,
and be con-tent.

Again, I al-ways go to sea as a sailor, be-cause they make a point of
pay-ing me for my trouble, whereas they never pay pas-sen-gers a single
penny that I ever heard of. On the con-trary, pas-sen-gers them-selves must
pay. And there is all the dif-fer-ence in the world between pay-ing and
be-ing paid. The act of pay-ing is per-haps the most un-com-fort-able
in-flic-tion that the two orch-ard thieves en-tailed upon us. But _be-ing
paid_,—what will com-pare with it? The urbane activ-ity with which a man
re-ceives money is really mar-vel-lous, con-sid-er-ing that we so earn-estly
be-lieve money to be the root of all earthly ills, and that on no
ac-count can a monied man enter heaven. Ah! how cheer-fully we con-sign
ourselves to per-di-tion!

Fin-ally, I al-ways go to sea as a sailor, be-cause of the whole-some
ex-er-cise and pure air of the fore-castle deck. For as in this world,
head winds are far more pre-val-ent than winds from astern (that is, if
you never vi-ol-ate the Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the
Com-modore on the quarter-deck gets his at-mo-sphere at second hand from
the sail-ors on the fore-castle. He thinks he breathes it first; but not
so. In much the same way do the com-mon-alty lead their lead-ers in many
other things, at the same time that the lead-ers little sus-pect it. But
where-fore it was that after hav-ing re-peatedly smelt the sea as a
mer-chant sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on a whal-ing
voy-age; this the in-vis-ible po-lice of-ficer of the Fates, who has the
con-stant sur-veil-lance of me, and secretly dogs me, and in-flu-ences me in
some un-ac-count-able way—he can bet-ter an-swer than any one else. And,
doubt-less, my go-ing on this whal-ing voy-age, formed part of the grand
pro-gramme of Provid-ence that was drawn up a long time ago. It came in
as a sort of brief in-ter-lude and solo between more ex-tens-ive
per-form-ances. I take it that this part of the bill must have run
some-thing like this:

“_Grand Con-tested Elec-tion for the Pres-id-ency of the Un-ited States._
“WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. “BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN.”

Though I can-not tell why it was ex-actly that those stage man-agers, the
Fates, put me down for this shabby part of a whal-ing voy-age, when
oth-ers were set down for mag-ni-fi-cent parts in high tra-gedies, and short
and easy parts in gen-teel com-ed-ies, and jolly parts in farces—though I
can-not tell why this was ex-actly; yet, now that I re-call all the
cir-cum-stances, I think I can see a little into the springs and motives
which be-ing cun-ningly presen-ted to me un-der vari-ous dis-guises, in-duced
me to set about per-form-ing the part I did, be-sides ca-jol-ing me into the
de-lu-sion that it was a choice res-ult-ing from my own un-biased freewill
and dis-crim-in-at-ing judg-ment.

Chief among these motives was the over-whelm-ing idea of the great whale
him-self. Such a portent-ous and mys-ter-i-ous mon-ster roused all my
curi-os-ity. Then the wild and dis-tant seas where he rolled his is-land
bulk; the un-deliv-er-able, name-less per-ils of the whale; these, with all
the at-tend-ing mar-vels of a thou-sand Patago-nian sights and sounds,
helped to sway me to my wish. With other men, per-haps, such things
would not have been in-duce-ments; but as for me, I am tor-men-ted with an
ever-last-ing itch for things re-mote. I love to sail for-bid-den seas, and
land on bar-bar-ous coasts. Not ig-nor-ing what is good, I am quick to
per-ceive a hor-ror, and could still be so-cial with it—would they let
me—since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all the in-mates of
the place one lodges in.

By reason of these things, then, the whal-ing voy-age was wel-come; the
great flood-gates of the won-der-world swung open, and in the wild
con-ceits that swayed me to my pur-pose, two and two there floated into
my in-most soul, end-less pro-ces-sions of the whale, and, mid most of them
all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air.


CHAPTER 2. The Car-pet-Bag.

I stuffed a shirt or two into my old car-pet-bag, tucked it un-der my
arm, and star-ted for Cape Horn and the Pa-cific. Quit-ting the good city
of old Man-hatto, I duly ar-rived in New Bed-ford. It was a Saturday night
in Decem-ber. Much was I dis-ap-poin-ted upon learn-ing that the little
packet for Nan-tucket had already sailed, and that no way of reach-ing
that place would of-fer, till the fol-low-ing Monday.

As most young can-did-ates for the pains and pen-al-ties of whal-ing stop at
this same New Bed-ford, thence to em-bark on their voy-age, it may as well
be re-lated that I, for one, had no idea of so do-ing. For my mind was
made up to sail in no other than a Nan-tucket craft, be-cause there was a
fine, bois-ter-ous some-thing about everything con-nec-ted with that fam-ous
old is-land, which amaz-ingly pleased me. Besides though New Bed-ford has
of late been gradu-ally mono-pol-ising the busi-ness of whal-ing, and though
in this mat-ter poor old Nan-tucket is now much be-hind her, yet Nan-tucket
was her great ori-ginal—the Tyre of this Carthage;—the place where the
first dead Amer-ican whale was stran-ded. Where else but from Nan-tucket
did those ab-ori-ginal whale-men, the Red-Men, first sally out in ca-noes
to give chase to the Le-viathan? And where but from Nan-tucket, too, did
that first ad-ven-tur-ous little sloop put forth, partly laden with
im-por-ted cobble-stones—so goes the story—to throw at the whales, in
or-der to dis-cover when they were nigh enough to risk a har-poon from the
bow-sprit?

Now hav-ing a night, a day, and still an-other night fol-low-ing be-fore me
in New Bed-ford, ere I could em-bark for my destined port, it be-came a
mat-ter of con-cern-ment where I was to eat and sleep mean-while. It was a
very du-bi-ous-look-ing, nay, a very dark and dis-mal night, bit-ingly cold
and cheer-less. I knew no one in the place. With anxious grapnels I had
soun-ded my pocket, and only brought up a few pieces of sil-ver,—So,
wherever you go, Ish-mael, said I to my-self, as I stood in the middle of
a dreary street shoul-der-ing my bag, and com-par-ing the gloom to-wards the
north with the dark-ness to-wards the south—wherever in your wis-dom you
may con-clude to lodge for the night, my dear Ish-mael, be sure to
in-quire the price, and don’t be too par-tic-u-lar.

With halt-ing steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of “The
Crossed Har-poons”—but it looked too ex-pens-ive and jolly there. Fur-ther
on, from the bright red win-dows of the “Sword-Fish Inn,” there came
such fer-vent rays, that it seemed to have melted the packed snow and
ice from be-fore the house, for every-where else the con-gealed frost lay
ten inches thick in a hard, as-phaltic pave-ment,—rather weary for me,
when I struck my foot against the flinty pro-jec-tions, be-cause from
hard, re-morse-less ser-vice the soles of my boots were in a most
miser-able plight. Too ex-pens-ive and jolly, again thought I, paus-ing one
mo-ment to watch the broad glare in the street, and hear the sounds of
the tink-ling glasses within. But go on, Ish-mael, said I at last; don’t
you hear? get away from be-fore the door; your patched boots are
stop-ping the way. So on I went. I now by in-stinct fol-lowed the streets
that took me wa-ter-ward, for there, doubt-less, were the cheapest, if not
the cheer-i-est inns.

Such dreary streets! blocks of black-ness, not houses, on either hand,
and here and there a candle, like a candle mov-ing about in a tomb. At
this hour of the night, of the last day of the week, that quarter of
the town proved all but deser-ted. But presently I came to a smoky light
pro-ceed-ing from a low, wide build-ing, the door of which stood
in-vit-ingly open. It had a care-less look, as if it were meant for the
uses of the pub-lic; so, en-ter-ing, the first thing I did was to stumble
over an ash-box in the porch. Ha! thought I, ha, as the fly-ing
particles al-most choked me, are these ashes from that des-troyed city,
Go-mor-rah? But “The Crossed Har-poons,” and “The Sword-Fish?”—this, then
must needs be the sign of “The Trap.” However, I picked my-self up and
hear-ing a loud voice within, pushed on and opened a second, in-terior
door.

It seemed the great Black Parlia-ment sit-ting in Tophet. A hun-dred black
faces turned round in their rows to peer; and bey-ond, a black An-gel of
Doom was beat-ing a book in a pul-pit. It was a negro church; and the
preacher’s text was about the black-ness of dark-ness, and the weep-ing
and wail-ing and teeth-gnash-ing there. Ha, Ish-mael, muttered I, back-ing
out, Wretched en-ter-tain-ment at the sign of ‘The Trap!’

Mov-ing on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the
docks, and heard a for-lorn creak-ing in the air; and look-ing up, saw a
swinging sign over the door with a white paint-ing upon it, faintly
rep-res-ent-ing a tall straight jet of misty spray, and these words
un-der-neath—“The Spouter Inn:—Peter Coffin.”

Coffin?—Spouter?—Rather omin-ous in that par-tic-u-lar con-nex-ion, thought
I. But it is a com-mon name in Nan-tucket, they say, and I sup-pose this
Peter here is an emig-rant from there. As the light looked so dim, and
the place, for the time, looked quiet enough, and the dilap-id-ated
little wooden house it-self looked as if it might have been car-ted here
from the ru-ins of some burnt dis-trict, and as the swinging sign had a
poverty-stricken sort of creak to it, I thought that here was the very
spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea cof-fee.

It was a queer sort of place—a gable-ended old house, one side palsied
as it were, and lean-ing over sadly. It stood on a sharp bleak corner,
where that tem-pes-tu-ous wind Euro-cly-don kept up a worse howl-ing than
ever it did about poor Paul’s tossed craft. Euro-cly-don, nev-er-the-less,
is a mighty pleas-ant zephyr to any one in-doors, with his feet on the
hob quietly toast-ing for bed. “In judging of that tem-pes-tu-ous wind
called Euro-cly-don,” says an old writer—of whose works I pos-sess the
only copy ex-tant—“it maketh a mar-vel-lous dif-fer-ence, whether thou
lookest out at it from a glass win-dow where the frost is all on the
out-side, or whether thou ob-ser-vest it from that sash-less win-dow, where
the frost is on both sides, and of which the wight Death is the only
glazier.” True enough, thought I, as this pas-sage oc-curred to my
mind—old black-let-ter, thou reason-est well. Yes, these eyes are
win-dows, and this body of mine is the house. What a pity they didn’t
stop up the chinks and the cran-nies though, and thrust in a little lint
here and there. But it’s too late to make any im-prove-ments now. The
uni-verse is fin-ished; the cope-stone is on, and the chips were car-ted
off a mil-lion years ago. Poor Laz-arus there, chat-ter-ing his teeth
against the curb-stone for his pil-low, and shak-ing off his tat-ters with
his shiv-er-ings, he might plug up both ears with rags, and put a
corn-cob into his mouth, and yet that would not keep out the
tem-pes-tu-ous Euro-cly-don. Euro-cly-don! says old Dives, in his red silken
wrap-per—(he had a red-der one af-ter-wards) pooh, pooh! What a fine frosty
night; how Orion glit-ters; what north-ern lights! Let them talk of their
ori-ental sum-mer climes of ever-last-ing con-ser-vat-or-ies; give me the
priv-ilege of mak-ing my own sum-mer with my own coals.

But what thinks Laz-arus? Can he warm his blue hands by hold-ing them up
to the grand north-ern lights? Would not Laz-arus rather be in Su-matra
than here? Would he not far rather lay him down length-wise along the
line of the equator; yea, ye gods! go down to the fiery pit it-self, in
or-der to keep out this frost?

Now, that Laz-arus should lie stran-ded there on the curb-stone be-fore the
door of Dives, this is more won-der-ful than that an ice-berg should be
moored to one of the Moluc-cas. Yet Dives him-self, he too lives like a
Czar in an ice palace made of frozen sighs, and be-ing a pres-id-ent of a
tem-per-ance so-ci-ety, he only drinks the tepid tears of orphans.

But no more of this blub-ber-ing now, we are go-ing a-whal-ing, and there
is plenty of that yet to come. Let us scrape the ice from our fros-ted
feet, and see what sort of a place this “Spouter” may be.


CHAPTER 3. The Spouter-Inn.

En-ter-ing that gable-ended Spouter-Inn, you found your-self in a wide,
low, strag-gling entry with old-fash-ioned wains-cots, re-mind-ing one of
the bul-warks of some con-demned old craft. On one side hung a very large
oilpaint-ing so thor-oughly be-smoked, and every way de-faced, that in the
un-equal cross-lights by which you viewed it, it was only by di-li-gent
study and a series of sys-tem-atic vis-its to it, and care-ful in-quiry of
the neigh-bors, that you could any way ar-rive at an un-der-stand-ing of its
pur-pose. Such un-ac-count-able masses of shades and shad-ows, that at first
you al-most thought some am-bi-tious young artist, in the time of the New
Eng-land hags, had en-deavored to de-lin-eate chaos be-witched. But by dint
of much and earn-est con-tem-pla-tion, and oft re-peated pon-der-ings, and
es-pe-cially by throw-ing open the little win-dow to-wards the back of the
entry, you at last come to the con-clu-sion that such an idea, how-ever
wild, might not be al-to-gether un-war-ran-ted.

But what most puzzled and con-foun-ded you was a long, limber,
portent-ous, black mass of some-thing hov-er-ing in the centre of the
pic-ture over three blue, dim, per-pen-dic-u-lar lines float-ing in a
name-less yeast. A boggy, soggy, squitchy pic-ture truly, enough to drive
a nervous man dis-trac-ted. Yet was there a sort of in-def-in-ite,
half-at-tained, un-ima-gin-able sub-lim-ity about it that fairly froze you to
it, till you in-vol-un-tar-ily took an oath with your-self to find out what
that mar-vel-lous paint-ing meant. Ever and anon a bright, but, alas,
de-cept-ive idea would dart you through.—It’s the Black Sea in a mid-night
gale.—It’s the un-nat-ural com-bat of the four primal ele-ments.—It’s a
blas-ted heath.—It’s a Hyper-borean winter scene.—It’s the break-ing-up of
the ice-bound stream of Time. But at last all these fan-cies yiel-ded to
that one portent-ous some-thing in the pic-ture’s midst. _That_ once found
out, and all the rest were plain. But stop; does it not bear a faint
re-semb-lance to a gi-gantic fish? even the great le-viathan him-self?

In fact, the artist’s design seemed this: a fi-nal the-ory of my own,
partly based upon the ag-greg-ated opin-ions of many aged per-sons with
whom I con-versed upon the sub-ject. The pic-ture rep-res-ents a Cape-Horner
in a great hur-ricane; the half-foundered ship wel-ter-ing there with its
three dis-mantled masts alone vis-ible; and an ex-as-per-ated whale,
pur-pos-ing to spring clean over the craft, is in the enorm-ous act of
im-pal-ing him-self upon the three mast-heads.

The op-pos-ite wall of this entry was hung all over with a hea-then-ish
ar-ray of mon-strous clubs and spears. Some were thickly set with
glit-ter-ing teeth re-sem-bling ivory saws; oth-ers were tufted with knots
of hu-man hair; and one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweep-ing
round like the seg-ment made in the new-mown grass by a long-armed
mower. You shuddered as you gazed, and wondered what mon-strous can-ni-bal
and sav-age could ever have gone a death-har-vest-ing with such a hack-ing,
hor-ri-fy-ing im-ple-ment. Mixed with these were rusty old whal-ing lances
and har-poons all broken and de-formed. Some were stor-ied weapons. With
this once long lance, now wildly el-bowed, fifty years ago did Nathan
Swain kill fif-teen whales between a sun-rise and a sun-set. And that
har-poon—so like a cork-screw now—was flung in Javan seas, and run away
with by a whale, years af-ter-wards slain off the Cape of Blanco. The
ori-ginal iron entered nigh the tail, and, like a rest-less needle
so-journ-ing in the body of a man, trav-elled full forty feet, and at last
was found im-bed-ded in the hump.

Cross-ing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way—cut
through what in old times must have been a great cent-ral chim-ney with
fire-places all round—you enter the pub-lic room. A still dus-kier place
is this, with such low pon-der-ous beams above, and such old wrinkled
planks be-neath, that you would al-most fancy you trod some old craft’s
cock-pits, es-pe-cially of such a howl-ing night, when this corner-anchored
old ark rocked so furi-ously. On one side stood a long, low, shelf-like
table covered with cracked glass cases, filled with dusty rar-it-ies
gathered from this wide world’s re-motest nooks. Pro-ject-ing from the
fur-ther angle of the room stands a dark-look-ing den—the bar—a rude
at-tempt at a right whale’s head. Be that how it may, there stands the
vast arched bone of the whale’s jaw, so wide, a coach might al-most
drive be-neath it. Within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old
de-canters, bottles, flasks; and in those jaws of swift de-struc-tion,
like an-other cursed Jo-nah (by which name in-deed they called him),
bustles a little withered old man, who, for their money, dearly sells
the sail-ors de-li-ri-ums and death.

Abom-in-able are the tum-blers into which he pours his poison. Though true
cyl-in-ders without—within, the vil-lan-ous green gog-gling glasses
de-ceit-fully tapered down-wards to a cheat-ing bot-tom. Par-al-lel me-ridi-ans
rudely pecked into the glass, sur-round these foot-pads’ gob-lets. Fill to
_this_ mark, and your charge is but a penny; to _this_ a penny more;
and so on to the full glass—the Cape Horn meas-ure, which you may gulp
down for a shil-ling.

Upon en-ter-ing the place I found a num-ber of young sea-men gathered about
a table, ex-amin-ing by a dim light divers spe-ci-mens of _skrim-shander_. I
sought the land-lord, and telling him I de-sired to be ac-com-mod-ated with
a room, re-ceived for an-swer that his house was full—not a bed
un-oc-cu-pied. “But avast,” he ad-ded, tap-ping his fore-head, “you haint no
ob-jec-tions to shar-ing a har-poon-eer’s blanket, have ye? I s’pose you are
goin’ a-whalin’, so you’d bet-ter get used to that sort of thing.”

I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if I should
ever do so, it would de-pend upon who the har-poon-eer might be, and that
if he (the land-lord) really had no other place for me, and the
har-poon-eer was not de-cidedly ob-jec-tion-able, why rather than wander
fur-ther about a strange town on so bit-ter a night, I would put up with
the half of any de-cent man’s blanket.

“I thought so. All right; take a seat. Sup-per?—you want sup-per?
Sup-per’ll be ready dir-ectly.”

I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on the
Bat-tery. At one end a ru-min-at-ing tar was still fur-ther ad-orn-ing it with
his jack-knife, stoop-ing over and di-li-gently work-ing away at the space
between his legs. He was try-ing his hand at a ship un-der full sail, but
he didn’t make much head-way, I thought.

At last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in an
ad-join-ing room. It was cold as Ice-land—no fire at all—the land-lord said
he couldn’t af-ford it. Noth-ing but two dis-mal tal-low candles, each in a
wind-ing sheet. We were fain to but-ton up our mon-key jack-ets, and hold
to our lips cups of scald-ing tea with our half frozen fin-gers. But the
fare was of the most sub-stan-tial kind—not only meat and pota-toes, but
dump-lings; good heav-ens! dump-lings for sup-per! One young fel-low in a
green box coat, ad-dressed him-self to these dump-lings in a most dire-ful
man-ner.

“My boy,” said the land-lord, “you’ll have the night-mare to a dead
sar-tainty.”

“Land-lord,” I whispered, “that aint the har-poon-eer is it?”

“Oh, no,” said he, look-ing a sort of diabol-ic-ally funny, “the
har-poon-eer is a dark com-plex-ioned chap. He never eats dump-lings, he
don’t—he eats noth-ing but steaks, and he likes ’em rare.”

“The devil he does,” says I. “Where is that har-poon-eer? Is he here?”

“He’ll be here afore long,” was the an-swer.

I could not help it, but I began to feel sus-pi-cious of this “dark
com-plex-ioned” har-poon-eer. At any rate, I made up my mind that if it so
turned out that we should sleep to-gether, he must un-dress and get into
bed be-fore I did.

Sup-per over, the com-pany went back to the bar-room, when, know-ing not
what else to do with my-self, I re-solved to spend the rest of the
even-ing as a looker on.

Presently a ri-ot-ing noise was heard without. Start-ing up, the land-lord
cried, “That’s the Gram-pus’s crew. I seed her re-por-ted in the off-ing
this morn-ing; a three years’ voy-age, and a full ship. Hur-rah, boys; now
we’ll have the latest news from the Fee-gees.”

A tramp-ing of sea boots was heard in the entry; the door was flung
open, and in rolled a wild set of mar-iners enough. En-vel-oped in their
shaggy watch coats, and with their heads muffled in wool-len com-fort-ers,
all be-darned and ragged, and their beards stiff with icicles, they
seemed an erup-tion of bears from Lab-rador. They had just landed from
their boat, and this was the first house they entered. No won-der, then,
that they made a straight wake for the whale’s mouth—the bar—when the
wrinkled little old Jo-nah, there of-fi-ci-at-ing, soon poured them out
brim-mers all round. One com-plained of a bad cold in his head, upon
which Jo-nah mixed him a pitch-like po-tion of gin and molasses, which he
swore was a sov-er-eign cure for all colds and ca-tarrhs what-so-ever, never
mind of how long stand-ing, or whether caught off the coast of Lab-rador,
or on the weather side of an ice-is-land.

The li-quor soon moun-ted into their heads, as it gen-er-ally does even
with the ar-rantest topers newly landed from sea, and they began
caper-ing about most ob-strep-er-ously.

I ob-served, how-ever, that one of them held some-what aloof, and though
he seemed de-sirous not to spoil the hil-ar-ity of his ship-mates by his
own sober face, yet upon the whole he re-frained from mak-ing as much
noise as the rest. This man in-ter-ested me at once; and since the
sea-gods had or-dained that he should soon be-come my ship-mate (though
but a sleep-ing-part-ner one, so far as this nar-rat-ive is con-cerned), I
will here ven-ture upon a little de-scrip-tion of him. He stood full six
feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like a cof-fer-dam. I
have sel-dom seen such brawn in a man. His face was deeply brown and
burnt, mak-ing his white teeth dazzling by the con-trast; while in the
deep shad-ows of his eyes floated some re-min-is-cences that did not seem
to give him much joy. His voice at once an-nounced that he was a
South-erner, and from his fine stature, I thought he must be one of
those tall moun-tain-eers from the Al-legh-anian Ridge in Vir-ginia. When
the rev-elry of his com-pan-ions had moun-ted to its height, this man
slipped away un-ob-served, and I saw no more of him till he be-came my
com-rade on the sea. In a few minutes, how-ever, he was missed by his
ship-mates, and be-ing, it seems, for some reason a huge fa-vour-ite with
them, they raised a cry of “Bulk-ing-ton! Bulk-ing-ton! where’s
Bulk-ing-ton?” and dar-ted out of the house in pur-suit of him.

It was now about nine o’clock, and the room seem-ing al-most
su-per-nat-ur-ally quiet after these or-gies, I began to con-grat-u-late my-self
upon a little plan that had oc-curred to me just pre-vi-ous to the
en-trance of the sea-men.

No man prefers to sleep two in a bed. In fact, you would a good deal
rather not sleep with your own brother. I don’t know how it is, but
people like to be private when they are sleep-ing. And when it comes to
sleep-ing with an un-known stranger, in a strange inn, in a strange town,
and that stranger a har-poon-eer, then your ob-jec-tions in-def-in-itely
mul-tiply. Nor was there any earthly reason why I as a sailor should
sleep two in a bed, more than any-body else; for sail-ors no more sleep
two in a bed at sea, than bach-elor Kings do ashore. To be sure they all
sleep to-gether in one apart-ment, but you have your own ham-mock, and
cover your-self with your own blanket, and sleep in your own skin.

The more I pondered over this har-poon-eer, the more I ab-om-in-ated the
thought of sleep-ing with him. It was fair to pre-sume that be-ing a
har-poon-eer, his linen or wool-len, as the case might be, would not be of
the ti-di-est, cer-tainly none of the finest. I began to twitch all over.
Besides, it was get-ting late, and my de-cent har-poon-eer ought to be home
and go-ing bed-wards. Sup-pose now, he should tumble in upon me at
mid-night—how could I tell from what vile hole he had been com-ing?

“Land-lord! I’ve changed my mind about that har-poon-eer.—I shan’t sleep
with him. I’ll try the bench here.”

“Just as you please; I’m sorry I can’t spare ye a table-cloth for a
mat-tress, and it’s a plaguy rough board here”—feel-ing of the knots and
notches. “But wait a bit, Skrim-shander; I’ve got a car-penter’s plane
there in the bar—wait, I say, and I’ll make ye snug enough.” So say-ing
he pro-cured the plane; and with his old silk handker-chief first dust-ing
the bench, vig-or-ously set to plan-ing away at my bed, the while grin-ning
like an ape. The shav-ings flew right and left; till at last the
plane-iron came bump against an in-des-truct-ible knot. The land-lord was
near sprain-ing his wrist, and I told him for heaven’s sake to quit—the
bed was soft enough to suit me, and I did not know how all the plan-ing
in the world could make ei-der down of a pine plank. So gath-er-ing up the
shav-ings with an-other grin, and throw-ing them into the great stove in
the middle of the room, he went about his busi-ness, and left me in a
brown study.

I now took the meas-ure of the bench, and found that it was a foot too
short; but that could be men-ded with a chair. But it was a foot too
nar-row, and the other bench in the room was about four inches higher
than the planed one—so there was no yok-ing them. I then placed the
first bench length-wise along the only clear space against the wall,
leav-ing a little in-ter-val between, for my back to settle down in. But I
soon found that there came such a draught of cold air over me from
un-der the sill of the win-dow, that this plan would never do at all,
es-pe-cially as an-other cur-rent from the rick-ety door met the one from
the win-dow, and both to-gether formed a series of small whirl-winds in
the im-me-di-ate vi-cin-ity of the spot where I had thought to spend the
night.

The devil fetch that har-poon-eer, thought I, but stop, couldn’t I steal
a march on him—bolt his door in-side, and jump into his bed, not to be
wakened by the most vi-ol-ent knock-ings? It seemed no bad idea; but upon
second thoughts I dis-missed it. For who could tell but what the next
morn-ing, so soon as I popped out of the room, the har-poon-eer might be
stand-ing in the entry, all ready to knock me down!

Still, look-ing round me again, and see-ing no pos-sible chance of
spend-ing a suf-fer-able night un-less in some other per-son’s bed, I began
to think that after all I might be cher-ish-ing un-war-rant-able pre-ju-dices
against this un-known har-poon-eer. Thinks I, I’ll wait awhile; he must be
drop-ping in be-fore long. I’ll have a good look at him then, and per-haps
we may be-come jolly good bed-fel-lows after all—there’s no telling.

But though the other boarders kept com-ing in by ones, twos, and threes,
and go-ing to bed, yet no sign of my har-poon-eer.

“Land-lord!” said I, “what sort of a chap is he—does he al-ways keep such
late hours?” It was now hard upon twelve o’clock.

The land-lord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed to be
migh-tily tickled at some-thing bey-ond my com-pre-hen-sion. “No,” he
answered, “gen-er-ally he’s an early bird—air-ley to bed and air-ley to
rise—yes, he’s the bird what catches the worm. But to-night he went out
a ped-dling, you see, and I don’t see what on airth keeps him so late,
un-less, may be, he can’t sell his head.”

“Can’t sell his head?—What sort of a bam-booz-ingly story is this you are
telling me?” get-ting into a tower-ing rage. “Do you pre-tend to say,
land-lord, that this har-poon-eer is ac-tu-ally en-gaged this blessed
Saturday night, or rather Sunday morn-ing, in ped-dling his head around
this town?”

“That’s pre-cisely it,” said the land-lord, “and I told him he couldn’t
sell it here, the mar-ket’s over-stocked.”

“With what?” shouted I.

“With heads to be sure; ain’t there too many heads in the world?”

“I tell you what it is, land-lord,” said I quite calmly, “you’d bet-ter
stop spin-ning that yarn to me—I’m not green.”

“May be not,” tak-ing out a stick and whit-tling a tooth-pick, “but I
rayther guess you’ll be done _brown_ if that ere har-poon-eer hears you a
slanderin’ his head.”

“I’ll break it for him,” said I, now fly-ing into a pas-sion again at
this un-ac-count-able far-rago of the land-lord’s.

“It’s broke a’ready,” said he.

“Broke,” said I—“_broke_, do you mean?”

“Sar-tain, and that’s the very reason he can’t sell it, I guess.”

“Land-lord,” said I, go-ing up to him as cool as Mt. He-cla in a
snow-storm—“land-lord, stop whit-tling. You and I must un-der-stand one
an-other, and that too without delay. I come to your house and want a
bed; you tell me you can only give me half a one; that the other half
be-longs to a cer-tain har-poon-eer. And about this har-poon-eer, whom I have
not yet seen, you per-sist in telling me the most mys-ti-fy-ing and
ex-as-per-at-ing stor-ies tend-ing to be-get in me an un-com-fort-able feel-ing
to-wards the man whom you design for my bed-fel-low—a sort of con-nex-ion,
land-lord, which is an in-tim-ate and con-fid-en-tial one in the highest
de-gree. I now de-mand of you to speak out and tell me who and what this
har-poon-eer is, and whether I shall be in all re-spects safe to spend the
night with him. And in the first place, you will be so good as to un-say
that story about selling his head, which if true I take to be good
evid-ence that this har-poon-eer is stark mad, and I’ve no idea of
sleep-ing with a mad-man; and you, sir, _y-ou_ I mean, land-lord, _y-ou_,
sir, by try-ing to in-duce me to do so know-ingly, would thereby render
your-self li-able to a crim-inal pro-sec-u-tion.”

“Wall,” said the land-lord, fetch-ing a long breath, “that’s a purty long
sar-mon for a chap that rips a little now and then. But be easy, be
easy, this here har-poon-eer I have been tel-lin’ you of has just ar-rived
from the south seas, where he bought up a lot of ’balmed New Zea-l-and
heads (great curios, you know), and he’s sold all on ’em but one, and
that one he’s try-ing to sell to-night, cause to-mor-row’s Sunday, and it
would not do to be sel-lin’ hu-man heads about the streets when folks is
goin’ to churches. He wanted to, last Sunday, but I stopped him just as
he was goin’ out of the door with four heads strung on a string, for
all the airth like a string of in-ions.”

This ac-count cleared up the oth-er-wise un-ac-count-able mys-tery, and showed
that the land-lord, after all, had had no idea of fool-ing me—but at the
same time what could I think of a har-poon-eer who stayed out of a
Saturday night clean into the holy Sab-bath, en-gaged in such a can-ni-bal
busi-ness as selling the heads of dead id-ol-at-ors?

“Depend upon it, land-lord, that har-poon-eer is a dan-ger-ous man.”

“He pays reg’lar,” was the re-join-der. “But come, it’s get-ting dread-ful
late, you had bet-ter be turn-ing flukes—it’s a nice bed; Sal and me
slept in that ere bed the night we were spliced. There’s plenty of room
for two to kick about in that bed; it’s an almighty big bed that. Why,
afore we give it up, Sal used to put our Sam and little Johnny in the
foot of it. But I got a dream-ing and sprawl-ing about one night, and
some-how, Sam got pitched on the floor, and came near break-ing his arm.
Arter that, Sal said it wouldn’t do. Come along here, I’ll give ye a
glim in a jiffy;” and so say-ing he lighted a candle and held it to-wards
me, of-fer-ing to lead the way. But I stood ir-res-ol-ute; when look-ing at a
clock in the corner, he ex-claimed “I vum it’s Sunday—you won’t see that
har-poon-eer to-night; he’s come to an-chor some-where—come along then;
_do_ come; _won’t_ ye come?”

I con-sidered the mat-ter a mo-ment, and then up stairs we went, and I was
ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and fur-nished, sure enough,
with a prodi-gious bed, al-most big enough in-deed for any four
har-poon-eers to sleep abreast.

“There,” said the land-lord, pla-cing the candle on a crazy old sea chest
that did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table; “there, make
your-self com-fort-able now, and good night to ye.” I turned round from
eye-ing the bed, but he had dis-ap-peared.

Fold-ing back the coun-ter-pane, I stooped over the bed. Though none of
the most el-eg-ant, it yet stood the scru-tiny tol-er-ably well. I then
glanced round the room; and be-sides the bed-stead and centre table,
could see no other fur-niture be-long-ing to the place, but a rude shelf,
the four walls, and a papered fire-board rep-res-ent-ing a man strik-ing a
whale. Of things not prop-erly be-long-ing to the room, there was a
ham-mock lashed up, and thrown upon the floor in one corner; also a
large sea-man’s bag, con-tain-ing the har-poon-eer’s ward-robe, no doubt in
lieu of a land trunk. Like-wise, there was a par-cel of out-land-ish bone
fish hooks on the shelf over the fire-place, and a tall har-poon
stand-ing at the head of the bed.

But what is this on the chest? I took it up, and held it close to the
light, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way pos-sible to
ar-rive at some sat-is-fact-ory con-clu-sion con-cern-ing it. I can com-pare it
to noth-ing but a large door mat, or-na-men-ted at the edges with little
tink-ling tags some-thing like the stained por-cu-pine quills round an
In-dian moc-casin. There was a hole or slit in the middle of this mat, as
you see the same in South Amer-ican ponchos. But could it be pos-sible
that any sober har-poon-eer would get into a door mat, and parade the
streets of any Chris-tian town in that sort of guise? I put it on, to
try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, be-ing un-com-monly shaggy
and thick, and I thought a little damp, as though this mys-ter-i-ous
har-poon-eer had been wear-ing it of a rainy day. I went up in it to a bit
of glass stuck against the wall, and I never saw such a sight in my
life. I tore my-self out of it in such a hurry that I gave my-self a kink
in the neck.

I sat down on the side of the bed, and com-menced think-ing about this
head-ped-dling har-poon-eer, and his door mat. After think-ing some time on
the bed-side, I got up and took off my mon-key jacket, and then stood in
the middle of the room think-ing. I then took off my coat, and thought a
little more in my shirt sleeves. But be-gin-ning to feel very cold now,
half un-dressed as I was, and re-mem-ber-ing what the land-lord said about
the har-poon-eer’s not com-ing home at all that night, it be-ing so very
late, I made no more ado, but jumped out of my pan-ta-loons and boots,
and then blow-ing out the light tumbled into bed, and com-men-ded my-self
to the care of heaven.

Whether that mat-tress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crock-ery,
there is no telling, but I rolled about a good deal, and could not
sleep for a long time. At last I slid off into a light doze, and had
pretty nearly made a good off-ing to-wards the land of Nod, when I heard
a heavy foot-fall in the pas-sage, and saw a glim-mer of light come into
the room from un-der the door.

Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the har-poon-eer, the in-fernal
head-ped-dler. But I lay per-fectly still, and re-solved not to say a word
till spoken to. Hold-ing a light in one hand, and that identical New
Zea-l-and head in the other, the stranger entered the room, and without
look-ing to-wards the bed, placed his candle a good way off from me on
the floor in one corner, and then began work-ing away at the knot-ted
cords of the large bag I be-fore spoke of as be-ing in the room. I was
all eager-ness to see his face, but he kept it aver-ted for some time
while em-ployed in un-la-cing the bag’s mouth. This ac-com-plished, how-ever,
he turned round—when, good heav-ens! what a sight! Such a face! It was
of a dark, purplish, yel-low col-our, here and there stuck over with
large black-ish look-ing squares. Yes, it’s just as I thought, he’s a
ter-rible bed-fel-low; he’s been in a fight, got dread-fully cut, and here
he is, just from the sur-geon. But at that mo-ment he chanced to turn his
face so to-wards the light, that I plainly saw they could not be
stick-ing-plasters at all, those black squares on his cheeks. They were
stains of some sort or other. At first I knew not what to make of this;
but soon an ink-ling of the truth oc-curred to me. I re-membered a story
of a white man—a whale-man too—who, fall-ing among the can-ni-bals, had
been tat-tooed by them. I con-cluded that this har-poon-eer, in the course
of his dis-tant voy-ages, must have met with a sim-ilar ad-ven-ture. And
what is it, thought I, after all! It’s only his out-side; a man can be
hon-est in any sort of skin. But then, what to make of his un-earthly
com-plex-ion, that part of it, I mean, ly-ing round about, and com-pletely
in-de-pend-ent of the squares of tat-too-ing. To be sure, it might be
noth-ing but a good coat of trop-ical tan-ning; but I never heard of a hot
sun’s tan-ning a white man into a purplish yel-low one. However, I had
never been in the South Seas; and per-haps the sun there pro-duced these
ex-traordin-ary ef-fects upon the skin. Now, while all these ideas were
passing through me like light-ning, this har-poon-eer never no-ticed me at
all. But, after some dif-fi-culty hav-ing opened his bag, he com-menced
fum-bling in it, and presently pulled out a sort of toma-hawk, and a
seal-skin wal-let with the hair on. Pla-cing these on the old chest in
the middle of the room, he then took the New Zea-l-and head—a ghastly
thing enough—and crammed it down into the bag. He now took off his
hat—a new beaver hat—when I came nigh singing out with fresh sur-prise.
There was no hair on his head—none to speak of at least—noth-ing but a
small scalp-knot twis-ted up on his fore-head. His bald purplish head now
looked for all the world like a mil-dewed skull. Had not the stranger
stood between me and the door, I would have bolted out of it quicker
than ever I bolted a din-ner.

Even as it was, I thought some-thing of slip-ping out of the win-dow, but
it was the second floor back. I am no cow-ard, but what to make of this
head-ped-dling purple ras-cal al-to-gether passed my com-pre-hen-sion.
Ignor-ance is the par-ent of fear, and be-ing com-pletely non-plussed and
con-foun-ded about the stranger, I con-fess I was now as much afraid of
him as if it was the devil him-self who had thus broken into my room at
the dead of night. In fact, I was so afraid of him that I was not game
enough just then to ad-dress him, and de-mand a sat-is-fact-ory an-swer
con-cern-ing what seemed in-ex-plic-able in him.

Mean-while, he con-tin-ued the busi-ness of un-dress-ing, and at last showed
his chest and arms. As I live, these covered parts of him were
checkered with the same squares as his face; his back, too, was all
over the same dark squares; he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years’
War, and just es-caped from it with a stick-ing-plaster shirt. Still
more, his very legs were marked, as if a par-cel of dark green frogs
were run-ning up the trunks of young palms. It was now quite plain that
he must be some ab-om-in-able sav-age or other shipped aboard of a whale-man
in the South Seas, and so landed in this Chris-tian coun-try. I quaked to
think of it. A ped-dler of heads too—per-haps the heads of his own
broth-ers. He might take a fancy to mine—heav-ens! look at that toma-hawk!

But there was no time for shud-der-ing, for now the sav-age went about
some-thing that com-pletely fas-cin-ated my at-ten-tion, and con-vinced me
that he must in-deed be a hea-then. Go-ing to his heavy grego, or wrap-all,
or dread-naught, which he had pre-vi-ously hung on a chair, he fumbled in
the pock-ets, and pro-duced at length a curi-ous little de-formed im-age
with a hunch on its back, and ex-actly the col-our of a three days’ old
Congo baby. Re-mem-ber-ing the em-balmed head, at first I al-most thought
that this black manikin was a real baby pre-served in some sim-ilar
man-ner. But see-ing that it was not at all limber, and that it glistened
a good deal like pol-ished ebony, I con-cluded that it must be noth-ing
but a wooden idol, which in-deed it proved to be. For now the sav-age
goes up to the empty fire-place, and re-mov-ing the papered fire-board,
sets up this little hunch-backed im-age, like a ten-pin, between the
and-irons. The chim-ney jambs and all the bricks in-side were very sooty,
so that I thought this fire-place made a very ap-pro-pri-ate little shrine
or chapel for his Congo idol.

I now screwed my eyes hard to-wards the half hid-den im-age, feel-ing but
ill at ease mean-time—to see what was next to fol-low. First he takes
about a double hand-ful of shav-ings out of his grego pocket, and places
them care-fully be-fore the idol; then lay-ing a bit of ship bis-cuit on
top and ap-ply-ing the flame from the lamp, he kindled the shav-ings into
a sac-ri-fi-cial blaze. Presently, after many hasty snatches into the
fire, and still hast-ier with-draw-als of his fin-gers (whereby he seemed
to be scorch-ing them badly), he at last suc-ceeded in draw-ing out the
bis-cuit; then blow-ing off the heat and ashes a little, he made a po-lite
of-fer of it to the little negro. But the little devil did not seem to
fancy such dry sort of fare at all; he never moved his lips. All these
strange antics were ac-com-pan-ied by still stranger gut-tural noises from
the de-votee, who seemed to be pray-ing in a sing-song or else singing
some pa-gan psalm-ody or other, dur-ing which his face twitched about in
the most un-nat-ural man-ner. At last ex-tin-guish-ing the fire, he took the
idol up very un-ce-re-mo-ni-ously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket
as care-lessly as if he were a sports-man bag-ging a dead wood-cock.

All these queer pro-ceed-ings in-creased my un-com-fort-able-ness, and see-ing
him now ex-hib-it-ing strong symp-toms of con-clud-ing his busi-ness
op-er-a-tions, and jump-ing into bed with me, I thought it was high time,
now or never, be-fore the light was put out, to break the spell in which
I had so long been bound.

But the in-ter-val I spent in de-lib-er-at-ing what to say, was a fatal one.
Tak-ing up his toma-hawk from the table, he ex-amined the head of it for
an in-stant, and then hold-ing it to the light, with his mouth at the
handle, he puffed out great clouds of to-bacco smoke. The next mo-ment
the light was ex-tin-guished, and this wild can-ni-bal, toma-hawk between
his teeth, sprang into bed with me. I sang out, I could not help it
now; and giv-ing a sud-den grunt of as-ton-ish-ment he began feel-ing me.

Stam-mer-ing out some-thing, I knew not what, I rolled away from him
against the wall, and then con-jured him, who-ever or whatever he might
be, to keep quiet, and let me get up and light the lamp again. But his
gut-tural re-sponses sat-is-fied me at once that he but ill com-pre-hen-ded my
mean-ing.

“Who-e debel you?”—he at last said—“you no speak-e, dam-me, I kill-e.”
And so say-ing the lighted toma-hawk began flour-ish-ing about me in the
dark.

“Land-lord, for God’s sake, Peter Coffin!” shouted I. “Land-lord! Watch!
Coffin! An-gels! save me!”

“Speak-e! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e!” again growled the
can-ni-bal, while his hor-rid flour-ish-ings of the toma-hawk scattered the
hot to-bacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get on fire.
But thank heaven, at that mo-ment the land-lord came into the room light
in hand, and leap-ing from the bed I ran up to him.

“Don’t be afraid now,” said he, grin-ning again, “Queequeg here wouldn’t
harm a hair of your head.”

“Stop your grin-ning,” shouted I, “and why didn’t you tell me that that
in-fernal har-poon-eer was a can-ni-bal?”

“I thought ye know’d it;—didn’t I tell ye, he was a ped-dlin’ heads
around town?—but turn flukes again and go to sleep. Queequeg, look
here—you sab-bee me, I sab-bee—you this man sleepe you—you sab-bee?”

“Me sab-bee plenty”—grunted Queequeg, puff-ing away at his pipe and
sit-ting up in bed.

“You gettee in,” he ad-ded, mo-tion-ing to me with his toma-hawk, and
throw-ing the clothes to one side. He really did this in not only a
civil but a really kind and char-it-able way. I stood look-ing at him a
mo-ment. For all his tat-too-ings he was on the whole a clean, comely
look-ing can-ni-bal. What’s all this fuss I have been mak-ing about,
thought I to my-self—the man’s a hu-man be-ing just as I am: he has just
as much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him. Bet-ter sleep
with a sober can-ni-bal than a drunken Chris-tian.

“Land-lord,” said I, “tell him to stash his toma-hawk there, or pipe, or
whatever you call it; tell him to stop smoking, in short, and I will
turn in with him. But I don’t fancy hav-ing a man smoking in bed with
me. It’s dan-ger-ous. Besides, I ain’t in-sured.”

This be-ing told to Queequeg, he at once com-plied, and again po-litely
mo-tioned me to get into bed—rolling over to one side as much as to
say—“I won’t touch a leg of ye.”

“Good night, land-lord,” said I, “you may go.”

I turned in, and never slept bet-ter in my life.


CHAPTER 4. The Coun-ter-pane.

Upon wak-ing next morn-ing about day-light, I found Queequeg’s arm thrown
over me in the most lov-ing and af-fec-tion-ate man-ner. You had al-most
thought I had been his wife. The coun-ter-pane was of patch-work, full of
odd little parti-col-oured squares and tri-angles; and this arm of his
tat-tooed all over with an in-ter-min-able Cretan labyrinth of a fig-ure, no
two parts of which were of one pre-cise shade—ow-ing I sup-pose to his
keep-ing his arm at sea un-meth-od-ic-ally in sun and shade, his shirt
sleeves ir-reg-u-larly rolled up at vari-ous times—this same arm of his, I
say, looked for all the world like a strip of that same patch-work
quilt. Indeed, partly ly-ing on it as the arm did when I first awoke, I
could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blen-ded their hues
to-gether; and it was only by the sense of weight and pres-sure that I
could tell that Queequeg was hug-ging me.

My sen-sa-tions were strange. Let me try to ex-plain them. When I was a
child, I well re-mem-ber a some-what sim-ilar cir-cum-stance that be-fell me;
whether it was a real-ity or a dream, I never could en-tirely settle. The
cir-cum-stance was this. I had been cut-ting up some caper or other—I
think it was try-ing to crawl up the chim-ney, as I had seen a little
sweep do a few days pre-vi-ous; and my step-mother who, some-how or other,
was all the time whip-ping me, or send-ing me to bed sup-per-less,—my
mother dragged me by the legs out of the chim-ney and packed me off to
bed, though it was only two o’clock in the af-ter-noon of the 21st June,
the longest day in the year in our hemi-sphere. I felt dread-fully. But
there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my little room in the
third floor, un-dressed my-self as slowly as pos-sible so as to kill time,
and with a bit-ter sigh got between the sheets.

I lay there dis-mally cal-cu-lat-ing that six-teen en-tire hours must elapse
be-fore I could hope for a re-sur-rec-tion. Six-teen hours in bed! the small
of my back ached to think of it. And it was so light too; the sun
shin-ing in at the win-dow, and a great rat-tling of coaches in the
streets, and the sound of gay voices all over the house. I felt worse
and worse—at last I got up, dressed, and softly go-ing down in my
stockinged feet, sought out my step-mother, and sud-denly threw my-self at
her feet, be-seech-ing her as a par-tic-u-lar fa-vour to give me a good
slip-per-ing for my mis-be-ha-viour; any-thing in-deed but con-demning me to
lie abed such an un-en-dur-able length of time. But she was the best and
most con-scien-tious of step-moth-ers, and back I had to go to my room. For
sev-eral hours I lay there broad awake, feel-ing a great deal worse than
I have ever done since, even from the greatest sub-sequent mis-for-tunes.
At last I must have fallen into a troubled night-mare of a doze; and
slowly wak-ing from it—half steeped in dreams—I opened my eyes, and the
be-fore sun-lit room was now wrapped in outer dark-ness. In-stantly I felt
a shock run-ning through all my frame; noth-ing was to be seen, and
noth-ing was to be heard; but a su-per-nat-ural hand seemed placed in mine.
My arm hung over the coun-ter-pane, and the name-less, un-ima-gin-able,
si-lent form or phantom, to which the hand be-longed, seemed closely
seated by my bed-side. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I lay there,
frozen with the most aw-ful fears, not dar-ing to drag away my hand; yet
ever think-ing that if I could but stir it one single inch, the hor-rid
spell would be broken. I knew not how this con-scious-ness at last glided
away from me; but wak-ing in the morn-ing, I shud-der-ingly re-membered it
all, and for days and weeks and months af-ter-wards I lost my-self in
con-found-ing at-tempts to ex-plain the mys-tery. Nay, to this very hour, I
of-ten puzzle my-self with it.

Now, take away the aw-ful fear, and my sen-sa-tions at feel-ing the
su-per-nat-ural hand in mine were very sim-ilar, in their strange-ness, to
those which I ex-per-i-enced on wak-ing up and see-ing Queequeg’s pa-gan arm
thrown round me. But at length all the past night’s events soberly
re-curred, one by one, in fixed real-ity, and then I lay only alive to
the com-ical pre-dic-a-ment. For though I tried to move his arm—un-lock his
bride-groom clasp—yet, sleep-ing as he was, he still hugged me tightly,
as though naught but death should part us twain. I now strove to rouse
him—“Queequeg!”—but his only an-swer was a snore. I then rolled over, my
neck feel-ing as if it were in a horse-col-lar; and sud-denly felt a
slight scratch. Throw-ing aside the coun-ter-pane, there lay the toma-hawk
sleep-ing by the sav-age’s side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby. A
pretty pickle, truly, thought I; abed here in a strange house in the
broad day, with a can-ni-bal and a toma-hawk! “Queequeg!—in the name of
good-ness, Queequeg, wake!” At length, by dint of much wrig-gling, and
loud and in-cess-ant ex-pos-tu-la-tions upon the un-be-com-ing-ness of his
hug-ging a fel-low male in that mat-ri-mo-nial sort of style, I suc-ceeded in
ex-tract-ing a grunt; and presently, he drew back his arm, shook him-self
all over like a New-found-land dog just from the wa-ter, and sat up in
bed, stiff as a pike-staff, look-ing at me, and rub-bing his eyes as if
he did not al-to-gether re-mem-ber how I came to be there, though a dim
con-scious-ness of know-ing some-thing about me seemed slowly dawn-ing over
him. Mean-while, I lay quietly eye-ing him, hav-ing no ser-i-ous mis-giv-ings
now, and bent upon nar-rowly ob-serving so curi-ous a creature. When, at
last, his mind seemed made up touch-ing the char-ac-ter of his bed-fel-low,
and he be-came, as it were, re-con-ciled to the fact; he jumped out upon
the floor, and by cer-tain signs and sounds gave me to un-der-stand that,
if it pleased me, he would dress first and then leave me to dress
af-ter-wards, leav-ing the whole apart-ment to my-self. Thinks I, Queequeg,
un-der the cir-cum-stances, this is a very civ-il-ized over-ture; but, the
truth is, these sav-ages have an in-nate sense of del-ic-acy, say what you
will; it is mar-vel-lous how es-sen-tially po-lite they are. I pay this
par-tic-u-lar com-pli-ment to Queequeg, be-cause he treated me with so much
ci-vil-ity and con-sid-er-a-tion, while I was guilty of great rude-ness;
star-ing at him from the bed, and watch-ing all his toi-lette mo-tions; for
the time my curi-os-ity get-ting the bet-ter of my breed-ing. Never-the-less,
a man like Queequeg you don’t see every day, he and his ways were well
worth un-usual re-gard-ing.

He com-menced dress-ing at top by don-ning his beaver hat, a very tall
one, by the by, and then—still minus his trowsers—he hunted up his
boots. What un-der the heav-ens he did it for, I can-not tell, but his
next move-ment was to crush him-self—boots in hand, and hat on—un-der the
bed; when, from sun-dry vi-ol-ent gasp-ings and strain-ings, I in-ferred he
was hard at work boot-ing him-self; though by no law of pro-pri-ety that I
ever heard of, is any man re-quired to be private when put-ting on his
boots. But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in the trans-ition
stage—neither cater-pil-lar nor but-ter-fly. He was just enough civ-il-ized
to show off his out-land-ish-ness in the strangest pos-sible man-ners. His
edu-ca-tion was not yet com-pleted. He was an un-der-gradu-ate. If he had not
been a small de-gree civ-il-ized, he very prob-ably would not have troubled
him-self with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a sav-age,
he never would have dreamt of get-ting un-der the bed to put them on. At
last, he emerged with his hat very much den-ted and crushed down over
his eyes, and began creak-ing and limp-ing about the room, as if, not
be-ing much ac-cus-tomed to boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cow-hide
ones—prob-ably not made to or-der either—rather pinched and tor-men-ted him
at the first go off of a bit-ter cold morn-ing.

See-ing, now, that there were no cur-tains to the win-dow, and that the
street be-ing very nar-row, the house op-pos-ite com-manded a plain view
into the room, and ob-serving more and more the in-dec-or-ous fig-ure that
Queequeg made, stav-ing about with little else but his hat and boots on;
I begged him as well as I could, to ac-cel-er-ate his toi-let some-what, and
par-tic-u-larly to get into his pan-ta-loons as soon as pos-sible. He
com-plied, and then pro-ceeded to wash him-self. At that time in the
morn-ing any Chris-tian would have washed his face; but Queequeg, to my
amazement, con-ten-ted him-self with re-strict-ing his ablu-tions to his
chest, arms, and hands. He then donned his waist-coat, and tak-ing up a
piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into wa-ter
and com-menced lath-er-ing his face. I was watch-ing to see where he kept
his razor, when lo and be-hold, he takes the har-poon from the bed
corner, slips out the long wooden stock, un-sheathes the head, whets it
a little on his boot, and strid-ing up to the bit of mir-ror against the
wall, be-gins a vig-or-ous scrap-ing, or rather har-poon-ing of his cheeks.
Thinks I, Queequeg, this is us-ing Ro-gers’s best cut-lery with a
ven-geance. After-wards I wondered the less at this op-er-a-tion when I came
to know of what fine steel the head of a har-poon is made, and how
ex-ceed-ingly sharp the long straight edges are al-ways kept.

The rest of his toi-let was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of
the room, wrapped up in his great pi-lot mon-key jacket, and sport-ing his
har-poon like a mar-shal’s baton.


CHAPTER 5. Break-fast.

I quickly fol-lowed suit, and des-cend-ing into the bar-room ac-cos-ted the
grin-ning land-lord very pleas-antly. I cher-ished no malice to-wards him,
though he had been sky-lark-ing with me not a little in the mat-ter of my
bed-fel-low.

However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a
good thing; the more’s the pity. So, if any one man, in his own proper
per-son, af-ford stuff for a good joke to any-body, let him not be
back-ward, but let him cheer-fully al-low him-self to spend and be spent in
that way. And the man that has any-thing boun-ti-fully laugh-able about
him, be sure there is more in that man than you per-haps think for.

The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been drop-ping in the
night pre-vi-ous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at. They were
nearly all whale-men; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates,
and sea car-penters, and sea coopers, and sea black-smiths, and
har-poon-eers, and ship keep-ers; a brown and brawny com-pany, with bosky
beards; an un-shorn, shaggy set, all wear-ing mon-key jack-ets for morn-ing
gowns.

You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. This
young fel-low’s healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, and
would seem to smell al-most as musky; he can-not have been three days
landed from his In-dian voy-age. That man next him looks a few shades
lighter; you might say a touch of satin wood is in him. In the
com-plex-ion of a third still lingers a tropic tawn, but slightly
bleached withal; _he_ doubt-less has tar-ried whole weeks ashore. But who
could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with vari-ous tints,
seemed like the Andes’ west-ern slope, to show forth in one ar-ray,
con-trast-ing cli-mates, zone by zone.

“Grub, ho!” now cried the land-lord, fling-ing open a door, and in we
went to break-fast.

They say that men who have seen the world, thereby be-come quite at ease
in man-ner, quite self-pos-sessed in com-pany. Not al-ways, though:
Led-y-ard, the great New Eng-land trav-el-ler, and Mungo Park, the Scotch
one; of all men, they pos-sessed the least as-sur-ance in the par-lor. But
per-haps the mere cross-ing of Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as
Led-y-ard did, or the tak-ing a long sol-it-ary walk on an empty stom-ach, in
the negro heart of Africa, which was the sum of poor Mungo’s
per-form-ances—this kind of travel, I say, may not be the very best mode
of at-tain-ing a high so-cial pol-ish. Still, for the most part, that sort
of thing is to be had any-where.

These re-flec-tions just here are oc-ca-sioned by the cir-cum-stance that
after we were all seated at the table, and I was pre-par-ing to hear some
good stor-ies about whal-ing; to my no small sur-prise, nearly every man
main-tained a pro-found si-lence. And not only that, but they looked
em-bar-rassed. Yes, here were a set of sea-dogs, many of whom without the
slight-est bash-ful-ness had boarded great whales on the high seas—en-tire
strangers to them—and du-elled them dead without wink-ing; and yet, here
they sat at a so-cial break-fast table—all of the same call-ing, all of
kindred tastes—look-ing round as sheep-ishly at each other as though they
had never been out of sight of some sheep-fold among the Green
Moun-tains. A curi-ous sight; these bash-ful bears, these timid war-rior
whale-men!

But as for Queequeg—why, Queequeg sat there among them—at the head of
the table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle. To be sure I
can-not say much for his breed-ing. His greatest ad-mirer could not have
cor-di-ally jus-ti-fied his bring-ing his har-poon into break-fast with him,
and us-ing it there without ce-re-mony; reach-ing over the table with it,
to the im-min-ent jeop-ardy of many heads, and grap-pling the beef-steaks
to-wards him. But _that_ was cer-tainly very coolly done by him, and
every one knows that in most people’s es-tim-a-tion, to do any-thing coolly
is to do it gen-teelly.

We will not speak of all Queequeg’s pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies here; how he es-chewed
cof-fee and hot rolls, and ap-plied his un-di-vided at-ten-tion to
beef-steaks, done rare. Enough, that when break-fast was over he with-drew
like the rest into the pub-lic room, lighted his toma-hawk-pipe, and was
sit-ting there quietly di-gest-ing and smoking with his in-sep-ar-able hat
on, when I sal-lied out for a stroll.


CHAPTER 6. The Street.

If I had been as-ton-ished at first catch-ing a glimpse of so out-land-ish
an in-di-vidual as Queequeg cir-cu-lat-ing among the po-lite so-ci-ety of a
civ-il-ized town, that as-ton-ish-ment soon de-par-ted upon tak-ing my first
day-light stroll through the streets of New Bed-ford.

In thor-ough-fares nigh the docks, any con-sid-er-able sea-port will
fre-quently of-fer to view the queerest look-ing non-des-cripts from for-eign
parts. Even in Broad-way and Chest-nut streets, Medi-ter-ranean mar-iners
will some-times jostle the af-frighted ladies. Re-gent Street is not
un-known to Las-cars and Malays; and at Bom-bay, in the Apollo Green, live
Yan-kees have of-ten scared the nat-ives. But New Bed-ford beats all Water
Street and Wap-ping. In these last-men-tioned haunts you see only
sail-ors; but in New Bed-ford, ac-tual can-ni-bals stand chat-ting at street
corners; sav-ages out-right; many of whom yet carry on their bones un-holy
flesh. It makes a stranger stare.

But, be-sides the Fee-geeans, Tong-ato-booarrs, Er-ro-mang-goans, Pan-nangi-ans,
and Brighg-gians, and, be-sides the wild spe-ci-mens of the whal-ing-craft
which un-heeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still
more curi-ous, cer-tainly more com-ical. There weekly ar-rive in this town
scores of green Ver-monters and New Hamp-shire men, all athirst for gain
and glory in the fish-ery. They are mostly young, of stal-wart frames;
fel-lows who have felled forests, and now seek to drop the axe and
snatch the whale-lance. Many are as green as the Green Moun-tains whence
they came. In some things you would think them but a few hours old.
Look there! that chap strut-ting round the corner. He wears a beaver hat
and swal-low-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and sheath-knife.
Here comes an-other with a sou’-wester and a bom-bazine cloak.

No town-bred dandy will com-pare with a coun-try-bred one—I mean a
down-right bump-kin dandy—a fel-low that, in the dog-days, will mow his
two acres in buck-skin gloves for fear of tan-ning his hands. Now when a
coun-try dandy like this takes it into his head to make a dis-tin-guished
repu-ta-tion, and joins the great whale-fish-ery, you should see the
com-ical things he does upon reach-ing the sea-port. In be-speak-ing his
sea-out-fit, he or-ders bell-but-tons to his waist-coats; straps to his
can-vas trowsers. Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bit-terly will burst those
straps in the first howl-ing gale, when thou art driven, straps,
but-tons, and all, down the throat of the tem-pest.

But think not that this fam-ous town has only har-poon-eers, can-ni-bals,
and bump-kins to show her vis-it-ors. Not at all. Still New Bed-ford is a
queer place. Had it not been for us whale-men, that tract of land would
this day per-haps have been in as howl-ing con-di-tion as the coast of
Lab-rador. As it is, parts of her back coun-try are enough to frighten
one, they look so bony. The town it-self is per-haps the dearest place to
live in, in all New Eng-land. It is a land of oil, true enough: but not
like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine. The streets do not run
with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them with fresh eggs.
Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all Amer-ica will you find more
pa-tri-cian-like houses; parks and gar-dens more op-u-lent, than in New
Bed-ford. Whence came they? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of
a coun-try?

Go and gaze upon the iron em-blem-at-ical har-poons round yon-der lofty
man-sion, and your ques-tion will be answered. Yes; all these brave
houses and flowery gar-dens came from the At-lantic, Pa-cific, and In-dian
oceans. One and all, they were har-pooned and dragged up hither from the
bot-tom of the sea. Can Herr Al-ex-an-der per-form a feat like that?

In New Bed-ford, fath-ers, they say, give whales for dowers to their
daugh-ters, and por-tion off their nieces with a few por-poises a-piece.
You must go to New Bed-ford to see a bril-liant wed-ding; for, they say,
they have reser-voirs of oil in every house, and every night reck-lessly
burn their lengths in sper-ma-ceti candles.

In sum-mer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples—long
av-en-ues of green and gold. And in August, high in air, the beau-ti-ful
and boun-ti-ful horse-chest-nuts, can-de-labra-wise, prof-fer the passer-by
their taper-ing up-right cones of con-greg-ated blos-soms. So om-ni-po-tent is
art; which in many a dis-trict of New Bed-ford has su-per-in-duced bright
ter-races of flowers upon the bar-ren re-fuse rocks thrown aside at
cre-ation’s fi-nal day.

And the wo-men of New Bed-ford, they bloom like their own red roses. But
roses only bloom in sum-mer; whereas the fine carna-tion of their cheeks
is per-en-nial as sun-light in the sev-enth heav-ens. Else-where match that
bloom of theirs, ye can-not, save in Salem, where they tell me the young
girls breathe such musk, their sailor sweet-hearts smell them miles off
shore, as though they were draw-ing nigh the odor-ous Moluc-cas in-stead of
the Pur-it-anic sands.


CHAPTER 7. The Chapel.

In this same New Bed-ford there stands a Whale-man’s Chapel, and few are
the moody fish-er-men, shortly bound for the In-dian Ocean or Pa-cific, who
fail to make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not.

Return-ing from my first morn-ing stroll, I again sal-lied out upon this
spe-cial er-rand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driv-ing
sleet and mist. Wrap-ping my-self in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called
bearskin, I fought my way against the stub-born storm. En-ter-ing, I found
a small scattered con-greg-a-tion of sail-ors, and sail-ors’ wives and
wid-ows. A muffled si-lence reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks
of the storm. Each si-lent wor-ship-per seemed pur-posely sit-ting apart
from the other, as if each si-lent grief were in-su-lar and
in-com-mu-nic-able. The chap-lain had not yet ar-rived; and there these
si-lent is-lands of men and wo-men sat stead-fastly eye-ing sev-eral marble
tab-lets, with black bor-ders, masoned into the wall on either side the
pul-pit. Three of them ran some-thing like the fol-low-ing, but I do not
pre-tend to quote:—

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF JOHN TALBOT, Who, at the age of eight-een, was
lost over-board, Near the Isle of Des-ol-a-tion, off Patago-nia, _Novem-ber_
1_st_, 1836. THIS TABLET Is erec-ted to his Memory BY HIS SISTER.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, NATHAN COLEMAN,
WALTER CANNY, SETH MACY, AND SAMUEL GLEIG, Form-ing one of the boats’
crews OF THE SHIP ELIZA Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On the
Off-shore Ground in the PACIFIC, _Decem-ber_ 31_st_, 1839. THIS MARBLE
Is here placed by their sur-viv-ing SHIPMATES.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF The late CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, Who in the bows
of his boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, _August_
3_d_, 1833. THIS TABLET Is erec-ted to his Memory BY HIS WIDOW.

Shak-ing off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated
my-self near the door, and turn-ing side-ways was sur-prised to see
Queequeg near me. Af-fected by the solem-nity of the scene, there was a
won-der-ing gaze of in-cred-u-lous curi-os-ity in his coun-ten-ance. This sav-age
was the only per-son present who seemed to no-tice my en-trance; be-cause
he was the only one who could not read, and, there-fore, was not read-ing
those fri-gid in-scrip-tions on the wall. Whether any of the re-l-at-ives of
the sea-men whose names ap-peared there were now among the con-greg-a-tion,
I knew not; but so many are the un-re-cor-ded ac-ci-dents in the fish-ery,
and so plainly did sev-eral wo-men present wear the coun-ten-ance if not
the trap-pings of some un-ceas-ing grief, that I feel sure that here
be-fore me were as-sembled those, in whose un-heal-ing hearts the sight of
those bleak tab-lets sym-path-et-ic-ally caused the old wounds to bleed
afresh.

Oh! ye whose dead lie bur-ied be-neath the green grass; who stand-ing
among flowers can say—here, _here_ lies my be-loved; ye know not the
des-ol-a-tion that broods in bos-oms like these. What bit-ter blanks in
those black-bordered marbles which cover no ashes! What des-pair in
those im-mov-able in-scrip-tions! What deadly voids and un-bid-den
in-fi-del-it-ies in the lines that seem to gnaw upon all Faith, and re-fuse
re-sur-rec-tions to the be-ings who have place-lessly per-ished without a
grave. As well might those tab-lets stand in the cave of Elephanta as
here.

In what census of liv-ing creatures, the dead of man-kind are in-cluded;
why it is that a uni-ver-sal pro-verb says of them, that they tell no
tales, though con-tain-ing more secrets than the Good-win Sands; how it is
that to his name who yes-ter-day de-par-ted for the other world, we pre-fix
so sig-ni-fic-ant and in-fi-del a word, and yet do not thus en-title him, if
he but em-barks for the re-motest In-dies of this liv-ing earth; why the
Life In-sur-ance Com-pan-ies pay death-for-feit-ures upon im-mor-tals; in what
eternal, un-stir-ring para-lysis, and deadly, hope-less trance, yet lies
an-tique Adam who died sixty round cen-tur-ies ago; how it is that we
still re-fuse to be com-for-ted for those who we nev-er-the-less main-tain are
dwell-ing in un-speak-able bliss; why all the liv-ing so strive to hush all
the dead; where-fore but the ru-mor of a knock-ing in a tomb will ter-rify
a whole city. All these things are not without their mean-ings.

But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these
dead doubts she gath-ers her most vi-tal hope.

It needs scarcely to be told, with what feel-ings, on the eve of a
Nan-tucket voy-age, I re-garded those marble tab-lets, and by the murky
light of that darkened, dole-ful day read the fate of the whale-men who
had gone be-fore me. Yes, Ish-mael, the same fate may be thine. But
some-how I grew merry again. De-light-ful in-duce-ments to em-bark, fine
chance for pro-mo-tion, it seems—aye, a stove boat will make me an
im-mor-tal by brevet. Yes, there is death in this busi-ness of whal-ing—a
speech-lessly quick chaotic bund-ling of a man into Etern-ity. But what
then? Me-thinks we have hugely mis-taken this mat-ter of Life and Death.
Me-thinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true
sub-stance. Me-thinks that in look-ing at things spir-itual, we are too
much like oysters ob-serving the sun through the wa-ter, and think-ing
that thick wa-ter the thin-nest of air. Me-thinks my body is but the lees
of my bet-ter be-ing. In fact take my body who will, take it I say, it is
not me. And there-fore three cheers for Nan-tucket; and come a stove boat
and stove body when they will, for stave my soul, Jove him-self can-not.


CHAPTER 8. The Pul-pit.

I had not been seated very long ere a man of a cer-tain ven-er-able
ro-bust-ness entered; im-me-di-ately as the storm-pel-ted door flew back upon
ad-mit-ting him, a quick re-gard-ful eye-ing of him by all the con-greg-a-tion,
suf-fi-ciently at-tested that this fine old man was the chap-lain. Yes, it
was the fam-ous Father Mapple, so called by the whale-men, among whom he
was a very great fa-vour-ite. He had been a sailor and a har-poon-eer in
his youth, but for many years past had ded-ic-ated his life to the
min-istry. At the time I now write of, Father Mapple was in the hardy
winter of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems mer-ging
into a second flower-ing youth, for among all the fis-sures of his
wrinkles, there shone cer-tain mild gleams of a newly de-vel-op-ing
bloom—the spring ver-dure peep-ing forth even be-neath Febru-ary’s snow. No
one hav-ing pre-vi-ously heard his his-tory, could for the first time
be-hold Father Mapple without the ut-most in-terest, be-cause there were
cer-tain en-graf-ted cler-ical pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies about him, im-put-able to that
ad-ven-tur-ous mari-time life he had led. When he entered I ob-served that
he car-ried no um-brella, and cer-tainly had not come in his car-riage, for
his tar-paulin hat ran down with melt-ing sleet, and his great pi-lot
cloth jacket seemed al-most to drag him to the floor with the weight of
the wa-ter it had ab-sorbed. However, hat and coat and over-shoes were one
by one re-moved, and hung up in a little space in an ad-ja-cent corner;
when, ar-rayed in a de-cent suit, he quietly ap-proached the pul-pit.

Like most old fash-ioned pul-pits, it was a very lofty one, and since a
reg-u-lar stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the
floor, ser-i-ously con-tract the already small area of the chapel, the
ar-chi-tect, it seemed, had ac-ted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and
fin-ished the pul-pit without a stairs, sub-sti-tut-ing a per-pen-dic-u-lar side
lad-der, like those used in mount-ing a ship from a boat at sea. The wife
of a whal-ing cap-tain had provided the chapel with a hand-some pair of
red worsted man-ropes for this lad-der, which, be-ing it-self nicely
headed, and stained with a ma-hogany col-our, the whole con-triv-ance,
con-sid-er-ing what man-ner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in bad
taste. Halt-ing for an in-stant at the foot of the lad-der, and with both
hands grasp-ing the or-na-mental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple
cast a look up-wards, and then with a truly sailor-like but still
rev-er-en-tial dex-ter-ity, hand over hand, moun-ted the steps as if
as-cend-ing the main-top of his ves-sel.

The per-pen-dic-u-lar parts of this side lad-der, as is usu-ally the case
with swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of
wood, so that at every step there was a joint. At my first glimpse of
the pul-pit, it had not es-caped me that how-ever con-veni-ent for a ship,
these joints in the present in-stance seemed un-ne-ces-sary. For I was not
pre-pared to see Father Mapple after gain-ing the height, slowly turn
round, and stoop-ing over the pul-pit, de-lib-er-ately drag up the lad-der
step by step, till the whole was de-pos-ited within, leav-ing him
im-preg-nable in his little Que-bec.

I pondered some time without fully com-pre-hend-ing the reason for this.
Father Mapple en-joyed such a wide repu-ta-tion for sin-cer-ity and
sanc-tity, that I could not sus-pect him of court-ing no-tori-ety by any
mere tricks of the stage. No, thought I, there must be some sober
reason for this thing; fur-ther-more, it must sym-bol-ize some-thing un-seen.
Can it be, then, that by that act of phys-ical isol-a-tion, he sig-ni-fies
his spir-itual with-drawal for the time, from all out-ward worldly ties
and con-nex-ions? Yes, for re-plen-ished with the meat and wine of the
word, to the faith-ful man of God, this pul-pit, I see, is a
self-con-tain-ing strong-hold—a lofty Ehren-breit-stein, with a per-en-nial
well of wa-ter within the walls.

But the side lad-der was not the only strange fea-ture of the place,
bor-rowed from the chap-lain’s former sea-farings. Between the marble
ceno-taphs on either hand of the pul-pit, the wall which formed its back
was ad-orned with a large paint-ing rep-res-ent-ing a gal-lant ship beat-ing
against a ter-rible storm off a lee coast of black rocks and snowy
break-ers. But high above the fly-ing scud and dark-rolling clouds, there
floated a little isle of sun-light, from which beamed forth an an-gel’s
face; and this bright face shed a dis-tinct spot of ra-di-ance upon the
ship’s tossed deck, some-thing like that sil-ver plate now in-ser-ted into
the Vict-ory’s plank where Nel-son fell. “Ah, noble ship,” the an-gel
seemed to say, “beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy
helm; for lo! the sun is break-ing through; the clouds are rolling
off—se-renest azure is at hand.”

Nor was the pul-pit it-self without a trace of the same sea-taste that
had achieved the lad-der and the pic-ture. Its pan-elled front was in the
like-ness of a ship’s bluff bows, and the Holy Bible res-ted on a
pro-ject-ing piece of scroll work, fash-ioned after a ship’s fiddle-headed
beak.

What could be more full of mean-ing?—for the pul-pit is ever this earth’s
fore-most part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pul-pit leads the
world. From thence it is the storm of God’s quick wrath is first
descried, and the bow must bear the earli-est brunt. From thence it is
the God of breezes fair or foul is first in-voked for fa-vour-able winds.
Yes, the world’s a ship on its pas-sage out, and not a voy-age com-plete;
and the pul-pit is its prow.


CHAPTER 9. The Ser-mon.

Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of un-as-sum-ing au-thor-ity ordered
the scattered people to con-dense. “Star-board gang-way, there! side away
to lar-board—lar-board gang-way to star-board! Mid-ships! mid-ships!”

There was a low rum-bling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a
still slighter shuff-ling of wo-men’s shoes, and all was quiet again, and
every eye on the preacher.

He paused a little; then kneel-ing in the pul-pit’s bows, fol-ded his
large brown hands across his chest, up-lif-ted his closed eyes, and
offered a prayer so deeply de-vout that he seemed kneel-ing and pray-ing
at the bot-tom of the sea.

This ended, in pro-longed sol-emn tones, like the con-tinual tolling of a
bell in a ship that is founder-ing at sea in a fog—in such tones he
com-menced read-ing the fol-low-ing hymn; but chan-ging his man-ner to-wards
the con-clud-ing stan-zas, burst forth with a peal-ing ex-ulta-tion and joy—


  “The ribs and ter-rors in the whale, Arched over me a dis-mal gloom,
  While all God’s sun-lit waves rolled by, And lift me deep-en-ing down
  to doom.

  “I saw the open-ing maw of hell, With end-less pains and sor-rows there;
  Which none but they that feel can tell— Oh, I was plunging to
  des-pair.

  “In black dis-tress, I called my God, When I could scarce be-lieve him
  mine, He bowed his ear to my com-plaints— No more the whale did me
  con-fine.

  “With speed he flew to my re-lief, As on a ra-di-ant dol-phin borne;
  Aw-ful, yet bright, as light-ning shone The face of my De-liverer God.

  “My song for ever shall re-cord That ter-rible, that joy-ful hour; I
  give the glory to my God, His all the mercy and the power.”




Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the
howl-ing of the storm. A brief pause en-sued; the preacher slowly turned
over the leaves of the Bible, and at last, fold-ing his hand down upon
the proper page, said: “Beloved ship-mates, clinch the last verse of the
first chapter of Jo-nah—‘And God had pre-pared a great fish to swal-low up
Jo-nah.’”

“Ship-mates, this book, con-tain-ing only four chapters—four yarns—is one
of the smal-lest strands in the mighty cable of the Scrip-tures. Yet what
depths of the soul does Jo-nah’s deep sealine sound! what a preg-nant
les-son to us is this prophet! What a noble thing is that canticle in
the fish’s belly! How bil-low-like and bois-ter-ously grand! We feel the
floods sur-ging over us; we sound with him to the kelpy bot-tom of the
wa-ters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea is about us! But _what_
is this les-son that the book of Jo-nah teaches? Ship-mates, it is a
two-stran-ded les-son; a les-son to us all as sin-ful men, and a les-son to
me as a pi-lot of the liv-ing God. As sin-ful men, it is a les-son to us
all, be-cause it is a story of the sin, hard-hearted-ness, sud-denly
awakened fears, the swift pun-ish-ment, re-pent-ance, pray-ers, and fi-nally
the de-liv-er-ance and joy of Jo-nah. As with all sin-ners among men, the
sin of this son of Amit-tai was in his wil-ful dis-obedi-ence of the
com-mand of God—never mind now what that com-mand was, or how
con-veyed—which he found a hard com-mand. But all the things that God
would have us do are hard for us to do—re-mem-ber that—and hence, he
of-tener com-mands us than en-deavors to per-suade. And if we obey God, we
must dis-obey ourselves; and it is in this dis-obey-ing ourselves, wherein
the hard-ness of obey-ing God con-sists.

“With this sin of dis-obedi-ence in him, Jo-nah still fur-ther flouts at
God, by seek-ing to flee from Him. He thinks that a ship made by men
will carry him into coun-tries where God does not reign, but only the
Cap-tains of this earth. He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks
a ship that’s bound for Tar-shish. There lurks, per-haps, a hitherto
un-heeded mean-ing here. By all ac-counts Tar-shish could have been no
other city than the mod-ern Cadiz. That’s the opin-ion of learned men.
And where is Cadiz, ship-mates? Cadiz is in Spain; as far by wa-ter, from
Joppa, as Jo-nah could pos-sibly have sailed in those an-cient days, when
the At-lantic was an al-most un-known sea. Be-cause Joppa, the mod-ern
Jaffa, ship-mates, is on the most east-erly coast of the Medi-ter-ranean,
the Syrian; and Tar-shish or Cadiz more than two thou-sand miles to the
west-ward from that, just out-side the Straits of Gibral-tar. See ye not
then, ship-mates, that Jo-nah sought to flee world-wide from God?
Miser-able man! Oh! most con-tempt-ible and worthy of all scorn; with
slouched hat and guilty eye, skulk-ing from his God; prowl-ing among the
ship-ping like a vile burg-lar hasten-ing to cross the seas. So
dis-ordered, self-con-demning is his look, that had there been po-lice-men
in those days, Jo-nah, on the mere sus-pi-cion of some-thing wrong, had
been ar-res-ted ere he touched a deck. How plainly he’s a fu-git-ive! no
bag-gage, not a hat-box, valise, or car-pet-bag,—no friends ac-com-pany him
to the wharf with their adieux. At last, after much dodging search, he
finds the Tar-shish ship re-ceiv-ing the last items of her cargo; and as
he steps on board to see its Cap-tain in the cabin, all the sail-ors for
the mo-ment de-sist from hoist-ing in the goods, to mark the stranger’s
evil eye. Jo-nah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and
con-fid-ence; in vain es-says his wretched smile. Strong in-tu-itions of the
man as-sure the mar-iners he can be no in-no-cent. In their game-some but
still ser-i-ous way, one whis-pers to the other—“Jack, he’s robbed a
widow;” or, “Joe, do you mark him; he’s a bi-gam-ist;” or, “Harry lad, I
guess he’s the adulterer that broke jail in old Go-mor-rah, or be-like,
one of the miss-ing mur-der-ers from So-dom.” Another runs to read the bill
that’s stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship is
moored, of-fer-ing five hun-dred gold coins for the ap-pre-hen-sion of a
par-ri-cide, and con-tain-ing a de-scrip-tion of his per-son. He reads, and
looks from Jo-nah to the bill; while all his sym-path-etic ship-mates now
crowd round Jo-nah, pre-pared to lay their hands upon him. Frighted Jo-nah
trembles, and sum-mon-ing all his bold-ness to his face, only looks so
much the more a cow-ard. He will not con-fess him-self sus-pec-ted; but that
it-self is strong sus-pi-cion. So he makes the best of it; and when the
sail-ors find him not to be the man that is ad-vert-ised, they let him
pass, and he des-cends into the cabin.

“‘Who’s there?’ cries the Cap-tain at his busy desk, hur-riedly mak-ing
out his pa-pers for the Cus-toms—‘Who’s there?’ Oh! how that harm-less
ques-tion mangles Jo-nah! For the in-stant he al-most turns to flee again.
But he ral-lies. ‘I seek a pas-sage in this ship to Tar-shish; how soon
sail ye, sir?’ Thus far the busy Cap-tain had not looked up to Jo-nah,
though the man now stands be-fore him; but no sooner does he hear that
hol-low voice, than he darts a scru-tin-iz-ing glance. ‘We sail with the
next com-ing tide,’ at last he slowly answered, still in-tently eye-ing
him. ‘No sooner, sir?’—‘Soon enough for any hon-est man that goes a
pas-sen-ger.’ Ha! Jo-nah, that’s an-other stab. But he swiftly calls away
the Cap-tain from that scent. ‘I’ll sail with ye,’—he says,—‘the pas-sage
money how much is that?—I’ll pay now.’ For it is par-tic-u-larly writ-ten,
ship-mates, as if it were a thing not to be over-looked in this his-tory,
‘that he paid the fare thereof’ ere the craft did sail. And taken with
the con-text, this is full of mean-ing.

“Now Jo-nah’s Cap-tain, ship-mates, was one whose dis-cern-ment de-tects
crime in any, but whose cu-pid-ity ex-poses it only in the pen-ni-less. In
this world, ship-mates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, and
without a pass-port; whereas Vir-tue, if a pau-per, is stopped at all
fron-ti-ers. So Jo-nah’s Cap-tain pre-pares to test the length of Jo-nah’s
purse, ere he judge him openly. He charges him thrice the usual sum;
and it’s as-sen-ted to. Then the Cap-tain knows that Jo-nah is a fu-git-ive;
but at the same time re-solves to help a flight that paves its rear with
gold. Yet when Jo-nah fairly takes out his purse, prudent sus-pi-cions
still mo-lest the Cap-tain. He rings every coin to find a coun-ter-feit.
Not a for-ger, any way, he mut-ters; and Jo-nah is put down for his
pas-sage. ‘Point out my state-room, Sir,’ says Jo-nah now, ‘I’m
travel-weary; I need sleep.’ ‘Thou lookest like it,’ says the Cap-tain,
‘there’s thy room.’ Jo-nah enters, and would lock the door, but the lock
con-tains no key. Hear-ing him fool-ishly fum-bling there, the Cap-tain
laughs lowly to him-self, and mut-ters some-thing about the doors of
con-victs’ cells be-ing never al-lowed to be locked within. All dressed
and dusty as he is, Jo-nah throws him-self into his berth, and finds the
little state-room ceil-ing al-most rest-ing on his fore-head. The air is
close, and Jo-nah gasps. Then, in that con-trac-ted hole, sunk, too,
be-neath the ship’s wa-ter-line, Jo-nah feels the her-ald-ing presen-ti-ment
of that stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smal-lest of
his bowels’ wards.

“Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly
os-cil-lates in Jo-nah’s room; and the ship, heel-ing over to-wards the
wharf with the weight of the last bales re-ceived, the lamp, flame and
all, though in slight mo-tion, still main-tains a per-man-ent ob-liquity
with ref-er-ence to the room; though, in truth, in-fal-libly straight
it-self, it but made ob-vi-ous the false, ly-ing levels among which it
hung. The lamp alarms and fright-ens Jo-nah; as ly-ing in his berth his
tor-men-ted eyes roll round the place, and this thus far suc-cess-ful
fu-git-ive finds no refuge for his rest-less glance. But that
con-tra-dic-tion in the lamp more and more ap-pals him. The floor, the
ceil-ing, and the side, are all awry. ‘Oh! so my con-science hangs in
me!’ he groans, ‘straight up-wards, so it burns; but the cham-bers of my
soul are all in crooked-ness!’

“Like one who after a night of drunken rev-elry hies to his bed, still
reel-ing, but with con-science yet prick-ing him, as the plungings of the
Ro-man race-horse but so much the more strike his steel tags into him;
as one who in that miser-able plight still turns and turns in giddy
an-guish, pray-ing God for an-ni-hil-a-tion un-til the fit be passed; and at
last amid the whirl of woe he feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as
over the man who bleeds to death, for con-science is the wound, and
there’s naught to staunch it; so, after sore wrest-lings in his berth,
Jo-nah’s prodigy of pon-der-ous misery drags him drown-ing down to sleep.

“And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; and
from the deser-ted wharf the un-cheered ship for Tar-shish, all ca-reen-ing,
glides to sea. That ship, my friends, was the first of re-cor-ded
smug-glers! the con-tra-band was Jo-nah. But the sea rebels; he will not
bear the wicked bur-den. A dread-ful storm comes on, the ship is like to
break. But now when the boat-swain calls all hands to lighten her; when
boxes, bales, and jars are clat-ter-ing over-board; when the wind is
shriek-ing, and the men are yelling, and every plank thun-ders with
tramp-ling feet right over Jo-nah’s head; in all this ra-ging tu-mult,
Jo-nah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black sky and ra-ging sea,
feels not the reel-ing tim-bers, and little hears he or heeds he the far
rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleav-ing
the seas after him. Aye, ship-mates, Jo-nah was gone down into the sides
of the ship—a berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast
asleep. But the frightened mas-ter comes to him, and shrieks in his dead
ear, ‘What mean-est thou, O, sleeper! arise!’ Startled from his leth-argy
by that dire-ful cry, Jo-nah stag-gers to his feet, and stum-bling to the
deck, grasps a shroud, to look out upon the sea. But at that mo-ment he
is sprung upon by a pan-ther bil-low leap-ing over the bul-warks. Wave
after wave thus leaps into the ship, and find-ing no speedy vent runs
roar-ing fore and aft, till the mar-iners come nigh to drown-ing while yet
afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her af-frighted face from the
steep gul-lies in the black-ness over-head, aghast Jo-nah sees the rear-ing
bow-sprit point-ing high up-ward, but soon beat down-ward again to-wards the
tor-men-ted deep.

“Ter-rors upon ter-rors run shout-ing through his soul. In all his
cringing at-ti-tudes, the God-fu-git-ive is now too plainly known. The
sail-ors mark him; more and more cer-tain grow their sus-pi-cions of him,
and at last, fully to test the truth, by re-fer-ring the whole mat-ter to
high Heaven, they fall to cast-ing lots, to see for whose cause this
great tem-pest was upon them. The lot is Jo-nah’s; that dis-covered, then
how furi-ously they mob him with their ques-tions. ‘What is thine
oc-cu-pa-tion? Whence comest thou? Thy coun-try? What people? But mark now,
my ship-mates, the be-ha-vior of poor Jo-nah. The eager mar-iners but ask
him who he is, and where from; whereas, they not only re-ceive an an-swer
to those ques-tions, but like-wise an-other an-swer to a ques-tion not put
by them, but the un-so-li-cited an-swer is forced from Jo-nah by the hard
hand of God that is upon him.

“‘I am a Hebrew,’ he cries—and then—‘I fear the Lord the God of Heaven
who hath made the sea and the dry land!’ Fear him, O Jo-nah? Aye, well
might-est thou fear the Lord God _then!_ Straight-way, he now goes on to
make a full con-fes-sion; whereupon the mar-iners be-came more and more
ap-palled, but still are pi-ti-ful. For when Jo-nah, not yet sup-plic-at-ing
God for mercy, since he but too well knew the dark-ness of his
deserts,—when wretched Jo-nah cries out to them to take him and cast him
forth into the sea, for he knew that for _his_ sake this great tem-pest
was upon them; they mer-ci-fully turn from him, and seek by other means
to save the ship. But all in vain; the in-dig-nant gale howls louder;
then, with one hand raised in-vok-ingly to God, with the other they not
un-re-luct-antly lay hold of Jo-nah.

“And now be-hold Jo-nah taken up as an an-chor and dropped into the sea;
when in-stantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea
is still, as Jo-nah car-ries down the gale with him, leav-ing smooth wa-ter
be-hind. He goes down in the whirl-ing heart of such a mas-ter-less
com-mo-tion that he scarce heeds the mo-ment when he drops seeth-ing into
the yawn-ing jaws await-ing him; and the whale shoots-to all his ivory
teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his prison. Then Jo-nah prayed
unto the Lord out of the fish’s belly. But ob-serve his prayer, and
learn a weighty les-son. For sin-ful as he is, Jo-nah does not weep and
wail for dir-ect de-liv-er-ance. He feels that his dread-ful pun-ish-ment is
just. He leaves all his de-liv-er-ance to God, con-tent-ing him-self with
this, that spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look to-wards
His holy temple. And here, ship-mates, is true and faith-ful re-pent-ance;
not clam-or-ous for par-don, but grate-ful for pun-ish-ment. And how pleas-ing
to God was this con-duct in Jo-nah, is shown in the even-tual de-liv-er-ance
of him from the sea and the whale. Ship-mates, I do not place Jo-nah
be-fore you to be copied for his sin but I do place him be-fore you as a
model for re-pent-ance. Sin not; but if you do, take heed to re-pent of it
like Jo-nah.”

While he was speak-ing these words, the howl-ing of the shriek-ing,
slant-ing storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who,
when de-scrib-ing Jo-nah’s sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm him-self.
His deep chest heaved as with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed
the war-ring ele-ments at work; and the thun-ders that rolled away from
off his swarthy brow, and the light leap-ing from his eye, made all his
simple hear-ers look on him with a quick fear that was strange to them.

There now came a lull in his look, as he si-lently turned over the
leaves of the Book once more; and, at last, stand-ing mo-tion-less, with
closed eyes, for the mo-ment, seemed com-mun-ing with God and him-self.

But again he leaned over to-wards the people, and bow-ing his head lowly,
with an as-pect of the deep-est yet man-li-est hu-mil-ity, he spake these
words:

“Ship-mates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands press
upon me. I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the les-son that
Jo-nah teaches to all sin-ners; and there-fore to ye, and still more to
me, for I am a greater sin-ner than ye. And now how gladly would I come
down from this mast-head and sit on the hatches there where you sit,
and listen as you listen, while some one of you reads _me_ that other
and more aw-ful les-son which Jo-nah teaches to _me_, as a pi-lot of the
liv-ing God. How be-ing an anoin-ted pi-lot-prophet, or speaker of true
things, and bid-den by the Lord to sound those un-wel-come truths in the
ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jo-nah, ap-palled at the hos-til-ity he should
raise, fled from his mis-sion, and sought to es-cape his duty and his God
by tak-ing ship at Joppa. But God is every-where; Tar-shish he never
reached. As we have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swal-lowed
him down to liv-ing gulfs of doom, and with swift slant-ings tore him
along ‘into the midst of the seas,’ where the ed-dy-ing depths sucked him
ten thou-sand fathoms down, and ‘the weeds were wrapped about his head,’
and all the wa-tery world of woe bowled over him. Yet even then bey-ond
the reach of any plum-met—‘out of the belly of hell’—when the whale
groun-ded upon the ocean’s ut-most bones, even then, God heard the
en-gul-phed, re-pent-ing prophet when he cried. Then God spake unto the
fish; and from the shud-der-ing cold and black-ness of the sea, the whale
came breech-ing up to-wards the warm and pleas-ant sun, and all the
de-lights of air and earth; and ‘vomited out Jo-nah upon the dry land;’
when the word of the Lord came a second time; and Jo-nah, bruised and
beaten—his ears, like two sea-shells, still mul-ti-tudin-ously mur-mur-ing
of the ocean—Jo-nah did the Almighty’s bid-ding. And what was that,
ship-mates? To preach the Truth to the face of False-hood! That was it!

“This, ship-mates, this is that other les-son; and woe to that pi-lot of
the liv-ing God who slights it. Woe to him whom this world charms from
Gospel duty! Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the wa-ters when God
has brewed them into a gale! Woe to him who seeks to please rather than
to ap-pal! Woe to him whose good name is more to him than good-ness! Woe
to him who, in this world, courts not dis-honor! Woe to him who would
not be true, even though to be false were sal-va-tion! Yea, woe to him
who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while preach-ing to oth-ers is
him-self a cast-away!”

He dropped and fell away from him-self for a mo-ment; then lift-ing his
face to them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with
a heav-enly en-thu-si-asm,—“But oh! ship-mates! on the star-board hand of
every woe, there is a sure de-light; and higher the top of that de-light,
than the bot-tom of the woe is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than
the kel-son is low? De-light is to him—a far, far up-ward, and in-ward
de-light—who against the proud gods and com-modores of this earth, ever
stands forth his own in-ex-or-able self. De-light is to him whose strong
arms yet sup-port him, when the ship of this base treach-er-ous world has
gone down be-neath him. De-light is to him, who gives no quarter in the
truth, and kills, burns, and des-troys all sin though he pluck it out
from un-der the robes of Sen-at-ors and Judges. De-light,—top-gal-lant
de-light is to him, who ac-know-ledges no law or lord, but the Lord his
God, and is only a pat-riot to heaven. De-light is to him, whom all the
waves of the bil-lows of the seas of the bois-ter-ous mob can never shake
from this sure Keel of the Ages. And eternal de-light and de-li-cious-ness
will be his, who com-ing to lay him down, can say with his fi-nal
breath—O Father!—chiefly known to me by Thy rod—mor-tal or im-mor-tal,
here I die. I have striven to be Thine, more than to be this world’s,
or mine own. Yet this is noth-ing: I leave etern-ity to Thee; for what is
man that he should live out the life-time of his God?”

He said no more, but slowly wav-ing a be-ne-dic-tion, covered his face with
his hands, and so re-mained kneel-ing, till all the people had de-par-ted,
and he was left alone in the place.


CHAPTER 10. A Bo-som Friend.

Return-ing to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there
quite alone; he hav-ing left the Chapel be-fore the be-ne-dic-tion some
time. He was sit-ting on a bench be-fore the fire, with his feet on the
stove hearth, and in one hand was hold-ing close up to his face that
little negro idol of his; peer-ing hard into its face, and with a
jack-knife gently whit-tling away at its nose, mean-while hum-ming to
him-self in his hea-then-ish way.

But be-ing now in-ter-rup-ted, he put up the im-age; and pretty soon, go-ing
to the table, took up a large book there, and pla-cing it on his lap
began count-ing the pages with de-lib-er-ate reg-u-lar-ity; at every fiftieth
page—as I fan-cied—stop-ping a mo-ment, look-ing va-cantly around him, and
giv-ing ut-ter-ance to a long-drawn gurg-ling whistle of as-ton-ish-ment. He
would then be-gin again at the next fifty; seem-ing to com-mence at num-ber
one each time, as though he could not count more than fifty, and it was
only by such a large num-ber of fifties be-ing found to-gether, that his
as-ton-ish-ment at the mul-ti-tude of pages was ex-cited.

With much in-terest I sat watch-ing him. Sav-age though he was, and
hideously marred about the face—at least to my taste—his coun-ten-ance
yet had a some-thing in it which was by no means dis-agree-able. You
can-not hide the soul. Through all his un-earthly tat-too-ings, I thought I
saw the traces of a simple hon-est heart; and in his large, deep eyes,
fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens of a spirit that would dare a
thou-sand dev-ils. And be-sides all this, there was a cer-tain lofty
bear-ing about the Pagan, which even his un-couth-ness could not
al-to-gether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never
had had a cred-itor. Whether it was, too, that his head be-ing shaved,
his fore-head was drawn out in freer and brighter re-lief, and looked
more ex-pans-ive than it oth-er-wise would, this I will not ven-ture to
de-cide; but cer-tain it was his head was phren-o-lo-gic-ally an ex-cel-lent
one. It may seem ri-dicu-lous, but it re-minded me of Gen-eral Wash-ing-ton’s
head, as seen in the pop-u-lar busts of him. It had the same long
reg-u-larly graded re-treat-ing slope from above the brows, which were
like-wise very pro-ject-ing, like two long promon-tor-ies thickly wooded on
top. Queequeg was Ge-orge Wash-ing-ton can-ni-bal-ist-ic-ally de-veloped.

Whilst I was thus closely scan-ning him, half-pre-tend-ing mean-while to be
look-ing out at the storm from the case-ment, he never heeded my
pres-ence, never troubled him-self with so much as a single glance; but
ap-peared wholly oc-cu-pied with count-ing the pages of the mar-vel-lous
book. Con-sid-er-ing how so-ci-ably we had been sleep-ing to-gether the night
pre-vi-ous, and es-pe-cially con-sid-er-ing the af-fec-tion-ate arm I had found
thrown over me upon wak-ing in the morn-ing, I thought this in-dif-fer-ence
of his very strange. But sav-ages are strange be-ings; at times you do
not know ex-actly how to take them. At first they are over-aw-ing; their
calm self-col-lec-ted-ness of sim-pli-city seems a So-cratic wis-dom. I had
no-ticed also that Queequeg never con-sor-ted at all, or but very little,
with the other sea-men in the inn. He made no ad-vances whatever;
ap-peared to have no de-sire to en-large the circle of his ac-quaint-ances.
All this struck me as mighty sin-gu-lar; yet, upon second thoughts, there
was some-thing al-most sub-lime in it. Here was a man some twenty thou-sand
miles from home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is—which was the only
way he could get there—thrown among people as strange to him as though
he were in the planet Jupiter; and yet he seemed en-tirely at his ease;
pre-serving the ut-most serenity; con-tent with his own com-pan-ion-ship;
al-ways equal to him-self. Surely this was a touch of fine philo-sophy;
though no doubt he had never heard there was such a thing as that. But,
per-haps, to be true philo-soph-ers, we mor-tals should not be con-scious of
so liv-ing or so striv-ing. So soon as I hear that such or such a man
gives him-self out for a philo-sopher, I con-clude that, like the
dys-peptic old wo-man, he must have “broken his di-gester.”

As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burn-ing low, in that
mild stage when, after its first in-tens-ity has warmed the air, it then
only glows to be looked at; the even-ing shades and phantoms gath-er-ing
round the case-ments, and peer-ing in upon us si-lent, sol-it-ary twain; the
storm boom-ing without in sol-emn swells; I began to be sens-ible of
strange feel-ings. I felt a melt-ing in me. No more my splintered heart
and maddened hand were turned against the wolfish world. This sooth-ing
sav-age had re-deemed it. There he sat, his very in-dif-fer-ence speak-ing a
nature in which there lurked no civ-il-ized hy-po-cris-ies and bland
de-ceits. Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet I began to
feel my-self mys-ter-i-ously drawn to-wards him. And those same things that
would have re-pelled most oth-ers, they were the very mag-nets that thus
drew me. I’ll try a pa-gan friend, thought I, since Chris-tian kind-ness
has proved but hol-low cour-tesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some
friendly signs and hints, do-ing my best to talk with him mean-while. At
first he little no-ticed these ad-vances; but presently, upon my
re-fer-ring to his last night’s hos-pit-al-it-ies, he made out to ask me
whether we were again to be bed-fel-lows. I told him yes; whereat I
thought he looked pleased, per-haps a little com-pli-men-ted.

We then turned over the book to-gether, and I en-deavored to ex-plain to
him the pur-pose of the print-ing, and the mean-ing of the few pic-tures
that were in it. Thus I soon en-gaged his in-terest; and from that we
went to jab-ber-ing the best we could about the vari-ous outer sights to
be seen in this fam-ous town. Soon I pro-posed a so-cial smoke; and,
pro-du-cing his pouch and toma-hawk, he quietly offered me a puff. And
then we sat ex-chan-ging puffs from that wild pipe of his, and keep-ing it
reg-u-larly passing between us.

If there yet lurked any ice of in-dif-fer-ence to-wards me in the Pagan’s
breast, this pleas-ant, gen-ial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and
left us cronies. He seemed to take to me quite as nat-ur-ally and
un-bid-denly as I to him; and when our smoke was over, he pressed his
fore-head against mine, clasped me round the waist, and said that
hence-forth we were mar-ried; mean-ing, in his coun-try’s phrase, that we
were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if need should be. In a
coun-try-man, this sud-den flame of friend-ship would have seemed far too
pre-ma-ture, a thing to be much dis-trus-ted; but in this simple sav-age
those old rules would not ap-ply.

After sup-per, and an-other so-cial chat and smoke, we went to our room
to-gether. He made me a present of his em-balmed head; took out his
enorm-ous to-bacco wal-let, and grop-ing un-der the to-bacco, drew out some
thirty dol-lars in sil-ver; then spread-ing them on the table, and
mech-an-ic-ally di-vid-ing them into two equal por-tions, pushed one of them
to-wards me, and said it was mine. I was go-ing to re-mon-strate; but he
si-lenced me by pour-ing them into my trowsers’ pock-ets. I let them stay.
He then went about his even-ing pray-ers, took out his idol, and re-moved
the pa-per fire-board. By cer-tain signs and symp-toms, I thought he seemed
anxious for me to join him; but well know-ing what was to fol-low, I
de-lib-er-ated a mo-ment whether, in case he in-vited me, I would com-ply or
oth-er-wise.

I was a good Chris-tian; born and bred in the bosom of the in-fal-lible
Pres-by-terian Church. How then could I unite with this wild id-ol-ator in
wor-ship-ping his piece of wood? But what is wor-ship? thought I. Do you
sup-pose now, Ish-mael, that the mag-nan-im-ous God of heaven and
earth—pa-gans and all in-cluded—can pos-sibly be jeal-ous of an
in-sig-ni-fic-ant bit of black wood? Im-possible! But what is wor-ship?—to do
the will of God—_that_ is wor-ship. And what is the will of God?—to do
to my fel-low man what I would have my fel-low man to do to me—_that_ is
the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fel-low man. And what do I wish
that this Queequeg would do to me? Why, unite with me in my par-tic-u-lar
Pres-by-terian form of wor-ship. Con-sequently, I must then unite with him
in his; ergo, I must turn id-ol-ator. So I kindled the shav-ings; helped
prop up the in-no-cent little idol; offered him burnt bis-cuit with
Queequeg; salamed be-fore him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that
done, we un-dressed and went to bed, at peace with our own con-sciences
and all the world. But we did not go to sleep without some little chat.

How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for con-fid-en-tial
dis-clos-ures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the
very bot-tom of their souls to each other; and some old couples of-ten
lie and chat over old times till nearly morn-ing. Thus, then, in our
hearts’ hon-ey-moon, lay I and Queequeg—a cosy, lov-ing pair.


CHAPTER 11. Night-gown.

We had lain thus in bed, chat-ting and nap-ping at short in-ter-vals, and
Queequeg now and then af-fec-tion-ately throw-ing his brown tat-tooed legs
over mine, and then draw-ing them back; so en-tirely so-ci-able and free
and easy were we; when, at last, by reason of our con-fab-u-la-tions, what
little nap-pish-ness re-mained in us al-to-gether de-par-ted, and we felt like
get-ting up again, though day-break was yet some way down the fu-ture.

Yes, we be-came very wake-ful; so much so that our re-cum-bent po-s-i-tion
began to grow wear-i-some, and by little and little we found ourselves
sit-ting up; the clothes well tucked around us, lean-ing against the
head-board with our four knees drawn up close to-gether, and our two
noses bend-ing over them, as if our kneep-ans were warm-ing-pans. We felt
very nice and snug, the more so since it was so chilly out of doors;
in-deed out of bed-clothes too, see-ing that there was no fire in the
room. The more so, I say, be-cause truly to en-joy bod-ily warmth, some
small part of you must be cold, for there is no qual-ity in this world
that is not what it is merely by con-trast. Noth-ing ex-ists in it-self. If
you flat-ter your-self that you are all over com-fort-able, and have been
so a long time, then you can-not be said to be com-fort-able any more. But
if, like Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown
of your head be slightly chilled, why then, in-deed, in the gen-eral
con-scious-ness you feel most de-light-fully and un-mis-tak-ably warm. For
this reason a sleep-ing apart-ment should never be fur-nished with a fire,
which is one of the lux-uri-ous dis-com-forts of the rich. For the height
of this sort of de-li-cious-ness is to have noth-ing but the blanket
between you and your snug-ness and the cold of the outer air. Then there
you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an arc-tic crys-tal.

We had been sit-ting in this crouch-ing man-ner for some time, when all at
once I thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whether
by day or by night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of al-ways
keep-ing my eyes shut, in or-der the more to con-cen-trate the snug-ness of
be-ing in bed. Be-cause no man can ever feel his own iden-tity aright
ex-cept his eyes be closed; as if dark-ness were in-deed the proper
ele-ment of our es-sences, though light be more con-genial to our clayey
part. Upon open-ing my eyes then, and com-ing out of my own pleas-ant and
self-cre-ated dark-ness into the im-posed and coarse outer gloom of the
unil-lu-min-ated twelve-o’clock-at-night, I ex-per-i-enced a dis-agree-able
re-vul-sion. Nor did I at all ob-ject to the hint from Queequeg that
per-haps it were best to strike a light, see-ing that we were so wide
awake; and be-sides he felt a strong de-sire to have a few quiet puffs
from his Toma-hawk. Be it said, that though I had felt such a strong
re-pug-nance to his smoking in the bed the night be-fore, yet see how
elastic our stiff pre-ju-dices grow when love once comes to bend them.
For now I liked noth-ing bet-ter than to have Queequeg smoking by me,
even in bed, be-cause he seemed to be full of such se-rene house-hold joy
then. I no more felt un-duly con-cerned for the land-lord’s policy of
in-sur-ance. I was only alive to the con-densed con-fid-en-tial
com-fort-able-ness of shar-ing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend.
With our shaggy jack-ets drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the
Toma-hawk from one to the other, till slowly there grew over us a blue
hanging tester of smoke, il-lu-min-ated by the flame of the new-lit lamp.

Whether it was that this un-du-lat-ing tester rolled the sav-age away to
far dis-tant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his nat-ive is-land;
and, eager to hear his his-tory, I begged him to go on and tell it. He
gladly com-plied. Though at the time I but ill com-pre-hen-ded not a few of
his words, yet sub-sequent dis-clos-ures, when I had be-come more fa-mil-iar
with his broken phras-eo-logy, now en-able me to present the whole story
such as it may prove in the mere skel-eton I give.


CHAPTER 12. Bio-graph-ical.

Queequeg was a nat-ive of Roko-voko, an is-land far away to the West and
South. It is not down in any map; true places never are.

When a new-hatched sav-age run-ning wild about his nat-ive wood-lands in a
grass clout, fol-lowed by the nib-bling goats, as if he were a green
sap-ling; even then, in Queequeg’s am-bi-tious soul, lurked a strong
de-sire to see some-thing more of Christen-dom than a spe-ci-men whaler or
two. His father was a High Chief, a King; his uncle a High Pri-est; and
on the ma-ter-nal side he boas-ted aunts who were the wives of
un-con-quer-able war-ri-ors. There was ex-cel-lent blood in his veins—royal
stuff; though sadly viti-ated, I fear, by the can-ni-bal propensity he
nour-ished in his un-tutored youth.

A Sag Har-bor ship vis-ited his father’s bay, and Queequeg sought a
pas-sage to Chris-tian lands. But the ship, hav-ing her full com-ple-ment of
sea-men, spurned his suit; and not all the King his father’s in-flu-ence
could pre-vail. But Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his ca-noe, he paddled
off to a dis-tant strait, which he knew the ship must pass through when
she quit-ted the is-land. On one side was a coral reef; on the other a
low tongue of land, covered with man-grove thick-ets that grew out into
the wa-ter. Hid-ing his ca-noe, still afloat, among these thick-ets, with
its prow sea-ward, he sat down in the stern, paddle low in hand; and
when the ship was glid-ing by, like a flash he dar-ted out; gained her
side; with one back-ward dash of his foot cap-sized and sank his ca-noe;
climbed up the chains; and throw-ing him-self at full length upon the
deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though
hacked in pieces.

In vain the cap-tain threatened to throw him over-board; sus-pen-ded a
cut-lass over his na-ked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and
Queequeg budged not. Struck by his des-per-ate daunt-less-ness, and his
wild de-sire to visit Christen-dom, the cap-tain at last re-len-ted, and
told him he might make him-self at home. But this fine young sav-age—this
sea Prince of Wales, never saw the Cap-tain’s cabin. They put him down
among the sail-ors, and made a whale-man of him. But like Czar Peter
con-tent to toil in the shipyards of for-eign cit-ies, Queequeg dis-dained
no seem-ing ig-no-miny, if thereby he might hap-pily gain the power of
en-light-en-ing his un-tutored coun-try-men. For at bot-tom—so he told me—he
was ac-tu-ated by a pro-found de-sire to learn among the Chris-ti-ans, the
arts whereby to make his people still hap-pier than they were; and more
than that, still bet-ter than they were. But, alas! the prac-tices of
whale-men soon con-vinced him that even Chris-ti-ans could be both
miser-able and wicked; in-fin-itely more so, than all his father’s
hea-thens. Ar-rived at last in old Sag Har-bor; and see-ing what the
sail-ors did there; and then go-ing on to Nan-tucket, and see-ing how they
spent their wages in _that_ place also, poor Queequeg gave it up for
lost. Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all me-ridi-ans; I’ll die a
pa-gan.

And thus an old id-ol-ator at heart, he yet lived among these Chris-ti-ans,
wore their clothes, and tried to talk their gib-ber-ish. Hence the queer
ways about him, though now some time from home.

By hints, I asked him whether he did not pro-pose go-ing back, and hav-ing
a coron-a-tion; since he might now con-sider his father dead and gone, he
be-ing very old and feeble at the last ac-counts. He answered no, not
yet; and ad-ded that he was fear-ful Chris-tian-ity, or rather Chris-ti-ans,
had un-fit-ted him for as-cend-ing the pure and un-defiled throne of thirty
pa-gan Kings be-fore him. But by and by, he said, he would re-turn,—as
soon as he felt him-self bap-tized again. For the nonce, how-ever, he
pro-posed to sail about, and sow his wild oats in all four oceans. They
had made a har-poon-eer of him, and that barbed iron was in lieu of a
sceptre now.

I asked him what might be his im-me-di-ate pur-pose, touch-ing his fu-ture
move-ments. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vo-ca-tion. Upon
this, I told him that whal-ing was my own design, and in-formed him of my
in-ten-tion to sail out of Nan-tucket, as be-ing the most prom-ising port
for an ad-ven-tur-ous whale-man to em-bark from. He at once re-solved to
ac-com-pany me to that is-land, ship aboard the same ves-sel, get into the
same watch, the same boat, the same mess with me, in short to share my
every hap; with both my hands in his, boldly dip into the Potluck of
both worlds. To all this I joy-ously as-sen-ted; for be-sides the af-fec-tion
I now felt for Queequeg, he was an ex-per-i-enced har-poon-eer, and as such,
could not fail to be of great use-ful-ness to one, who, like me, was
wholly ig-nor-ant of the mys-ter-ies of whal-ing, though well ac-quain-ted
with the sea, as known to mer-chant sea-men.

His story be-ing ended with his pipe’s last dy-ing puff, Queequeg
em-braced me, pressed his fore-head against mine, and blow-ing out the
light, we rolled over from each other, this way and that, and very soon
were sleep-ing.


CHAPTER 13. Wheel-bar-row.

Next morn-ing, Monday, after dis-pos-ing of the em-balmed head to a barber,
for a block, I settled my own and com-rade’s bill; us-ing, how-ever, my
com-rade’s money. The grin-ning land-lord, as well as the boarders, seemed
amaz-ingly tickled at the sud-den friend-ship which had sprung up between
me and Queequeg—es-pe-cially as Peter Coffin’s cock and bull stor-ies
about him had pre-vi-ously so much alarmed me con-cern-ing the very per-son
whom I now com-pan-ied with.

We bor-rowed a wheel-bar-row, and em-bark-ing our things, in-clud-ing my own
poor car-pet-bag, and Queequeg’s can-vas sack and ham-mock, away we went
down to “the Moss,” the little Nan-tucket packet schooner moored at the
wharf. As we were go-ing along the people stared; not at Queequeg so
much—for they were used to see-ing can-ni-bals like him in their
streets,—but at see-ing him and me upon such con-fid-en-tial terms. But we
heeded them not, go-ing along wheel-ing the bar-row by turns, and Queequeg
now and then stop-ping to ad-just the sheath on his har-poon barbs. I
asked him why he car-ried such a trouble-some thing with him ashore, and
whether all whal-ing ships did not find their own har-poons. To this, in
sub-stance, he replied, that though what I hin-ted was true enough, yet
he had a par-tic-u-lar af-fec-tion for his own har-poon, be-cause it was of
as-sured stuff, well tried in many a mor-tal com-bat, and deeply in-tim-ate
with the hearts of whales. In short, like many in-land reap-ers and
mowers, who go into the farm-ers’ mead-ows armed with their own
scythes—though in no wise ob-liged to fur-nish them—even so, Queequeg,
for his own private reas-ons, pre-ferred his own har-poon.

Shift-ing the bar-row from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about
the first wheel-bar-row he had ever seen. It was in Sag Har-bor. The
own-ers of his ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his
heavy chest to his board-ing house. Not to seem ig-nor-ant about the
thing—though in truth he was en-tirely so, con-cern-ing the pre-cise way in
which to man-age the bar-row—Queequeg puts his chest upon it; lashes it
fast; and then shoulders the bar-row and marches up the wharf. “Why,”
said I, “Queequeg, you might have known bet-ter than that, one would
think. Didn’t the people laugh?”

Upon this, he told me an-other story. The people of his is-land of
Roko-voko, it seems, at their wed-ding feasts ex-press the fra-grant wa-ter
of young co-coa-nuts into a large stained cala-bash like a punch-bowl; and
this punch-bowl al-ways forms the great cent-ral or-na-ment on the braided
mat where the feast is held. Now a cer-tain grand mer-chant ship once
touched at Roko-voko, and its com-mander—from all ac-counts, a very
stately punc-tili-ous gen-tle-man, at least for a sea cap-tain—this
com-mander was in-vited to the wed-ding feast of Queequeg’s sis-ter, a
pretty young prin-cess just turned of ten. Well; when all the wed-ding
guests were as-sembled at the bride’s bam-boo cot-tage, this Cap-tain
marches in, and be-ing as-signed the post of honor, placed him-self over
against the punch-bowl, and between the High Pri-est and his majesty the
King, Queequeg’s father. Grace be-ing said,—for those people have their
grace as well as we—though Queequeg told me that un-like us, who at such
times look down-wards to our plat-ters, they, on the con-trary, copy-ing
the ducks, glance up-wards to the great Giver of all feasts—Grace, I
say, be-ing said, the High Pri-est opens the ban-quet by the im-me-morial
ce-re-mony of the is-land; that is, dip-ping his con-sec-rated and
con-sec-rat-ing fin-gers into the bowl be-fore the blessed bever-age
cir-cu-lates. See-ing him-self placed next the Pri-est, and not-ing the
ce-re-mony, and think-ing him-self—be-ing Cap-tain of a ship—as hav-ing plain
pre-ced-ence over a mere is-land King, es-pe-cially in the King’s own
house—the Cap-tain coolly pro-ceeds to wash his hands in the
punch-bowl;—tak-ing it I sup-pose for a huge fin-ger-glass. “Now,” said
Queequeg, “what you tink now?—Didn’t our people laugh?”

At last, pas-sage paid, and lug-gage safe, we stood on board the
schooner. Hoist-ing sail, it glided down the Acush-net river. On one
side, New Bed-ford rose in ter-races of streets, their ice-covered trees
all glit-ter-ing in the clear, cold air. Huge hills and moun-tains of
casks on casks were piled upon her wharves, and side by side the
world-wan-der-ing whale ships lay si-lent and safely moored at last; while
from oth-ers came a sound of car-penters and coopers, with blen-ded noises
of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all be-token-ing that new cruises
were on the start; that one most per-il-ous and long voy-age ended, only
be-gins a second; and a second ended, only be-gins a third, and so on,
for ever and for aye. Such is the end-less-ness, yea, the in-tol-er-able-ness
of all earthly ef-fort.

Gain-ing the more open wa-ter, the bra-cing breeze waxed fresh; the little
Moss tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his
snort-ings. How I snuffed that Tar-tar air!—how I spurned that turn-pike
earth!—that com-mon high-way all over den-ted with the marks of slav-ish
heels and hoofs; and turned me to ad-mire the mag-nan-im-ity of the sea
which will per-mit no re-cords.

At the same foam-foun-tain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me.
His dusky nos-trils swelled apart; he showed his filed and poin-ted
teeth. On, on we flew; and our off-ing gained, the Moss did homage to
the blast; ducked and dived her bows as a slave be-fore the Sultan.
Side-ways lean-ing, we side-ways dar-ted; every rope-yarn tingling like a
wire; the two tall masts buck-ling like In-dian canes in land tor-nadoes.
So full of this reel-ing scene were we, as we stood by the plunging
bow-sprit, that for some time we did not no-tice the jeer-ing glances of
the pas-sen-gers, a lub-ber-like as-sembly, who mar-velled that two fel-low
be-ings should be so com-pan-ion-able; as though a white man were any-thing
more dig-ni-fied than a white-washed negro. But there were some boobies
and bump-kins there, who, by their in-tense green-ness, must have come
from the heart and centre of all ver-dure. Queequeg caught one of these
young sap-lings mim-ick-ing him be-hind his back. I thought the bump-kin’s
hour of doom was come. Drop-ping his har-poon, the brawny sav-age caught
him in his arms, and by an al-most mi-ra-cu-lous dex-ter-ity and strength,
sent him high up bod-ily into the air; then slightly tap-ping his stern
in mid-somer-set, the fel-low landed with burst-ing lungs upon his feet,
while Queequeg, turn-ing his back upon him, lighted his toma-hawk pipe
and passed it to me for a puff.

“Capt-ing! Capt-ing!” yelled the bump-kin, run-ning to-wards that of-ficer;
“Capt-ing, Capt-ing, here’s the devil.”

“Hallo, _y-ou_ sir,” cried the Cap-tain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalk-ing
up to Queequeg, “what in thun-der do you mean by that? Don’t you know
you might have killed that chap?”

“What him say?” said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.

“He say,” said I, “that you came near kill-e that man there,” point-ing
to the still shiv-er-ing green-horn.

“Kill-e,” cried Queequeg, twist-ing his tat-tooed face into an un-earthly
ex-pres-sion of dis-dain, “ah! him bevy small-e fish-e; Queequeg no kill-e
so small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!”

“Look you,” roared the Cap-tain, “I’ll kill-e _y-ou_, you can-ni-bal, if
you try any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.”

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Cap-tain to
mind his own eye. The prodi-gious strain upon the main-sail had par-ted
the weather-sheet, and the tre-mend-ous boom was now fly-ing from side to
side, com-pletely sweep-ing the en-tire after part of the deck. The poor
fel-low whom Queequeg had handled so roughly, was swept over-board; all
hands were in a panic; and to at-tempt snatch-ing at the boom to stay it,
seemed mad-ness. It flew from right to left, and back again, al-most in
one tick-ing of a watch, and every in-stant seemed on the point of
snap-ping into splin-ters. Noth-ing was done, and noth-ing seemed cap-able
of be-ing done; those on deck rushed to-wards the bows, and stood eye-ing
the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an ex-as-per-ated whale. In the
midst of this con-sterna-tion, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and
crawl-ing un-der the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, se-cured
one end to the bul-warks, and then fling-ing the other like a lasso,
caught it round the boom as it swept over his head, and at the next
jerk, the spar was that way trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was
run into the wind, and while the hands were clear-ing away the stern
boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist, dar-ted from the side with a long
liv-ing arc of a leap. For three minutes or more he was seen swim-ming
like a dog, throw-ing his long arms straight out be-fore him, and by
turns re-veal-ing his brawny shoulders through the freez-ing foam. I
looked at the grand and glor-i-ous fel-low, but saw no one to be saved.
The green-horn had gone down. Shoot-ing him-self per-pen-dic-u-larly from the
wa-ter, Queequeg, now took an in-stant’s glance around him, and seem-ing
to see just how mat-ters were, dived down and dis-ap-peared. A few minutes
more, and he rose again, one arm still strik-ing out, and with the other
drag-ging a life-less form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor
bump-kin was re-stored. All hands voted Queequeg a noble trump; the
cap-tain begged his par-don. From that hour I clove to Queequeg like a
barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long dive.

Was there ever such un-con-scious-ness? He did not seem to think that he
at all de-served a medal from the Hu-mane and Mag-nan-im-ous So-ci-et-ies. He
only asked for wa-ter—fresh wa-ter—some-thing to wipe the brine off; that
done, he put on dry clothes, lighted his pipe, and lean-ing against the
bul-warks, and mildly eye-ing those around him, seemed to be say-ing to
him-self—“It’s a mu-tual, joint-stock world, in all me-ridi-ans. We
can-ni-bals must help these Chris-ti-ans.”


CHAPTER 14. Nan-tucket.

Noth-ing more happened on the pas-sage worthy the men-tion-ing; so, after a
fine run, we safely ar-rived in Nan-tucket.

Nan-tucket! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of
the world it oc-cu-pies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely
than the Eddy-stone light-house. Look at it—a mere hil-lock, and el-bow of
sand; all beach, without a back-ground. There is more sand there than
you would use in twenty years as a sub-sti-tute for blot-ting pa-per. Some
game-some wights will tell you that they have to plant weeds there, they
don’t grow nat-ur-ally; that they im-port Canada thistles; that they have
to send bey-ond seas for a spile to stop a leak in an oil cask; that
pieces of wood in Nan-tucket are car-ried about like bits of the true
cross in Rome; that people there plant toad-stools be-fore their houses,
to get un-der the shade in sum-mer time; that one blade of grass makes an
oasis, three blades in a day’s walk a prairie; that they wear quick-sand
shoes, some-thing like La-plander snow-shoes; that they are so shut up,
belted about, every way in-closed, sur-roun-ded, and made an ut-ter is-land
of by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will
some-times be found ad-her-ing, as to the backs of sea turtles. But these
ex-tra-vag-an-zas only show that Nan-tucket is no Illinois.

Look now at the won-drous tra-di-tional story of how this is-land was
settled by the red-men. Thus goes the le-gend. In olden times an eagle
swooped down upon the New Eng-land coast, and car-ried off an in-fant
In-dian in his talons. With loud lament the par-ents saw their child
borne out of sight over the wide wa-ters. They re-solved to fol-low in the
same dir-ec-tion. Set-ting out in their ca-noes, after a per-il-ous pas-sage
they dis-covered the is-land, and there they found an empty ivory
cas-ket,—the poor little In-dian’s skel-eton.

What won-der, then, that these Nan-tuck-eters, born on a beach, should
take to the sea for a live-li-hood! They first caught crabs and quo-hogs
in the sand; grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mack-erel; more
ex-per-i-enced, they pushed off in boats and cap-tured cod; and at last,
launch-ing a navy of great ships on the sea, ex-plored this wa-tery world;
put an in-cess-ant belt of cir-cum-nav-ig-a-tions round it; peeped in at
Behring’s Straits; and in all sea-sons and all oceans de-clared
ever-last-ing war with the migh-ti-est an-im-ated mass that has sur-vived the
flood; most mon-strous and most moun-tain-ous! That Him-malehan, salt-sea
Masto-don, clothed with such portent-ous-ness of un-con-scious power, that
his very pan-ics are more to be dreaded than his most fear-less and
ma-li-cious as-saults!

And thus have these na-ked Nan-tuck-eters, these sea her-mits, is-su-ing from
their ant-hill in the sea, over-run and conquered the wa-tery world like
so many Al-ex-an-ders; par-cel-ling out among them the At-lantic, Pa-cific,
and In-dian oceans, as the three pir-ate powers did Po-land. Let Amer-ica
add Mex-ico to Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the Eng-lish
over-swarm all In-dia, and hang out their blaz-ing ban-ner from the sun;
two thirds of this ter-raqueous globe are the Nan-tuck-eter’s. For the sea
is his; he owns it, as Em-per-ors own em-pires; other sea-men hav-ing but a
right of way through it. Mer-chant ships are but ex-ten-sion bridges;
armed ones but float-ing forts; even pir-ates and pri-vat-eers, though
fol-low-ing the sea as high-way-men the road, they but plun-der other ships,
other frag-ments of the land like them-selves, without seek-ing to draw
their liv-ing from the bot-tom-less deep it-self. The Nan-tuck-eter, he alone
resides and ri-ots on the sea; he alone, in Bible lan-guage, goes down to
it in ships; to and fro plough-ing it as his own spe-cial plant-a-tion.
_There_ is his home; _there_ lies his busi-ness, which a Noah’s flood
would not in-ter-rupt, though it over-whelmed all the mil-lions in Ch-ina.
He lives on the sea, as prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among
the waves, he climbs them as chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years
he knows not the land; so that when he comes to it at last, it smells
like an-other world, more strangely than the moon would to an Earths-man.
With the land-less gull, that at sun-set folds her wings and is rocked to
sleep between bil-lows; so at night-fall, the Nan-tuck-eter, out of sight
of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest, while un-der his
very pil-low rush herds of wal-ruses and whales.


CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

It was quite late in the even-ing when the little Moss came snugly to
an-chor, and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could at-tend to no
busi-ness that day, at least none but a sup-per and a bed. The land-lord
of the Spouter-Inn had re-com-men-ded us to his cousin Hosea Hus-sey of the
Try Pots, whom he as-ser-ted to be the pro-pri-etor of one of the best kept
ho-tels in all Nan-tucket, and moreover he had as-sured us that Cousin
Hosea, as he called him, was fam-ous for his chow-ders. In short, he
plainly hin-ted that we could not pos-sibly do bet-ter than try pot-luck
at the Try Pots. But the dir-ec-tions he had given us about keep-ing a
yel-low ware-house on our star-board hand till we opened a white church to
the lar-board, and then keep-ing that on the lar-board hand till we made a
corner three points to the star-board, and that done, then ask the first
man we met where the place was: these crooked dir-ec-tions of his very
much puzzled us at first, es-pe-cially as, at the out-set, Queequeg
in-sisted that the yel-low ware-house—our first point of de-par-ture—must be
left on the lar-board hand, whereas I had un-der-stood Peter Coffin to say
it was on the star-board. However, by dint of beat-ing about a little in
the dark, and now and then knock-ing up a peace-able in-hab-it-ant to
in-quire the way, we at last came to some-thing which there was no
mis-tak-ing.

Two enorm-ous wooden pots painted black, and sus-pen-ded by asses’ ears,
swung from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an
old door-way. The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other
side, so that this old top-mast looked not a little like a gal-lows.
Per-haps I was over sens-it-ive to such im-pres-sions at the time, but I
could not help star-ing at this gal-lows with a vague mis-giv-ing. A sort
of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the two re-main-ing horns; yes,
_t-wo_ of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me. It’s omin-ous, thinks
I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon land-ing in my first whal-ing port;
tomb-stones star-ing at me in the whale-men’s chapel; and here a gal-lows!
and a pair of prodi-gious black pots too! Are these last throw-ing out
ob-lique hints touch-ing Tophet?

I was called from these re-flec-tions by the sight of a freckled wo-man
with yel-low hair and a yel-low gown, stand-ing in the porch of the inn,
un-der a dull red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an in-jured
eye, and car-ry-ing on a brisk scold-ing with a man in a purple wool-len
shirt.

“Get along with ye,” said she to the man, “or I’ll be comb-ing ye!”

“Come on, Queequeg,” said I, “all right. There’s Mrs. Hus-sey.”

And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hus-sey be-ing from home, but leav-ing
Mrs. Hus-sey en-tirely com-pet-ent to at-tend to all his af-fairs. Upon
mak-ing known our de-sires for a sup-per and a bed, Mrs. Hus-sey,
post-pon-ing fur-ther scold-ing for the present, ushered us into a little
room, and seat-ing us at a table spread with the rel-ics of a re-cently
con-cluded re-past, turned round to us and said—“Clam or Cod?”

“What’s that about Cods, ma’am?” said I, with much po-lite-ness.

“Clam or Cod?” she re-peated.

“A clam for sup-per? a cold clam; is _that_ what you mean, Mrs. Hus-sey?”
says I, “but that’s a rather cold and clammy re-cep-tion in the winter
time, ain’t it, Mrs. Hus-sey?”

But be-ing in a great hurry to re-sume scold-ing the man in the purple
Shirt, who was wait-ing for it in the entry, and seem-ing to hear noth-ing
but the word “clam,” Mrs. Hus-sey hur-ried to-wards an open door lead-ing
to the kit-chen, and bawl-ing out “clam for two,” dis-ap-peared.

“Queequeg,” said I, “do you think that we can make out a sup-per for us
both on one clam?”

However, a warm sa-vory steam from the kit-chen served to be-lie the
ap-par-ently cheer-less pro-spect be-fore us. But when that smoking chow-der
came in, the mys-tery was de-light-fully ex-plained. Oh, sweet friends!
hearken to me. It was made of small juicy clams, scarcely big-ger than
hazel nuts, mixed with poun-ded ship bis-cuit, and salted pork cut up
into little flakes; the whole en-riched with but-ter, and plen-ti-fully
seasoned with pep-per and salt. Our ap-pet-ites be-ing sharpened by the
frosty voy-age, and in par-tic-u-lar, Queequeg see-ing his fa-vour-ite fish-ing
food be-fore him, and the chow-der be-ing sur-pass-ingly ex-cel-lent, we
des-patched it with great ex-ped-i-tion: when lean-ing back a mo-ment and
be-think-ing me of Mrs. Hus-sey’s clam and cod an-nounce-ment, I thought I
would try a little ex-per-i-ment. Step-ping to the kit-chen door, I uttered
the word “cod” with great em-phasis, and re-sumed my seat. In a few
mo-ments the sa-voury steam came forth again, but with a dif-fer-ent
fla-vor, and in good time a fine cod-chow-der was placed be-fore us.

We re-sumed busi-ness; and while ply-ing our spoons in the bowl, thinks I
to my-self, I won-der now if this here has any ef-fect on the head? What’s
that stul-ti-fy-ing say-ing about chow-der-headed people? “But look,
Queequeg, ain’t that a live eel in your bowl? Where’s your har-poon?”

Fish-i-est of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well de-served its
name; for the pots there were al-ways boil-ing chow-ders. Chowder for
break-fast, and chow-der for din-ner, and chow-der for sup-per, till you
began to look for fish-bones com-ing through your clothes. The area
be-fore the house was paved with clam-shells. Mrs. Hus-sey wore a
pol-ished neck-lace of cod-fish ver-tebra; and Hosea Hus-sey had his ac-count
books bound in su-per-ior old shark-skin. There was a fishy fla-vor to the
milk, too, which I could not at all ac-count for, till one morn-ing
hap-pen-ing to take a stroll along the beach among some fish-er-men’s
boats, I saw Hosea’s brindled cow feed-ing on fish rem-nants, and
march-ing along the sand with each foot in a cod’s de-cap-it-ated head,
look-ing very slip-shod, I as-sure ye.

Sup-per con-cluded, we re-ceived a lamp, and dir-ec-tions from Mrs. Hus-sey
con-cern-ing the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to
pre-cede me up the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and de-man-ded
his har-poon; she al-lowed no har-poon in her cham-bers. “Why not?” said I;
“every true whale-man sleeps with his har-poon—but why not?” “Be-cause
it’s dan-ger-ous,” says she. “Ever since young Stiggs com-ing from that
un-fort’nt v’y’ge of his, when he was gone four years and a half, with
only three bar-rels of _ile_, was found dead in my first floor back,
with his har-poon in his side; ever since then I al-low no boarders to
take sich dan-ger-ous wee-pons in their rooms at night. So, Mr. Queequeg”
(for she had learned his name), “I will just take this here iron, and
keep it for you till morn-ing. But the chow-der; clam or cod to-mor-row
for break-fast, men?”

“Both,” says I; “and let’s have a couple of smoked her-ring by way of
vari-ety.”


CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

In bed we con-cocted our plans for the mor-row. But to my sur-prise and no
small con-cern, Queequeg now gave me to un-der-stand, that he had been
di-li-gently con-sult-ing Yojo—the name of his black little god—and Yojo
had told him two or three times over, and strongly in-sisted upon it
every-way, that in-stead of our go-ing to-gether among the whal-ing-fleet in
har-bor, and in con-cert se-lect-ing our craft; in-stead of this, I say,
Yojo earn-estly en-joined that the se-lec-tion of the ship should rest
wholly with me, inas-much as Yojo pur-posed be-friend-ing us; and, in or-der
to do so, had already pitched upon a ves-sel, which, if left to my-self,
I, Ish-mael, should in-fal-libly light upon, for all the world as though
it had turned out by chance; and in that ves-sel I must im-me-di-ately ship
my-self, for the present ir-re-spect-ive of Queequeg.

I have for-got-ten to men-tion that, in many things, Queequeg placed great
con-fid-ence in the ex-cel-lence of Yojo’s judg-ment and sur-pris-ing fore-cast
of things; and cher-ished Yojo with con-sid-er-able es-teem, as a rather
good sort of god, who per-haps meant well enough upon the whole, but in
all cases did not suc-ceed in his be-ne-vol-ent designs.

Now, this plan of Queequeg’s, or rather Yojo’s, touch-ing the se-lec-tion
of our craft; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little
re-lied upon Queequeg’s saga-city to point out the whaler best fit-ted to
carry us and our for-tunes se-curely. But as all my re-mon-strances
pro-duced no ef-fect upon Queequeg, I was ob-liged to ac-qui-esce; and
ac-cord-ingly pre-pared to set about this busi-ness with a de-term-ined
rush-ing sort of en-ergy and vigor, that should quickly settle that
tri-fling little af-fair. Next morn-ing early, leav-ing Queequeg shut up
with Yojo in our little bed-room—for it seemed that it was some sort of
Lent or Ra-madan, or day of fast-ing, hu-mi-li-ation, and prayer with
Queequeg and Yojo that day; _how_ it was I never could find out, for,
though I ap-plied my-self to it sev-eral times, I never could mas-ter his
litur-gies and XXXIX Articles—leav-ing Queequeg, then, fast-ing on his
toma-hawk pipe, and Yojo warm-ing him-self at his sac-ri-fi-cial fire of
shav-ings, I sal-lied out among the ship-ping. After much pro-longed
saun-ter-ing and many ran-dom in-quir-ies, I learnt that there were three
ships up for three-years’ voy-ages—The Devil-dam, the Tit-bit, and the
Pequod. _Devil-Dam_, I do not know the ori-gin of; _Tit-bit_ is ob-vi-ous;
_Pequod_, you will no doubt re-mem-ber, was the name of a cel-eb-rated
tribe of Mas-sachu-setts In-di-ans; now ex-tinct as the an-cient Medes. I
peered and pryed about the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the
Tit-bit; and fi-nally, go-ing on board the Pequod, looked around her for
a mo-ment, and then de-cided that this was the very ship for us.

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I
know;—square-toed lug-gers; moun-tain-ous Japan-ese junks; but-ter-box
gal-li-ots, and what not; but take my word for it, you never saw such a
rare old craft as this same rare old Pequod. She was a ship of the old
school, rather small if any-thing; with an old-fash-ioned claw-footed
look about her. Long seasoned and weather-stained in the typhoons and
calms of all four oceans, her old hull’s com-plex-ion was darkened like a
French gren-adier’s, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia. Her
ven-er-able bows looked bearded. Her masts—cut some-where on the coast of
Japan, where her ori-ginal ones were lost over-board in a gale—her masts
stood stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Co-logne. Her
an-cient decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pil-grim-wor-shipped
flag-stone in Can-ter-bury Cathed-ral where Becket bled. But to all these
her old an-tiquit-ies, were ad-ded new and mar-vel-lous fea-tures, per-tain-ing
to the wild busi-ness that for more than half a cen-tury she had
fol-lowed. Old Cap-tain Peleg, many years her chief-mate, be-fore he
com-manded an-other ves-sel of his own, and now a re-tired sea-man, and one
of the prin-cipal own-ers of the Pequod,—this old Peleg, dur-ing the term
of his chief-mate-ship, had built upon her ori-ginal grot-esque-ness, and
in-laid it, all over, with a quaint-ness both of ma-ter-ial and device,
un-matched by any-thing ex-cept it be Thorkill-Hake’s carved buck-ler or
bed-stead. She was ap-par-elled like any bar-baric Ethiopian em-peror, his
neck heavy with pendants of pol-ished ivory. She was a thing of
trophies. A can-ni-bal of a craft, trick-ing her-self forth in the chased
bones of her en-emies. All round, her un-pan-elled, open bul-warks were
gar-nished like one con-tinu-ous jaw, with the long sharp teeth of the
sperm whale, in-ser-ted there for pins, to fasten her old hempen thews
and ten-dons to. Those thews ran not through base blocks of land wood,
but deftly trav-elled over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorn-ing a turn-stile
wheel at her rev-er-end helm, she spor-ted there a tiller; and that tiller
was in one mass, curi-ously carved from the long nar-row lower jaw of her
hered-it-ary foe. The helms-man who steered by that tiller in a tem-pest,
felt like the Tar-tar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutch-ing
its jaw. A noble craft, but some-how a most mel-an-choly! All noble things
are touched with that.

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one hav-ing
au-thor-ity, in or-der to pro-pose my-self as a can-did-ate for the voy-age, at
first I saw nobody; but I could not well over-look a strange sort of
tent, or rather wig-wam, pitched a little be-hind the main-mast. It
seemed only a tem-por-ary erec-tion used in port. It was of a con-ical
shape, some ten feet high; con-sist-ing of the long, huge slabs of limber
black bone taken from the middle and highest part of the jaws of the
right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a circle of
these slabs laced to-gether, mu-tu-ally sloped to-wards each other, and at
the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved
to and fro like the top-knot on some old Pot-to-wot-tamie Sa-chem’s head. A
tri-an-gu-lar open-ing faced to-wards the bows of the ship, so that the
in-sider com-manded a com-plete view for-ward.

And half con-cealed in this queer tene-ment, I at length found one who by
his as-pect seemed to have au-thor-ity; and who, it be-ing noon, and the
ship’s work sus-pen-ded, was now en-joy-ing res-pite from the bur-den of
com-mand. He was seated on an old-fash-ioned oaken chair, wrig-gling all
over with curi-ous carving; and the bot-tom of which was formed of a
stout in-ter-la-cing of the same elastic stuff of which the wig-wam was
con-struc-ted.

There was noth-ing so very par-tic-u-lar, per-haps, about the ap-pear-ance of
the eld-erly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old sea-men,
and heav-ily rolled up in blue pi-lot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style;
only there was a fine and al-most mi-cro-scopic net-work of the minutest
wrinkles in-ter-la-cing round his eyes, which must have arisen from his
con-tinual sail-ings in many hard gales, and al-ways look-ing to
wind-ward;—for this causes the muscles about the eyes to be-come pursed
to-gether. Such eye-wrinkles are very ef-fec-tual in a scowl.

“Is this the Cap-tain of the Pequod?” said I, ad-van-cing to the door of
the tent.

“Sup-pos-ing it be the cap-tain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of
him?” he de-man-ded.

“I was think-ing of ship-ping.”

“Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nan-tuck-eter—ever been in a
stove boat?”

“No, Sir, I never have.”

“Dost know noth-ing at all about whal-ing, I dare say—eh?

“Noth-ing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I’ve been
sev-eral voy-ages in the mer-chant ser-vice, and I think that—”

“Mer-chant ser-vice be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that
leg?—I’ll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of
the marchant ser-vice to me again. Marchant ser-vice in-deed! I sup-pose
now ye feel con-sid-er-able proud of hav-ing served in those marchant
ships. But flukes! man, what makes thee want to go a whal-ing, eh?—it
looks a little sus-pi-cious, don’t it, eh?—Hast not been a pir-ate, hast
thou?—Didst not rob thy last Cap-tain, didst thou?—Dost not think of
mur-der-ing the of-ficers when thou get-test to sea?”

I pro-tested my in-no-cence of these things. I saw that un-der the mask of
these half hu-mor-ous in-nu-en-does, this old sea-man, as an in-su-lated
Quaker-ish Nan-tuck-eter, was full of his in-su-lar pre-ju-dices, and rather
dis-trust-ful of all ali-ens, un-less they hailed from Cape Cod or the
Vine-yard.

“But what takes thee a-whal-ing? I want to know that be-fore I think of
ship-ping ye.”

“Well, sir, I want to see what whal-ing is. I want to see the world.”

“Want to see what whal-ing is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on Cap-tain Ahab?”

“Who is Cap-tain Ahab, sir?”

“Aye, aye, I thought so. Cap-tain Ahab is the Cap-tain of this ship.”

“I am mis-taken then. I thought I was speak-ing to the Cap-tain him-self.”

“Thou art speak-ing to Cap-tain Peleg—that’s who ye are speak-ing to,
young man. It be-longs to me and Cap-tain Bildad to see the Pequod fit-ted
out for the voy-age, and sup-plied with all her needs, in-clud-ing crew. We
are part own-ers and agents. But as I was go-ing to say, if thou wantest
to know what whal-ing is, as thou tell-est ye do, I can put ye in a way
of find-ing it out be-fore ye bind your-self to it, past back-ing out. Clap
eye on Cap-tain Ahab, young man, and thou wilt find that he has only one
leg.”

“What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?”

“Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was de-voured, chewed
up, crunched by the mon-strousest par-ma-cetty that ever chipped a
boat!—ah, ah!”

I was a little alarmed by his en-ergy, per-haps also a little touched at
the hearty grief in his con-clud-ing ex-clam-a-tion, but said as calmly as I
could, “What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know
there was any pe-cu-liar fe-ro-city in that par-tic-u-lar whale, though in-deed
I might have in-ferred as much from the simple fact of the ac-ci-dent.”

“Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d’ye see; thou
dost not talk shark a bit. _Sure_, ye’ve been to sea be-fore now; sure
of that?”

“Sir,” said I, “I thought I told you that I had been four voy-ages in
the mer-chant—”

“Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchant
ser-vice—don’t ag-grav-ate me—I won’t have it. But let us un-der-stand each
other. I have given thee a hint about what whal-ing is; do ye yet feel
in-clined for it?”

“I do, sir.”

“Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a har-poon down a live
whale’s throat, and then jump after it? An-swer, quick!”

“I am, sir, if it should be pos-it-ively in-dis-pens-able to do so; not to
be got rid of, that is; which I don’t take to be the fact.”

“Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whal-ing, to find
out by ex-per-i-ence what whal-ing is, but ye also want to go in or-der to
see the world? Was not that what ye said? I thought so. Well then, just
step for-ward there, and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back
to me and tell me what ye see there.”

For a mo-ment I stood a little puzzled by this curi-ous re-quest, not
know-ing ex-actly how to take it, whether hu-mor-ously or in earn-est. But
con-cen-trat-ing all his crow’s feet into one scowl, Cap-tain Peleg star-ted
me on the er-rand.

Go-ing for-ward and glan-cing over the weather bow, I per-ceived that the
ship swinging to her an-chor with the flood-tide, was now ob-liquely
point-ing to-wards the open ocean. The pro-spect was un-lim-ited, but
ex-ceed-ingly mono-ton-ous and for-bid-ding; not the slight-est vari-ety that I
could see.

“Well, what’s the re-port?” said Peleg when I came back; “what did ye
see?”

“Not much,” I replied—“noth-ing but wa-ter; con-sid-er-able ho-ri-zon though,
and there’s a squall com-ing up, I think.”

“Well, what does thou think then of see-ing the world? Do ye wish to go
round Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can’t ye see the world where
you stand?”

I was a little staggered, but go a-whal-ing I must, and I would; and the
Pequod was as good a ship as any—I thought the best—and all this I now
re-peated to Peleg. See-ing me so de-term-ined, he ex-pressed his
will-ing-ness to ship me.

“And thou may-est as well sign the pa-pers right off,” he ad-ded—“come
along with ye.” And so say-ing, he led the way be-low deck into the
cabin.

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most un-com-mon and
sur-pris-ing fig-ure. It turned out to be Cap-tain Bildad, who along with
Cap-tain Peleg was one of the largest own-ers of the ves-sel; the other
shares, as is some-times the case in these ports, be-ing held by a crowd
of old an-nu-it-ants; wid-ows, fath-er-less chil-dren, and chan-cery wards;
each own-ing about the value of a tim-ber head, or a foot of plank, or a
nail or two in the ship. People in Nan-tucket in-vest their money in
whal-ing ves-sels, the same way that you do yours in ap-proved state
stocks bring-ing in good in-terest.

Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and in-deed many other Nan-tuck-eters, was a
Quaker, the is-land hav-ing been ori-gin-ally settled by that sect; and to
this day its in-hab-it-ants in gen-eral re-tain in an un-com-mon meas-ure the
pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies of the Quaker, only vari-ously and an-om-al-ously mod-i-fied by
things al-to-gether alien and het-ero-gen-eous. For some of these same
Quakers are the most san-guin-ary of all sail-ors and whale-hunters. They
are fight-ing Quakers; they are Quakers with a ven-geance.

So that there are in-stances among them of men, who, named with
Scrip-ture names—a sin-gu-larly com-mon fash-ion on the is-land—and in
child-hood nat-ur-ally im-bib-ing the stately dra-matic thee and thou of the
Quaker idiom; still, from the au-da-cious, dar-ing, and bound-less
ad-ven-ture of their sub-sequent lives, strangely blend with these
un-out-grown pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies, a thou-sand bold dashes of char-ac-ter, not
un-worthy a Scand-inavian sea-king, or a po-et-ical Pagan Ro-man. And when
these things unite in a man of greatly su-per-ior nat-ural force, with a
glob-u-lar brain and a pon-der-ous heart; who has also by the still-ness and
se-clu-sion of many long night-watches in the re-motest wa-ters, and
be-neath con-stel-la-tions never seen here at the north, been led to think
un-tra-di-tion-ally and in-de-pend-ently; re-ceiv-ing all nature’s sweet or
sav-age im-pres-sions fresh from her own vir-gin vol-un-tary and con-fid-ing
breast, and thereby chiefly, but with some help from ac-ci-dental
ad-vant-ages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty lan-guage—that man makes
one in a whole na-tion’s census—a mighty pa-geant creature, formed for
noble tra-gedies. Nor will it at all de-tract from him, dra-mat-ic-ally
re-garded, if either by birth or other cir-cum-stances, he have what seems
a half wil-ful over-rul-ing mor-bid-ness at the bot-tom of his nature. For
all men tra-gic-ally great are made so through a cer-tain mor-bid-ness. Be
sure of this, O young am-bi-tion, all mor-tal great-ness is but dis-ease.
But, as yet we have not to do with such an one, but with quite an-other;
and still a man, who, if in-deed pe-cu-liar, it only res-ults again from
an-other phase of the Quaker, mod-i-fied by in-di-vidual cir-cum-stances.

Like Cap-tain Peleg, Cap-tain Bildad was a well-to-do, re-tired whale-man.
But un-like Cap-tain Peleg—who cared not a rush for what are called
ser-i-ous things, and in-deed deemed those self-same ser-i-ous things the
veri-est of all trifles—Cap-tain Bildad had not only been ori-gin-ally
edu-cated ac-cord-ing to the strict-est sect of Nan-tucket Quaker-ism, but
all his sub-sequent ocean life, and the sight of many un-clad, lovely
is-land creatures, round the Horn—all that had not moved this nat-ive
born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered one angle of his
vest. Still, for all this im-mut-able-ness, was there some lack of com-mon
con-sist-ency about worthy Cap-tain Bildad. Though re-fus-ing, from
con-scien-tious scruples, to bear arms against land in-vaders, yet him-self
had il-lim-it-ably in-vaded the At-lantic and Pa-cific; and though a sworn
foe to hu-man blood-shed, yet had he in his straight-bod-ied coat, spilled
tuns upon tuns of le-viathan gore. How now in the con-tem-plat-ive even-ing
of his days, the pi-ous Bildad re-con-ciled these things in the
re-min-is-cence, I do not know; but it did not seem to con-cern him much,
and very prob-ably he had long since come to the sage and sens-ible
con-clu-sion that a man’s re-li-gion is one thing, and this prac-tical world
quite an-other. This world pays di-vidends. Rising from a little
cabin-boy in short clothes of the drab-best drab, to a har-poon-eer in a
broad shad-bel-lied waist-coat; from that be-com-ing boat-header,
chief-mate, and cap-tain, and fi-nally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hin-ted
be-fore, had con-cluded his ad-ven-tur-ous ca-reer by wholly re-tir-ing from
act-ive life at the goodly age of sixty, and ded-ic-at-ing his re-main-ing
days to the quiet re-ceiv-ing of his well-earned in-come.

Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the repu-ta-tion of be-ing an
in-cor-ri-gible old hunks, and in his sea-go-ing days, a bit-ter, hard
task-mas-ter. They told me in Nan-tucket, though it cer-tainly seems a
curi-ous story, that when he sailed the old Categut whale-man, his crew,
upon ar-riv-ing home, were mostly all car-ried ashore to the hos-pital,
sore ex-hausted and worn out. For a pi-ous man, es-pe-cially for a Quaker,
he was cer-tainly rather hard-hearted, to say the least. He never used
to swear, though, at his men, they said; but some-how he got an
in-or-din-ate quant-ity of cruel, un-mit-ig-ated hard work out of them. When
Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-col-oured eye in-tently look-ing
at you, made you feel com-pletely nervous, till you could clutch
some-thing—a ham-mer or a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at
some-thing or other, never mind what. In-dol-ence and idle-ness per-ished
be-fore him. His own per-son was the ex-act em-bod-i-ment of his util-it-arian
char-ac-ter. On his long, gaunt body, he car-ried no spare flesh, no
su-per-flu-ous beard, his chin hav-ing a soft, eco-nom-ical nap to it, like
the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.

Such, then, was the per-son that I saw seated on the transom when I
fol-lowed Cap-tain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks
was small; and there, bolt-up-right, sat old Bildad, who al-ways sat so,
and never leaned, and this to save his coat tails. His broad-brim was
placed be-side him; his legs were stiffly crossed; his drab ves-ture was
buttoned up to his chin; and spec-tacles on nose, he seemed ab-sorbed in
read-ing from a pon-der-ous volume.

“Bildad,” cried Cap-tain Peleg, “at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye have been
study-ing those Scrip-tures, now, for the last thirty years, to my
cer-tain know-ledge. How far ye got, Bildad?”

As if long ha-bitu-ated to such pro-fane talk from his old ship-mate,
Bildad, without no-ti-cing his present ir-rev-er-ence, quietly looked up,
and see-ing me, glanced again in-quir-ingly to-wards Peleg.

“He says he’s our man, Bildad,” said Peleg, “he wants to ship.”

“Dost thee?” said Bildad, in a hol-low tone, and turn-ing round to me.

“I _dost_,” said I un-con-sciously, he was so in-tense a Quaker.

“What do ye think of him, Bildad?” said Peleg.

“He’ll do,” said Bildad, eye-ing me, and then went on spelling away at
his book in a mum-bling tone quite aud-ible.

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, es-pe-cially as Peleg,
his friend and old ship-mate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said
noth-ing, only look-ing round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest,
and draw-ing forth the ship’s art-icles, placed pen and ink be-fore him,
and seated him-self at a little table. I began to think it was high time
to settle with my-self at what terms I would be will-ing to en-gage for
the voy-age. I was already aware that in the whal-ing busi-ness they paid
no wages; but all hands, in-clud-ing the cap-tain, re-ceived cer-tain shares
of the profits called _lays_, and that these lays were pro-por-tioned to
the de-gree of im-port-ance per-tain-ing to the re-spect-ive du-ties of the
ship’s com-pany. I was also aware that be-ing a green hand at whal-ing, my
own lay would not be very large; but con-sid-er-ing that I was used to the
sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt
that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th
lay—that is, the 275th part of the clear net pro-ceeds of the voy-age,
whatever that might even-tu-ally amount to. And though the 275th lay was
what they call a rather _long lay_, yet it was bet-ter than noth-ing; and
if we had a lucky voy-age, might pretty nearly pay for the cloth-ing I
would wear out on it, not to speak of my three years’ beef and board,
for which I would not have to pay one stiver.

It might be thought that this was a poor way to ac-cu-mu-late a princely
for-tune—and so it was, a very poor way in-deed. But I am one of those
that never take on about princely for-tunes, and am quite con-tent if the
world is ready to board and lodge me, while I am put-ting up at this
grim sign of the Thun-der Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the
275th lay would be about the fair thing, but would not have been
sur-prised had I been offered the 200th, con-sid-er-ing I was of a
broad-shouldered make.

But one thing, nev-er-the-less, that made me a little dis-trust-ful about
re-ceiv-ing a gen-er-ous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had heard
some-thing of both Cap-tain Peleg and his un-ac-count-able old crony Bildad;
how that they be-ing the prin-cipal pro-pri-et-ors of the Pequod, there-fore
the other and more in-con-sid-er-able and scattered own-ers, left nearly the
whole man-age-ment of the ship’s af-fairs to these two. And I did not know
but what the stingy old Bildad might have a mighty deal to say about
ship-ping hands, es-pe-cially as I now found him on board the Pequod,
quite at home there in the cabin, and read-ing his Bible as if at his
own fireside. Now while Peleg was vainly try-ing to mend a pen with his
jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small sur-prise, con-sid-er-ing that he
was such an in-ter-ested party in these pro-ceed-ings; Bildad never heeded
us, but went on mum-bling to him-self out of his book, “_Lay_ not up for
yourselves treas-ures upon earth, where moth—”

“Well, Cap-tain Bildad,” in-ter-rup-ted Peleg, “what d’ye say, what lay
shall we give this young man?”

“Thou know-est best,” was the sepulchral reply, “the seven hun-dred and
sev-enty-sev-enth wouldn’t be too much, would it?—‘where moth and rust do
cor-rupt, but _lay_—’”

_Lay_, in-deed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hun-dred and
sev-enty-sev-enth! Well, old Bildad, you are de-term-ined that I, for one,
shall not _lay_ up many _lays_ here be-low, where moth and rust do
cor-rupt. It was an ex-ceed-ingly _long lay_ that, in-deed; and though from
the mag-nitude of the fig-ure it might at first de-ceive a lands-man, yet
the slight-est con-sid-er-a-tion will show that though seven hun-dred and
sev-enty-seven is a pretty large num-ber, yet, when you come to make a
_teenth_ of it, you will then see, I say, that the seven hun-dred and
sev-enty-sev-enth part of a farth-ing is a good deal less than seven
hun-dred and sev-enty-seven gold doub-loons; and so I thought at the time.

“Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,” cried Peleg, “thou dost not want to
swindle this young man! he must have more than that.”

“Seven hun-dred and sev-enty-sev-enth,” again said Bildad, without lift-ing
his eyes; and then went on mum-bling—“for where your treas-ure is, there
will your heart be also.”

“I am go-ing to put him down for the three hun-dredth,” said Peleg, “do
ye hear that, Bildad! The three hun-dredth lay, I say.”

Bildad laid down his book, and turn-ing sol-emnly to-wards him said,
“Cap-tain Peleg, thou hast a gen-er-ous heart; but thou must con-sider the
duty thou ow-est to the other own-ers of this ship—wid-ows and orphans,
many of them—and that if we too abund-antly re-ward the labors of this
young man, we may be tak-ing the bread from those wid-ows and those
orphans. The seven hun-dred and sev-enty-sev-enth lay, Cap-tain Peleg.”

“Thou Bildad!” roared Peleg, start-ing up and clat-ter-ing about the
cabin. “Blast ye, Cap-tain Bildad, if I had fol-lowed thy ad-vice in these
mat-ters, I would afore now had a con-science to lug about that would be
heavy enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape
Horn.”

“Cap-tain Peleg,” said Bildad stead-ily, “thy con-science may be draw-ing
ten inches of wa-ter, or ten fathoms, I can’t tell; but as thou art
still an im-pen-it-ent man, Cap-tain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy
con-science be but a leaky one; and will in the end sink thee founder-ing
down to the fiery pit, Cap-tain Peleg.”

“Fi-ery pit! fiery pit! ye in-sult me, man; past all nat-ural bear-ing, ye
in-sult me. It’s an all-fired out-rage to tell any hu-man creature that
he’s bound to hell. Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that again to me,
and start my soul-bolts, but I’ll—I’ll—yes, I’ll swal-low a live goat
with all his hair and horns on. Out of the cabin, ye cant-ing,
drab-col-oured son of a wooden gun—a straight wake with ye!”

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a
mar-vel-lous ob-lique, slid-ing celer-ity, Bildad for that time eluded him.

Alarmed at this ter-rible out-burst between the two prin-cipal and
re-spons-ible own-ers of the ship, and feel-ing half a mind to give up all
idea of sail-ing in a ves-sel so ques-tion-ably owned and tem-por-ar-ily
com-manded, I stepped aside from the door to give egress to Bildad, who,
I made no doubt, was all eager-ness to van-ish from be-fore the awakened
wrath of Peleg. But to my as-ton-ish-ment, he sat down again on the
transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slight-est in-ten-tion of
with-draw-ing. He seemed quite used to im-pen-it-ent Peleg and his ways. As
for Peleg, after let-ting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more
left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a
little as if still nervously agit-ated. “Whew!” he whistled at last—“the
squall’s gone off to lee-ward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at
sharpen-ing a lance, mend that pen, will ye. My jack-knife here needs
the grind-stone. That’s he; thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man,
Ish-mael’s thy name, didn’t ye say? Well then, down ye go here, Ish-mael,
for the three hun-dredth lay.”

“Cap-tain Peleg,” said I, “I have a friend with me who wants to ship
too—shall I bring him down to-mor-row?”

“To be sure,” said Peleg. “Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.”

“What lay does he want?” groaned Bildad, glan-cing up from the book in
which he had again been bury-ing him-self.

“Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad,” said Peleg. “Has he ever
whaled it any?” turn-ing to me.

“Killed more whales than I can count, Cap-tain Peleg.”

“Well, bring him along then.”

And, after sign-ing the pa-pers, off I went; noth-ing doubt-ing but that I
had done a good morn-ing’s work, and that the Pequod was the identical
ship that Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.

But I had not pro-ceeded far, when I began to be-think me that the
Cap-tain with whom I was to sail yet re-mained un-seen by me; though,
in-deed, in many cases, a whale-ship will be com-pletely fit-ted out, and
re-ceive all her crew on board, ere the cap-tain makes him-self vis-ible by
ar-riv-ing to take com-mand; for some-times these voy-ages are so pro-longed,
and the shore in-ter-vals at home so ex-ceed-ingly brief, that if the
cap-tain have a fam-ily, or any ab-sorb-ing con-cern-ment of that sort, he
does not trouble him-self much about his ship in port, but leaves her to
the own-ers till all is ready for sea. However, it is al-ways as well to
have a look at him be-fore ir-re-voc-ably com-mit-ting your-self into his
hands. Turn-ing back I ac-cos-ted Cap-tain Peleg, in-quir-ing where Cap-tain
Ahab was to be found.

“And what dost thou want of Cap-tain Ahab? It’s all right enough; thou
art shipped.”

“Yes, but I should like to see him.”

“But I don’t think thou wilt be able to at present. I don’t know
ex-actly what’s the mat-ter with him; but he keeps close in-side the
house; a sort of sick, and yet he don’t look so. In fact, he ain’t
sick; but no, he isn’t well either. Any how, young man, he won’t al-ways
see me, so I don’t sup-pose he will thee. He’s a queer man, Cap-tain
Ahab—so some think—but a good one. Oh, thou’lt like him well enough; no
fear, no fear. He’s a grand, un-godly, god-like man, Cap-tain Ahab;
doesn’t speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well listen.
Mark ye, be fore-warned; Ahab’s above the com-mon; Ahab’s been in
col-leges, as well as ’mong the can-ni-bals; been used to deeper won-ders
than the waves; fixed his fiery lance in migh-tier, stranger foes than
whales. His lance! aye, the keen-est and the surest that out of all our
isle! Oh! he ain’t Cap-tain Bildad; no, and he ain’t Cap-tain Peleg;
_he’s Ah-ab_, boy; and Ahab of old, thou know-est, was a crowned king!”

“And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did
they not lick his blood?”

“Come hither to me—hither, hither,” said Peleg, with a sig-ni-fic-ance in
his eye that al-most startled me. “Look ye, lad; never say that on board
the Pequod. Never say it any-where. Cap-tain Ahab did not name him-self.
’Twas a fool-ish, ig-nor-ant whim of his crazy, wid-owed mother, who died
when he was only a twelve-month old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at
Gay-head, said that the name would some-how prove proph-etic. And,
per-haps, other fools like her may tell thee the same. I wish to warn
thee. It’s a lie. I know Cap-tain Ahab well; I’ve sailed with him as
mate years ago; I know what he is—a good man—not a pi-ous, good man,
like Bildad, but a swear-ing good man—some-thing like me—only there’s a
good deal more of him. Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly;
and I know that on the pas-sage home, he was a little out of his mind
for a spell; but it was the sharp shoot-ing pains in his bleed-ing stump
that brought that about, as any one might see. I know, too, that ever
since he lost his leg last voy-age by that ac-cursed whale, he’s been a
kind of moody—des-per-ate moody, and sav-age some-times; but that will all
pass off. And once for all, let me tell thee and as-sure thee, young
man, it’s bet-ter to sail with a moody good cap-tain than a laugh-ing bad
one. So good-bye to thee—and wrong not Cap-tain Ahab, be-cause he hap-pens
to have a wicked name. Besides, my boy, he has a wife—not three voy-ages
wed-ded—a sweet, resigned girl. Think of that; by that sweet girl that
old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any ut-ter, hope-less harm
in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blas-ted, if he be, Ahab has his
hu-man-it-ies!”

As I walked away, I was full of thought-ful-ness; what had been
in-cid-ent-ally re-vealed to me of Cap-tain Ahab, filled me with a cer-tain
wild vague-ness of pain-ful-ness con-cern-ing him. And some-how, at the time,
I felt a sym-pathy and a sor-row for him, but for I don’t know what,
un-less it was the cruel loss of his leg. And yet I also felt a strange
awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I can-not at all de-scribe, was
not ex-actly awe; I do not know what it was. But I felt it; and it did
not dis-in-cline me to-wards him; though I felt im-pa-tience at what seemed
like mys-tery in him, so im-per-fectly as he was known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length car-ried in other dir-ec-tions, so
that for the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.


CHAPTER 17. The Ra-madan.

As Queequeg’s Ra-madan, or Fast-ing and Hu-mi-li-ation, was to con-tinue all
day, I did not choose to dis-turb him till to-wards night-fall; for I
cher-ish the greatest re-spect to-wards every-body’s re-li-gious ob-lig-a-tions,
never mind how com-ical, and could not find it in my heart to un-der-value
even a con-greg-a-tion of ants wor-ship-ping a toad-stool; or those other
creatures in cer-tain parts of our earth, who with a de-gree of
foot-man-ism quite un-pre-ced-en-ted in other plan-ets, bow down be-fore the
torso of a de-ceased landed pro-pri-etor merely on ac-count of the
in-or-din-ate pos-ses-sions yet owned and ren-ted in his name.

I say, we good Pres-by-terian Chris-ti-ans should be char-it-able in these
things, and not fancy ourselves so vastly su-per-ior to other mor-tals,
pa-gans and what not, be-cause of their half-crazy con-ceits on these
sub-jects. There was Queequeg, now, cer-tainly en-ter-tain-ing the most
ab-surd no-tions about Yojo and his Ra-madan;—but what of that? Queequeg
thought he knew what he was about, I sup-pose; he seemed to be con-tent;
and there let him rest. All our ar-guing with him would not avail; let
him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us all—Pres-by-teri-ans and Pagans
alike—for we are all some-how dread-fully cracked about the head, and
sadly need mend-ing.

Towards even-ing, when I felt as-sured that all his per-form-ances and
rituals must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door;
but no an-swer. I tried to open it, but it was fastened in-side.
“Queequeg,” said I softly through the key-hole:—all si-lent. “I say,
Queequeg! why don’t you speak? It’s I—Ish-mael.” But all re-mained still
as be-fore. I began to grow alarmed. I had al-lowed him such abund-ant
time; I thought he might have had an apo-plectic fit. I looked through
the key-hole; but the door open-ing into an odd corner of the room, the
key-hole pro-spect was but a crooked and sin-is-ter one. I could only see
part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall, but noth-ing
more. I was sur-prised to be-hold rest-ing against the wall the wooden
shaft of Queequeg’s har-poon, which the land-lady the even-ing pre-vi-ous
had taken from him, be-fore our mount-ing to the cham-ber. That’s strange,
thought I; but at any rate, since the har-poon stands yon-der, and he
sel-dom or never goes abroad without it, there-fore he must be in-side
here, and no pos-sible mis-take.

“Queequeg!—Queequeg!”—all still. So-mething must have happened.
Apo-plexy! I tried to burst open the door; but it stub-bornly res-isted.
Run-ning down stairs, I quickly stated my sus-pi-cions to the first per-son
I met—the cham-ber-maid. “La! la!” she cried, “I thought some-thing must
be the mat-ter. I went to make the bed after break-fast, and the door was
locked; and not a mouse to be heard; and it’s been just so si-lent ever
since. But I thought, may be, you had both gone off and locked your
bag-gage in for safe keep-ing. La! la, ma’am!—Mis-tress! murder! Mrs.
Hus-sey! apo-plexy!”—and with these cries, she ran to-wards the kit-chen, I
fol-low-ing.

Mrs. Hus-sey soon ap-peared, with a mus-tard-pot in one hand and a
vin-egar-cruet in the other, hav-ing just broken away from the oc-cu-pa-tion
of at-tend-ing to the castors, and scold-ing her little black boy
mean-time.

“Wood-house!” cried I, “which way to it? Run for God’s sake, and fetch
some-thing to pry open the door—the axe!—the axe! he’s had a stroke;
de-pend upon it!”—and so say-ing I was un-meth-od-ic-ally rush-ing up stairs
again empty-handed, when Mrs. Hus-sey in-ter-posed the mus-tard-pot and
vin-egar-cruet, and the en-tire castor of her coun-ten-ance.

“What’s the mat-ter with you, young man?”

“Get the axe! For God’s sake, run for the doc-tor, some one, while I pry
it open!”

“Look here,” said the land-lady, quickly put-ting down the vin-egar-cruet,
so as to have one hand free; “look here; are you talk-ing about pry-ing
open any of my doors?”—and with that she seized my arm. “What’s the
mat-ter with you? What’s the mat-ter with you, ship-mate?”

In as calm, but rapid a man-ner as pos-sible, I gave her to un-der-stand
the whole case. Un-con-sciously clap-ping the vin-egar-cruet to one side of
her nose, she ru-min-ated for an in-stant; then ex-claimed—“No! I haven’t
seen it since I put it there.” Run-ning to a little closet un-der the
land-ing of the stairs, she glanced in, and re-turn-ing, told me that
Queequeg’s har-poon was miss-ing. “He’s killed him-self,” she cried. “It’s
un-fort’nate Stiggs done over again—there goes an-other coun-ter-pane—God
pity his poor mother!—it will be the ruin of my house. Has the poor lad
a sis-ter? Where’s that girl?—there, Betty, go to Sn-arles the Painter,
and tell him to paint me a sign, with—“no sui-cides per-mit-ted here, and
no smoking in the par-lor;”—might as well kill both birds at once. Kill?
The Lord be mer-ci-ful to his ghost! What’s that noise there? You, young
man, avast there!”

And run-ning up after me, she caught me as I was again try-ing to force
open the door.

“I don’t al-low it; I won’t have my premises spoiled. Go for the
lock-smith, there’s one about a mile from here. But avast!” put-ting her
hand in her side-pocket, “here’s a key that’ll fit, I guess; let’s
see.” And with that, she turned it in the lock; but, alas! Queequeg’s
sup-ple-mental bolt re-mained un-with-drawn within.

“Have to burst it open,” said I, and was run-ning down the entry a
little, for a good start, when the land-lady caught at me, again vow-ing
I should not break down her premises; but I tore from her, and with a
sud-den bod-ily rush dashed my-self full against the mark.

With a prodi-gious noise the door flew open, and the knob slam-ming
against the wall, sent the plaster to the ceil-ing; and there, good
heav-ens! there sat Queequeg, al-to-gether cool and self-col-lec-ted; right
in the middle of the room; squat-ting on his hams, and hold-ing Yojo on
top of his head. He looked neither one way nor the other way, but sat
like a carved im-age with scarce a sign of act-ive life.

“Queequeg,” said I, go-ing up to him, “Queequeg, what’s the mat-ter with
you?”

“He hain’t been a sit-tin’ so all day, has he?” said the land-lady.

But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I al-most felt
like push-ing him over, so as to change his po-s-i-tion, for it was al-most
in-tol-er-able, it seemed so pain-fully and un-nat-ur-ally con-strained;
es-pe-cially, as in all prob-ab-il-ity he had been sit-ting so for up-wards of
eight or ten hours, go-ing too without his reg-u-lar meals.

“Mrs. Hus-sey,” said I, “he’s _alive_ at all events; so leave us, if you
please, and I will see to this strange af-fair my-self.”

Clos-ing the door upon the land-lady, I en-deavored to pre-vail upon
Queequeg to take a chair; but in vain. There he sat; and all he could
do—for all my po-lite arts and bland-ish-ments—he would not move a peg,
nor say a single word, nor even look at me, nor no-tice my pres-ence in
the slight-est way.

I won-der, thought I, if this can pos-sibly be a part of his Ra-madan; do
they fast on their hams that way in his nat-ive is-land. It must be so;
yes, it’s part of his creed, I sup-pose; well, then, let him rest; he’ll
get up sooner or later, no doubt. It can’t last for ever, thank God,
and his Ra-madan only comes once a year; and I don’t be-lieve it’s very
punc-tual then.

I went down to sup-per. After sit-ting a long time listen-ing to the long
stor-ies of some sail-ors who had just come from a plum-pud-ding voy-age,
as they called it (that is, a short whal-ing-voy-age in a schooner or
brig, con-fined to the north of the line, in the At-lantic Ocean only);
after listen-ing to these plum-pud-dingers till nearly el-even o’clock, I
went up stairs to go to bed, feel-ing quite sure by this time Queequeg
must cer-tainly have brought his Ra-madan to a ter-min-a-tion. But no; there
he was just where I had left him; he had not stirred an inch. I began
to grow vexed with him; it seemed so down-right sense-less and in-sane to
be sit-ting there all day and half the night on his hams in a cold room,
hold-ing a piece of wood on his head.

“For heaven’s sake, Queequeg, get up and shake your-self; get up and
have some sup-per. You’ll starve; you’ll kill your-self, Queequeg.” But
not a word did he reply.

Despair-ing of him, there-fore, I de-term-ined to go to bed and to sleep;
and no doubt, be-fore a great while, he would fol-low me. But pre-vi-ous to
turn-ing in, I took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as
it prom-ised to be a very cold night; and he had noth-ing but his
or-din-ary round jacket on. For some time, do all I would, I could not
get into the faintest doze. I had blown out the candle; and the mere
thought of Queequeg—not four feet off—sit-ting there in that un-easy
po-s-i-tion, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really
wretched. Think of it; sleep-ing all night in the same room with a wide
awake pa-gan on his hams in this dreary, un-ac-count-able Ra-madan!

But some-how I dropped off at last, and knew noth-ing more till break of
day; when, look-ing over the bed-side, there squat-ted Queequeg, as if he
had been screwed down to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of
sun entered the win-dow, up he got, with stiff and grat-ing joints, but
with a cheer-ful look; limped to-wards me where I lay; pressed his
fore-head again against mine; and said his Ra-madan was over.

Now, as I be-fore hin-ted, I have no ob-jec-tion to any per-son’s re-li-gion,
be it what it may, so long as that per-son does not kill or in-sult any
other per-son, be-cause that other per-son don’t be-lieve it also. But when
a man’s re-li-gion be-comes really frantic; when it is a pos-it-ive tor-ment
to him; and, in fine, makes this earth of ours an un-com-fort-able inn to
lodge in; then I think it high time to take that in-di-vidual aside and
ar-gue the point with him.

And just so I now did with Queequeg. “Queequeg,” said I, “get into bed
now, and lie and listen to me.” I then went on, be-gin-ning with the rise
and pro-gress of the prim-it-ive re-li-gions, and com-ing down to the vari-ous
re-li-gions of the present time, dur-ing which time I labored to show
Queequeg that all these Lents, Ra-madans, and pro-longed ham-squat-tings
in cold, cheer-less rooms were stark non-sense; bad for the health;
use-less for the soul; op-posed, in short, to the ob-vi-ous laws of Hy-giene
and com-mon sense. I told him, too, that he be-ing in other things such
an ex-tremely sens-ible and saga-cious sav-age, it pained me, very badly
pained me, to see him now so de-plor-ably fool-ish about this ri-dicu-lous
Ra-madan of his. Besides, ar-gued I, fast-ing makes the body cave in;
hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fast must
ne-ces-sar-ily be half-starved. This is the reason why most dys-peptic
re-li-gion-ists cher-ish such mel-an-choly no-tions about their here-afters. In
one word, Queequeg, said I, rather di-gress-ively; hell is an idea first
born on an un-di-ges-ted apple-dump-ling; and since then per-petu-ated
through the hered-it-ary dys-pep-sias nur-tured by Ra-madans.

I then asked Queequeg whether he him-self was ever troubled with
dys-pep-sia; ex-press-ing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it
in. He said no; only upon one mem-or-able oc-ca-sion. It was after a great
feast given by his father the king, on the gain-ing of a great battle
wherein fifty of the en-emy had been killed by about two o’clock in the
af-ter-noon, and all cooked and eaten that very even-ing.

“No more, Queequeg,” said I, shud-der-ing; “that will do;” for I knew the
in-fer-ences without his fur-ther hint-ing them. I had seen a sailor who
had vis-ited that very is-land, and he told me that it was the cus-tom,
when a great battle had been gained there, to bar-be-cue all the slain in
the yard or garden of the vic-tor; and then, one by one, they were
placed in great wooden trench-ers, and gar-nished round like a pi-lau,
with bread-fruit and co-coa-nuts; and with some pars-ley in their mouths,
were sent round with the vic-tor’s com-pli-ments to all his friends, just
as though these presents were so many Christ-mas tur-keys.

After all, I do not think that my re-marks about re-li-gion made much
im-pres-sion upon Queequeg. Be-cause, in the first place, he some-how
seemed dull of hear-ing on that im-port-ant sub-ject, un-less con-sidered
from his own point of view; and, in the second place, he did not more
than one third un-der-stand me, couch my ideas simply as I would; and,
fi-nally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal more about the true
re-li-gion than I did. He looked at me with a sort of con-des-cend-ing
con-cern and com-pas-sion, as though he thought it a great pity that such
a sens-ible young man should be so hope-lessly lost to evan-gel-ical pa-gan
piety.

At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, tak-ing a prodi-giously hearty
break-fast of chow-ders of all sorts, so that the land-lady should not
make much profit by reason of his Ra-madan, we sal-lied out to board the
Pequod, saun-ter-ing along, and pick-ing our teeth with halibut bones.


CHAPTER 18. His Mark.

As we were walk-ing down the end of the wharf to-wards the ship, Queequeg
car-ry-ing his har-poon, Cap-tain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us
from his wig-wam, say-ing he had not sus-pec-ted my friend was a can-ni-bal,
and fur-ther-more an-noun-cing that he let no can-ni-bals on board that
craft, un-less they pre-vi-ously pro-duced their pa-pers.

“What do you mean by that, Cap-tain Peleg?” said I, now jump-ing on the
bul-warks, and leav-ing my com-rade stand-ing on the wharf.

“I mean,” he replied, “he must show his pa-pers.”

“Yes,” said Cap-tain Bildad in his hol-low voice, stick-ing his head from
be-hind Peleg’s, out of the wig-wam. “He must show that he’s con-ver-ted.
Son of dark-ness,” he ad-ded, turn-ing to Queequeg, “art thou at present
in com-mu-nion with any Chris-tian church?”

“Why,” said I, “he’s a mem-ber of the first Con-greg-a-tional Church.” Here
be it said, that many tat-tooed sav-ages sail-ing in Nan-tucket ships at
last come to be con-ver-ted into the churches.

“First Con-greg-a-tional Church,” cried Bildad, “what! that wor-ships in
Deacon Deu-ter-o-nomy Cole-man’s meet-ing-house?” and so say-ing, tak-ing out
his spec-tacles, he rubbed them with his great yel-low bandana
handker-chief, and put-ting them on very care-fully, came out of the
wig-wam, and lean-ing stiffly over the bul-warks, took a good long look at
Queequeg.

“How long hath he been a mem-ber?” he then said, turn-ing to me; “not
very long, I rather guess, young man.”

“No,” said Peleg, “and he hasn’t been bap-tized right either, or it
would have washed some of that devil’s blue off his face.”

“Do tell, now,” cried Bildad, “is this Phil-istine a reg-u-lar mem-ber of
Deacon Deu-ter-o-nomy’s meet-ing? I never saw him go-ing there, and I pass
it every Lord’s day.”

“I don’t know any-thing about Deacon Deu-ter-o-nomy or his meet-ing,” said
I; “all I know is, that Queequeg here is a born mem-ber of the First
Con-greg-a-tional Church. He is a dea-con him-self, Queequeg is.”

“Young man,” said Bildad sternly, “thou art sky-lark-ing with me—ex-plain
thy-self, thou young Hittite. What church dost thee mean? an-swer me.”

Find-ing my-self thus hard pushed, I replied. “I mean, sir, the same
an-cient Cath-olic Church to which you and I, and Cap-tain Peleg there,
and Queequeg here, and all of us, and every mother’s son and soul of us
be-long; the great and ever-last-ing First Con-greg-a-tion of this whole
wor-ship-ping world; we all be-long to that; only some of us cher-ish some
queer crotchets no ways touch-ing the grand be-lief; in _that_ we all
join hands.”

“Splice, thou mean’st _s-plice_ hands,” cried Peleg, draw-ing nearer.
“Young man, you’d bet-ter ship for a mis-sion-ary, in-stead of a fore-mast
hand; I never heard a bet-ter ser-mon. Deacon Deu-ter-o-nomy—why Father
Mapple him-self couldn’t beat it, and he’s reckoned some-thing. Come
aboard, come aboard; never mind about the pa-pers. I say, tell Quo-hog
there—what’s that you call him? tell Quo-hog to step along. By the great
an-chor, what a har-poon he’s got there! looks like good stuff that; and
he handles it about right. I say, Quo-hog, or whatever your name is, did
you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat? did you ever strike a
fish?”

Without say-ing a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon
the bul-warks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats
hanging to the side; and then bra-cing his left knee, and pois-ing his
har-poon, cried out in some such way as this:—

“Cap’ain, you see him small drop tar on wa-ter dere? You see him? well,
spose him one whale eye, well, den!” and tak-ing sharp aim at it, he
dar-ted the iron right over old Bildad’s broad brim, clean across the
ship’s decks, and struck the glisten-ing tar spot out of sight.

“Now,” said Queequeg, quietly haul-ing in the line, “spos-ee him whale-e
eye; why, dad whale dead.”

“Quick, Bildad,” said Peleg, his part-ner, who, aghast at the close
vi-cin-ity of the fly-ing har-poon, had re-treated to-wards the cabin
gang-way. “Quick, I say, you Bildad, and get the ship’s pa-pers. We must
have Hedge-hog there, I mean Quo-hog, in one of our boats. Look ye,
Quo-hog, we’ll give ye the nineti-eth lay, and that’s more than ever was
given a har-poon-eer yet out of Nan-tucket.”

So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon
en-rolled among the same ship’s com-pany to which I my-self be-longed.

When all pre-lim-in-ar-ies were over and Peleg had got everything ready for
sign-ing, he turned to me and said, “I guess, Quo-hog there don’t know
how to write, does he? I say, Quo-hog, blast ye! dost thou sign thy name
or make thy mark?”

But at this ques-tion, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice be-fore taken
part in sim-ilar ce-re-mon-ies, looked no ways abashed; but tak-ing the
offered pen, copied upon the pa-per, in the proper place, an ex-act
coun-ter-part of a queer round fig-ure which was tat-tooed upon his arm; so
that through Cap-tain Peleg’s ob-stin-ate mis-take touch-ing his
ap-pel-lat-ive, it stood some-thing like this:—

Quo-hog. his X mark.

Mean-while Cap-tain Bildad sat earn-estly and stead-fastly eye-ing Queequeg,
and at last rising sol-emnly and fum-bling in the huge pock-ets of his
broad-skir-ted drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and se-lect-ing one
en-titled “The Lat-ter Day Com-ing; or No Time to Lose,” placed it in
Queequeg’s hands, and then grasp-ing them and the book with both his,
looked earn-estly into his eyes, and said, “Son of dark-ness, I must do
my duty by thee; I am part owner of this ship, and feel con-cerned for
the souls of all its crew; if thou still clingest to thy Pagan ways,
which I sadly fear, I be-seech thee, re-main not for aye a Belial
bonds-man. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the
wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say; oh! good-ness gra-cious! steer
clear of the fiery pit!”

So-mething of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad’s lan-guage,
het-ero-gen-eously mixed with Scrip-tural and do-mestic phrases.

“Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoil-ing our har-poon-eer,”
cried Peleg. “Pious har-poon-eers never make good voy-agers—it takes the
shark out of ’em; no har-poon-eer is worth a straw who aint pretty
shark-ish. There was young Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat-header out
of all Nan-tucket and the Vine-yard; he joined the meet-ing, and never
came to good. He got so frightened about his plaguy soul, that he
shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear of after-claps, in case
he got stove and went to Davy Jones.”

“Peleg! Peleg!” said Bildad, lift-ing his eyes and hands, “thou thy-self,
as I my-self, hast seen many a per-il-ous time; thou know-est, Peleg, what
it is to have the fear of death; how, then, can’st thou prate in this
un-godly guise. Thou be-li-est thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this
same Pequod here had her three masts over-board in that typhoon on
Japan, that same voy-age when thou went mate with Cap-tain Ahab, did’st
thou not think of Death and the Judg-ment then?”

“Hear him, hear him now,” cried Peleg, march-ing across the cabin, and
thrust-ing his hands far down into his pock-ets,—“hear him, all of ye.
Think of that! When every mo-ment we thought the ship would sink! Death
and the Judg-ment then? What? With all three masts mak-ing such an
ever-last-ing thun-der-ing against the side; and every sea break-ing over
us, fore and aft. Think of Death and the Judg-ment then? No! no time to
think about Death then. Life was what Cap-tain Ahab and I was think-ing
of; and how to save all hands—how to rig jury-masts—how to get into the
nearest port; that was what I was think-ing of.”

Bildad said no more, but but-ton-ing up his coat, stalked on deck, where
we fol-lowed him. There he stood, very quietly over-look-ing some
sail-makers who were mend-ing a top-sail in the waist. Now and then he
stooped to pick up a patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which
oth-er-wise might have been wasted.


CHAPTER 19. The Prophet.

“Ship-mates, have ye shipped in that ship?”

Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were saun-ter-ing away from
the wa-ter, for the mo-ment each oc-cu-pied with his own thoughts, when the
above words were put to us by a stranger, who, paus-ing be-fore us,
lev-elled his massive fore-finger at the ves-sel in ques-tion. He was but
shab-bily ap-par-elled in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of a
black handker-chief in-vest-ing his neck. A con-flu-ent small-pox had in all
dir-ec-tions flowed over his face, and left it like the com-plic-ated
ribbed bed of a tor-rent, when the rush-ing wa-ters have been dried up.

“Have ye shipped in her?” he re-peated.

“You mean the ship Pequod, I sup-pose,” said I, try-ing to gain a little
more time for an un-in-ter-rup-ted look at him.

“Aye, the Pequod—that ship there,” he said, draw-ing back his whole arm,
and then rap-idly shov-ing it straight out from him, with the fixed
bay-onet of his poin-ted fin-ger dar-ted full at the ob-ject.

“Yes,” said I, “we have just signed the art-icles.”

“Anything down there about your souls?”

“About what?”

“Oh, per-haps you hav’n’t got any,” he said quickly. “No mat-ter though,
I know many chaps that hav’n’t got any,—good luck to ’em; and they are
all the bet-ter off for it. A soul’s a sort of a fifth wheel to a
wagon.”

“What are you jab-ber-ing about, ship-mate?” said I.

“_He’s_ got enough, though, to make up for all de-fi-cien-cies of that
sort in other chaps,” ab-ruptly said the stranger, pla-cing a nervous
em-phasis upon the word _he_.

“Queequeg,” said I, “let’s go; this fel-low has broken loose from
some-where; he’s talk-ing about some-thing and some-body we don’t know.”

“Stop!” cried the stranger. “Ye said true—ye hav’n’t seen Old Thun-der
yet, have ye?”

“Who’s Old Thun-der?” said I, again riv-eted with the in-sane earn-est-ness
of his man-ner.

“Cap-tain Ahab.”

“What! the cap-tain of our ship, the Pequod?”

“Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. Ye
hav’n’t seen him yet, have ye?”

“No, we hav’n’t. He’s sick they say, but is get-ting bet-ter, and will be
all right again be-fore long.”

“All right again be-fore long!” laughed the stranger, with a sol-emnly
de-ris-ive sort of laugh. “Look ye; when Cap-tain Ahab is all right, then
this left arm of mine will be all right; not be-fore.”

“What do you know about him?”

“What did they _tell_ you about him? Say that!”

“They didn’t tell much of any-thing about him; only I’ve heard that he’s
a good whale-hunter, and a good cap-tain to his crew.”

“That’s true, that’s true—yes, both true enough. But you must jump when
he gives an or-der. Step and growl; growl and go—that’s the word with
Cap-tain Ahab. But noth-ing about that thing that happened to him off
Cape Horn, long ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights;
noth-ing about that deadly skrim-mage with the Span-iard afore the al-tar
in Santa?—heard noth-ing about that, eh? Noth-ing about the sil-ver
cala-bash he spat into? And noth-ing about his los-ing his leg last
voy-age, ac-cord-ing to the proph-ecy. Didn’t ye hear a word about them
mat-ters and some-thing more, eh? No, I don’t think ye did; how could ye?
Who knows it? Not all Nan-tucket, I guess. But hows’ever, may-hap, ye’ve
heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard of
that, I dare say. Oh yes, _that_ every one knows a’most—I mean they
know he’s only one leg; and that a par-ma-cetti took the other off.”

“My friend,” said I, “what all this gib-ber-ish of yours is about, I
don’t know, and I don’t much care; for it seems to me that you must be
a little dam-aged in the head. But if you are speak-ing of Cap-tain Ahab,
of that ship there, the Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all
about the loss of his leg.”

“_All_ about it, eh—sure you do?—all?”

“Pretty sure.”

With fin-ger poin-ted and eye lev-elled at the Pequod, the beg-gar-like
stranger stood a mo-ment, as if in a troubled rev-erie; then start-ing a
little, turned and said:—“Ye’ve shipped, have ye? Names down on the
pa-pers? Well, well, what’s signed, is signed; and what’s to be, will
be; and then again, per-haps it won’t be, after all. Anyhow, it’s all
fixed and ar-ranged a’ready; and some sail-ors or other must go with him,
I sup-pose; as well these as any other men, God pity ’em! Morn-ing to ye,
ship-mates, morn-ing; the in-ef-fable heav-ens bless ye; I’m sorry I stopped
ye.”

“Look here, friend,” said I, “if you have any-thing im-port-ant to tell
us, out with it; but if you are only try-ing to bam-boozle us, you are
mis-taken in your game; that’s all I have to say.”

“And it’s said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way;
you are just the man for him—the likes of ye. Morn-ing to ye, ship-mates,
morn-ing! Oh! when ye get there, tell ’em I’ve con-cluded not to make one
of ’em.”

“Ah, my dear fel-low, you can’t fool us that way—you can’t fool us. It
is the easi-est thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a
great secret in him.”

“Morn-ing to ye, ship-mates, morn-ing.”

“Morn-ing it is,” said I. “Come along, Queequeg, let’s leave this crazy
man. But stop, tell me your name, will you?”

“Eli-jah.”

Eli-jah! thought I, and we walked away, both com-ment-ing, after each
other’s fash-ion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was
noth-ing but a hum-bug, try-ing to be a bug-bear. But we had not gone
per-haps above a hun-dred yards, when chan-cing to turn a corner, and
look-ing back as I did so, who should be seen but Eli-jah fol-low-ing us,
though at a dis-tance. Some-how, the sight of him struck me so, that I
said noth-ing to Queequeg of his be-ing be-hind, but passed on with my
com-rade, anxious to see whether the stranger would turn the same corner
that we did. He did; and then it seemed to me that he was dog-ging us,
but with what in-tent I could not for the life of me ima-gine. This
cir-cum-stance, coupled with his am-bigu-ous, half-hint-ing, half-re-veal-ing,
shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague won-der-ments
and half-ap-pre-hen-sions, and all con-nec-ted with the Pequod; and Cap-tain
Ahab; and the leg he had lost; and the Cape Horn fit; and the sil-ver
cala-bash; and what Cap-tain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship
the day pre-vi-ous; and the pre-dic-tion of the squaw Tistig; and the
voy-age we had bound ourselves to sail; and a hun-dred other shad-owy
things.

I was re-solved to sat-isfy my-self whether this ragged Eli-jah was really
dog-ging us or not, and with that in-tent crossed the way with Queequeg,
and on that side of it re-traced our steps. But Eli-jah passed on,
without seem-ing to no-tice us. This re-lieved me; and once more, and
fi-nally as it seemed to me, I pro-nounced him in my heart, a hum-bug.


CHAPTER 20. All Astir.

A day or two passed, and there was great activ-ity aboard the Pequod.
Not only were the old sails be-ing men-ded, but new sails were com-ing on
board, and bolts of can-vas, and coils of rig-ging; in short, everything
be-tokened that the ship’s pre-par-a-tions were hur-ry-ing to a close.
Cap-tain Peleg sel-dom or never went ashore, but sat in his wig-wam
keep-ing a sharp look-out upon the hands: Bildad did all the pur-chas-ing
and provid-ing at the stores; and the men em-ployed in the hold and on
the rig-ging were work-ing till long after night-fall.

On the day fol-low-ing Queequeg’s sign-ing the art-icles, word was given at
all the inns where the ship’s com-pany were stop-ping, that their chests
must be on board be-fore night, for there was no telling how soon the
ves-sel might be sail-ing. So Queequeg and I got down our traps,
resolv-ing, how-ever, to sleep ashore till the last. But it seems they
al-ways give very long no-tice in these cases, and the ship did not sail
for sev-eral days. But no won-der; there was a good deal to be done, and
there is no telling how many things to be thought of, be-fore the Pequod
was fully equipped.

Every one knows what a mul-ti-tude of things—beds, sauce-pans, knives and
forks, shovels and tongs, nap-kins, nut-crack-ers, and what not, are
in-dis-pens-able to the busi-ness of house-keep-ing. Just so with whal-ing,
which ne-ces-sit-ates a three-years’ house-keep-ing upon the wide ocean, far
from all gro-cers, cost-er-mon-gers, doc-tors, bakers, and bankers. And
though this also holds true of mer-chant ves-sels, yet not by any means
to the same ex-tent as with whale-men. For be-sides the great length of
the whal-ing voy-age, the nu-mer-ous art-icles pe-cu-liar to the pro-sec-u-tion
of the fish-ery, and the im-possib-il-ity of re-pla-cing them at the re-mote
har-bors usu-ally fre-quen-ted, it must be re-membered, that of all ships,
whal-ing ves-sels are the most ex-posed to ac-ci-dents of all kinds, and
es-pe-cially to the de-struc-tion and loss of the very things upon which
the suc-cess of the voy-age most de-pends. Hence, the spare boats, spare
spars, and spare lines and har-poons, and spare everythings, al-most, but
a spare Cap-tain and du-plic-ate ship.

At the period of our ar-rival at the Is-land, the heav-iest stor-age of the
Pequod had been al-most com-pleted; com-pris-ing her beef, bread, wa-ter,
fuel, and iron hoops and staves. But, as be-fore hin-ted, for some time
there was a con-tinual fetch-ing and car-ry-ing on board of divers odds and
ends of things, both large and small.

Chief among those who did this fetch-ing and car-ry-ing was Cap-tain
Bildad’s sis-ter, a lean old lady of a most de-term-ined and in-defatig-able
spirit, but withal very kind-hearted, who seemed re-solved that, if _she_
could help it, noth-ing should be found want-ing in the Pequod, after
once fairly get-ting to sea. At one time she would come on board with a
jar of pickles for the stew-ard’s pantry; an-other time with a bunch of
quills for the chief mate’s desk, where he kept his log; a third time
with a roll of flan-nel for the small of some one’s rheum-atic back.
Never did any wo-man bet-ter de-serve her name, which was Char-ity—Aunt
Char-ity, as every-body called her. And like a sis-ter of char-ity did this
char-it-able Aunt Char-ity bustle about hither and thither, ready to turn
her hand and heart to any-thing that prom-ised to yield safety, com-fort,
and con-sol-a-tion to all on board a ship in which her be-loved brother
Bildad was con-cerned, and in which she her-self owned a score or two of
well-saved dol-lars.

But it was start-ling to see this ex-cel-lent hearted Quakeress com-ing on
board, as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and
a still longer whal-ing lance in the other. Nor was Bildad him-self nor
Cap-tain Peleg at all back-ward. As for Bildad, he car-ried about with him
a long list of the art-icles needed, and at every fresh ar-rival, down
went his mark op-pos-ite that art-icle upon the pa-per. Every once in a
while Peleg came hob-bling out of his whale-bone den, roar-ing at the men
down the hatch-ways, roar-ing up to the rig-gers at the mast-head, and
then con-cluded by roar-ing back into his wig-wam.

Dur-ing these days of pre-par-a-tion, Queequeg and I of-ten vis-ited the
craft, and as of-ten I asked about Cap-tain Ahab, and how he was, and
when he was go-ing to come on board his ship. To these ques-tions they
would an-swer, that he was get-ting bet-ter and bet-ter, and was ex-pec-ted
aboard every day; mean-time, the two cap-tains, Peleg and Bildad, could
at-tend to everything ne-ces-sary to fit the ves-sel for the voy-age. If I
had been down-right hon-est with my-self, I would have seen very plainly
in my heart that I did but half fancy be-ing com-mit-ted this way to so
long a voy-age, without once lay-ing my eyes on the man who was to be the
ab-so-lute dic-tator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the open
sea. But when a man sus-pects any wrong, it some-times hap-pens that if he
be already in-volved in the mat-ter, he in-sens-ibly strives to cover up
his sus-pi-cions even from him-self. And much this way it was with me. I
said noth-ing, and tried to think noth-ing.

At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would
cer-tainly sail. So next morn-ing, Queequeg and I took a very early
start.


CHAPTER 21. Go-ing Aboard.

It was nearly six o’clock, but only grey im-per-fect misty dawn, when we
drew nigh the wharf.

“There are some sail-ors run-ning ahead there, if I see right,” said I to
Queequeg, “it can’t be shad-ows; she’s off by sun-rise, I guess; come
on!”

“Avast!” cried a voice, whose owner at the same time com-ing close
be-hind us, laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then in-sinu-at-ing
him-self between us, stood stoop-ing for-ward a little, in the un-cer-tain
twi-light, strangely peer-ing from Queequeg to me. It was Eli-jah.

“Go-ing aboard?”

“Hands off, will you,” said I.

“Loo-kee here,” said Queequeg, shak-ing him-self, “go ’way!”

“Ain’t go-ing aboard, then?”

“Yes, we are,” said I, “but what busi-ness is that of yours? Do you
know, Mr. Eli-jah, that I con-sider you a little im-per-tin-ent?”

“No, no, no; I wasn’t aware of that,” said Eli-jah, slowly and
won-der-ingly look-ing from me to Queequeg, with the most un-ac-count-able
glances.

“Eli-jah,” said I, “you will ob-lige my friend and me by with-draw-ing. We
are go-ing to the In-dian and Pa-cific Oceans, and would prefer not to be
de-tained.”

“Ye be, be ye? Com-ing back afore break-fast?”

“He’s cracked, Queequeg,” said I, “come on.”

“Hol-loa!” cried sta-tion-ary Eli-jah, hail-ing us when we had re-moved a few
paces.

“Never mind him,” said I, “Queequeg, come on.”

But he stole up to us again, and sud-denly clap-ping his hand on my
shoulder, said—“Did ye see any-thing look-ing like men go-ing to-wards that
ship a while ago?”

Struck by this plain mat-ter-of-fact ques-tion, I answered, say-ing, “Yes,
I thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure.”

“Very dim, very dim,” said Eli-jah. “Morn-ing to ye.”

Once more we quit-ted him; but once more he came softly after us; and
touch-ing my shoulder again, said, “See if you can find ’em now, will
ye?

“Find who?”

“Morn-ing to ye! morn-ing to ye!” he re-joined, again mov-ing off. “Oh! I
was go-ing to warn ye against—but never mind, never mind—it’s all one,
all in the fam-ily too;—sharp frost this morn-ing, ain’t it? Good-bye to
ye. Shan’t see ye again very soon, I guess; un-less it’s be-fore the
Grand Jury.” And with these cracked words he fi-nally de-par-ted, leav-ing
me, for the mo-ment, in no small won-der-ment at his frantic im-pudence.

At last, step-ping on board the Pequod, we found everything in pro-found
quiet, not a soul mov-ing. The cabin en-trance was locked within; the
hatches were all on, and lumbered with coils of rig-ging. Go-ing for-ward
to the fore-castle, we found the slide of the scuttle open. See-ing a
light, we went down, and found only an old rig-ger there, wrapped in a
tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at whole length upon two chests, his
face down-wards and in-closed in his fol-ded arms. The pro-found-est slum-ber
slept upon him.

“Those sail-ors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?” said I,
look-ing du-bi-ously at the sleeper. But it seemed that, when on the
wharf, Queequeg had not at all no-ticed what I now al-luded to; hence I
would have thought my-self to have been op-tic-ally de-ceived in that
mat-ter, were it not for Eli-jah’s oth-er-wise in-ex-plic-able ques-tion. But I
beat the thing down; and again mark-ing the sleeper, joc-u-larly hin-ted to
Queequeg that per-haps we had best sit up with the body; telling him to
es-tab-lish him-self ac-cord-ingly. He put his hand upon the sleeper’s rear,
as though feel-ing if it was soft enough; and then, without more ado,
sat quietly down there.

“Gra-cious! Queequeg, don’t sit there,” said I.

“Oh! perry dood seat,” said Queequeg, “my coun-try way; won’t hurt him
face.”

“Face!” said I, “call that his face? very be-ne-vol-ent coun-ten-ance then;
but how hard he breathes, he’s heav-ing him-self; get off, Queequeg, you
are heavy, it’s grind-ing the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg! Look,
he’ll twitch you off soon. I won-der he don’t wake.”

Queequeg re-moved him-self to just bey-ond the head of the sleeper, and
lighted his toma-hawk pipe. I sat at the feet. We kept the pipe passing
over the sleeper, from one to the other. Mean-while, upon ques-tion-ing
him in his broken fash-ion, Queequeg gave me to un-der-stand that, in his
land, ow-ing to the ab-sence of settees and so-fas of all sorts, the king,
chiefs, and great people gen-er-ally, were in the cus-tom of fat-ten-ing
some of the lower or-ders for ot-to-mans; and to fur-nish a house
com-fort-ably in that re-spect, you had only to buy up eight or ten lazy
fel-lows, and lay them round in the piers and al-coves. Besides, it was
very con-veni-ent on an ex-cur-sion; much bet-ter than those garden-chairs
which are con-vert-ible into walk-ing-sticks; upon oc-ca-sion, a chief
call-ing his at-tend-ant, and de-sir-ing him to make a settee of him-self
un-der a spread-ing tree, per-haps in some damp marshy place.

While nar-rat-ing these things, every time Queequeg re-ceived the toma-hawk
from me, he flour-ished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper’s head.

“What’s that for, Queequeg?”

“Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!”

He was go-ing on with some wild re-min-is-cences about his toma-hawk-pipe,
which, it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed
his soul, when we were dir-ectly at-trac-ted to the sleep-ing rig-ger. The
strong va-por now com-pletely filling the con-trac-ted hole, it began to
tell upon him. He breathed with a sort of muffled-ness; then seemed
troubled in the nose; then re-volved over once or twice; then sat up and
rubbed his eyes.

“Hol-loa!” he breathed at last, “who be ye smokers?”

“Shipped men,” answered I, “when does she sail?”

“Aye, aye, ye are go-ing in her, be ye? She sails to-day. The Cap-tain
came aboard last night.”

“What Cap-tain?—Ahab?”

“Who but him in-deed?”

I was go-ing to ask him some fur-ther ques-tions con-cern-ing Ahab, when we
heard a noise on deck.

“Hol-loa! Star-buck’s astir,” said the rig-ger. “He’s a lively chief mate,
that; good man, and a pi-ous; but all alive now, I must turn to.” And so
say-ing he went on deck, and we fol-lowed.

It was now clear sun-rise. Soon the crew came on board in twos and
threes; the rig-gers be-stirred them-selves; the mates were act-ively
en-gaged; and sev-eral of the shore people were busy in bring-ing vari-ous
last things on board. Mean-while Cap-tain Ahab re-mained in-vis-ibly
en-shrined within his cabin.


CHAPTER 22. Merry Christ-mas.

At length, to-wards noon, upon the fi-nal dis-missal of the ship’s
rig-gers, and after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and
after the ever-thought-ful Char-ity had come off in a whale-boat, with
her last gift—a night-cap for Stubb, the second mate, her
brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the stew-ard—after all this, the
two Cap-tains, Peleg and Bildad, is-sued from the cabin, and turn-ing to
the chief mate, Peleg said:

“Now, Mr. Star-buck, are you sure everything is right? Cap-tain Ahab is
all ready—just spoke to him—noth-ing more to be got from shore, eh?
Well, call all hands, then. Muster ’em aft here—blast ’em!”

“No need of pro-fane words, how-ever great the hurry, Peleg,” said
Bildad, “but away with thee, friend Star-buck, and do our bid-ding.”

How now! Here upon the very point of start-ing for the voy-age, Cap-tain
Peleg and Cap-tain Bildad were go-ing it with a high hand on the
quarter-deck, just as if they were to be joint-com-mand-ers at sea, as
well as to all ap-pear-ances in port. And, as for Cap-tain Ahab, no sign
of him was yet to be seen; only, they said he was in the cabin. But
then, the idea was, that his pres-ence was by no means ne-ces-sary in
get-ting the ship un-der weigh, and steer-ing her well out to sea. Indeed,
as that was not at all his proper busi-ness, but the pi-lot’s; and as he
was not yet com-pletely re-covered—so they said—there-fore, Cap-tain Ahab
stayed be-low. And all this seemed nat-ural enough; es-pe-cially as in the
mer-chant ser-vice many cap-tains never show them-selves on deck for a
con-sid-er-able time after heav-ing up the an-chor, but re-main over the
cabin table, hav-ing a farewell merry-mak-ing with their shore friends,
be-fore they quit the ship for good with the pi-lot.

But there was not much chance to think over the mat-ter, for Cap-tain
Peleg was now all alive. He seemed to do most of the talk-ing and
com-mand-ing, and not Bildad.

“Aft here, ye sons of bach-el-ors,” he cried, as the sail-ors lingered at
the main-mast. “Mr. Star-buck, drive ’em aft.”

“Strike the tent there!”—was the next or-der. As I hin-ted be-fore, this
whale-bone mar-quee was never pitched ex-cept in port; and on board the
Pequod, for thirty years, the or-der to strike the tent was well known
to be the next thing to heav-ing up the an-chor.

“Man the cap-stan! Blood and thun-der!—jump!”—was the next com-mand, and
the crew sprang for the hand-spikes.

Now in get-ting un-der weigh, the sta-tion gen-er-ally oc-cu-pied by the pi-lot
is the for-ward part of the ship. And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be
it known, in ad-di-tion to his other of-ficers, was one of the li-censed
pi-lots of the port—he be-ing sus-pec-ted to have got him-self made a pi-lot
in or-der to save the Nan-tucket pi-lot-fee to all the ships he was
con-cerned in, for he never pi-loted any other craft—Bildad, I say, might
now be seen act-ively en-gaged in look-ing over the bows for the
ap-proach-ing an-chor, and at in-ter-vals singing what seemed a dis-mal stave
of psalm-ody, to cheer the hands at the wind-lass, who roared forth some
sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Al-ley, with hearty good
will. Never-the-less, not three days pre-vi-ous, Bildad had told them that
no pro-fane songs would be al-lowed on board the Pequod, par-tic-u-larly in
get-ting un-der weigh; and Char-ity, his sis-ter, had placed a small choice
copy of Watts in each sea-man’s berth.

Mean-time, over-see-ing the other part of the ship, Cap-tain Peleg ripped
and swore astern in the most fright-ful man-ner. I al-most thought he
would sink the ship be-fore the an-chor could be got up; in-vol-un-tar-ily I
paused on my hand-spike, and told Queequeg to do the same, think-ing of
the per-ils we both ran, in start-ing on the voy-age with such a devil for
a pi-lot. I was com-fort-ing my-self, how-ever, with the thought that in
pi-ous Bildad might be found some sal-va-tion, spite of his seven hun-dred
and sev-enty-sev-enth lay; when I felt a sud-den sharp poke in my rear,
and turn-ing round, was hor-ri-fied at the ap-par-i-tion of Cap-tain Peleg in
the act of with-draw-ing his leg from my im-me-di-ate vi-cin-ity. That was my
first kick.

“Is that the way they heave in the marchant ser-vice?” he roared.
“Spring, thou sheep-head; spring, and break thy back-bone! Why don’t ye
spring, I say, all of ye—spring! Quo-hog! spring, thou chap with the red
whiskers; spring there, Scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants. Spring, I
say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out!” And so say-ing, he moved
along the wind-lass, here and there us-ing his leg very freely, while
im-per-turb-able Bildad kept lead-ing off with his psalm-ody. Thinks I,
Cap-tain Peleg must have been drink-ing some-thing to-day.

At last the an-chor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. It
was a short, cold Christ-mas; and as the short north-ern day merged into
night, we found ourselves al-most broad upon the wintry ocean, whose
freez-ing spray cased us in ice, as in pol-ished ar-mor. The long rows of
teeth on the bul-warks glistened in the moon-light; and like the white
ivory tusks of some huge ele-phant, vast curving icicles de-pended from
the bows.

Lank Bildad, as pi-lot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as
the old craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shiv-er-ing
frost all over her, and the winds howled, and the cord-age rang, his
steady notes were heard,—


_“Sweet fields bey-ond the swell-ing flood, Stand dressed in liv-ing
green. So to the Jews old Canaan stood, While Jordan rolled between.”_



Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then. They
were full of hope and fruition. Spite of this fri-gid winter night in
the bois-ter-ous At-lantic, spite of my wet feet and wet-ter jacket, there
was yet, it then seemed to me, many a pleas-ant haven in store; and
meads and glades so etern-ally ver-nal, that the grass shot up by the
spring, un-trod-den, un-wil-ted, re-mains at mid-sum-mer.

At last we gained such an off-ing, that the two pi-lots were needed no
longer. The stout sail-boat that had ac-com-pan-ied us began ran-ging
along-side.

It was curi-ous and not un-pleas-ing, how Peleg and Bildad were af-fected
at this junc-ture, es-pe-cially Cap-tain Bildad. For loath to de-part, yet;
very loath to leave, for good, a ship bound on so long and per-il-ous a
voy-age—bey-ond both stormy Capes; a ship in which some thou-sands of his
hard earned dol-lars were in-ves-ted; a ship, in which an old ship-mate
sailed as cap-tain; a man al-most as old as he, once more start-ing to
en-counter all the ter-rors of the piti-less jaw; loath to say good-bye to
a thing so every way brim-ful of every in-terest to him,—poor old Bildad
lingered long; paced the deck with anxious strides; ran down into the
cabin to speak an-other farewell word there; again came on deck, and
looked to wind-ward; looked to-wards the wide and end-less wa-ters, only
bounded by the far-off un-seen Eastern Contin-ents; looked to-wards the
land; looked aloft; looked right and left; looked every-where and
nowhere; and at last, mech-an-ic-ally coil-ing a rope upon its pin,
con-vuls-ively grasped stout Peleg by the hand, and hold-ing up a lan-tern,
for a mo-ment stood gaz-ing hero-ic-ally in his face, as much as to say,
“Never-the-less, friend Peleg, I can stand it; yes, I can.”

As for Peleg him-self, he took it more like a philo-sopher; but for all
his philo-sophy, there was a tear twink-ling in his eye, when the lan-tern
came too near. And he, too, did not a little run from cabin to deck—now
a word be-low, and now a word with Star-buck, the chief mate.

But, at last, he turned to his com-rade, with a fi-nal sort of look about
him,—“Cap-tain Bildad—come, old ship-mate, we must go. Back the main-yard
there! Boat ahoy! Stand by to come close along-side, now! Care-ful,
care-ful!—come, Bildad, boy—say your last. Luck to ye, Star-buck—luck to
ye, Mr. Stubb—luck to ye, Mr. Flask—good-bye and good luck to ye
all—and this day three years I’ll have a hot sup-per smoking for ye in
old Nan-tucket. Hur-rah and away!”

“God bless ye, and have ye in His holy keep-ing, men,” mur-mured old
Bildad, al-most in-co-her-ently. “I hope ye’ll have fine weather now, so
that Cap-tain Ahab may soon be mov-ing among ye—a pleas-ant sun is all he
needs, and ye’ll have plenty of them in the tropic voy-age ye go. Be
care-ful in the hunt, ye mates. Don’t stave the boats need-lessly, ye
har-poon-eers; good white ce-dar plank is raised full three per cent.
within the year. Don’t for-get your pray-ers, either. Mr. Star-buck, mind
that cooper don’t waste the spare staves. Oh! the sail-needles are in
the green locker! Don’t whale it too much a’ Lord’s days, men; but
don’t miss a fair chance either, that’s re-ject-ing Heaven’s good gifts.
Have an eye to the molasses tierce, Mr. Stubb; it was a little leaky, I
thought. If ye touch at the is-lands, Mr. Flask, be-ware of for-nic-a-tion.
Good-bye, good-bye! Don’t keep that cheese too long down in the hold,
Mr. Star-buck; it’ll spoil. Be care-ful with the but-ter—twenty cents the
pound it was, and mind ye, if—”

“Come, come, Cap-tain Bildad; stop pa-laver-ing,—away!” and with that,
Peleg hur-ried him over the side, and both dropt into the boat.

Ship and boat di-verged; the cold, damp night breeze blew between; a
scream-ing gull flew over-head; the two hulls wildly rolled; we gave
three heavy-hearted cheers, and blindly plunged like fate into the lone
At-lantic.


CHAPTER 23. The Lee Shore.

Some chapters back, one Bulk-ing-ton was spoken of, a tall, new-landed
mar-iner, en-countered in New Bed-ford at the inn.

When on that shiv-er-ing winter’s night, the Pequod thrust her vin-dict-ive
bows into the cold ma-li-cious waves, who should I see stand-ing at her
helm but Bulk-ing-ton! I looked with sym-path-etic awe and fear-ful-ness upon
the man, who in mid-winter just landed from a four years’ dan-ger-ous
voy-age, could so un-rest-ingly push off again for still an-other
tem-pes-tu-ous term. The land seemed scorch-ing to his feet. Won-der-fullest
things are ever the un-men-tion-able; deep memor-ies yield no epi-taphs;
this six-inch chapter is the stone-less grave of Bulk-ing-ton. Let me only
say that it fared with him as with the storm-tossed ship, that
miser-ably drives along the lee-ward land. The port would fain give
suc-cor; the port is pi-ti-ful; in the port is safety, com-fort,
hearth-stone, sup-per, warm blankets, friends, all that’s kind to our
mor-tal-it-ies. But in that gale, the port, the land, is that ship’s
direst jeop-ardy; she must fly all hos-pit-al-ity; one touch of land,
though it but graze the keel, would make her shud-der through and
through. With all her might she crowds all sail off shore; in so do-ing,
fights ’gainst the very winds that fain would blow her home-ward; seeks
all the lashed sea’s land-less-ness again; for refuge’s sake for-lornly
rush-ing into peril; her only friend her bitterest foe!

Know ye now, Bulk-ing-ton? Glimpses do ye seem to see of that mor-tally
in-tol-er-able truth; that all deep, earn-est think-ing is but the in-trepid
ef-fort of the soul to keep the open in-de-pend-ence of her sea; while the
wild-est winds of heaven and earth con-spire to cast her on the
treach-er-ous, slav-ish shore?

But as in land-less-ness alone resides highest truth, shore-less,
in-def-in-ite as God—so, bet-ter is it to per-ish in that howl-ing in-fin-ite,
than be in-glori-ously dashed upon the lee, even if that were safety! For
worm-like, then, oh! who would craven crawl to land! Ter-rors of the
ter-rible! is all this agony so vain? Take heart, take heart, O
Bulk-ing-ton! Bear thee grimly, demi-god! Up from the spray of thy
ocean-per-ish-ing—straight up, leaps thy apo-theosis!


CHAPTER 24. The Ad-voc-ate.

As Queequeg and I are now fairly em-barked in this busi-ness of whal-ing;
and as this busi-ness of whal-ing has some-how come to be re-garded among
lands-men as a rather un-po-et-ical and dis-rep-ut-able pur-suit; there-fore, I
am all anxi-ety to con-vince ye, ye lands-men, of the in-justice hereby
done to us hunters of whales.

In the first place, it may be deemed al-most su-per-flu-ous to es-tab-lish
the fact, that among people at large, the busi-ness of whal-ing is not
ac-coun-ted on a level with what are called the lib-eral pro-fes-sions. If a
stranger were in-tro-duced into any mis-cel-laneous met-ro-pol-itan so-ci-ety,
it would but slightly ad-vance the gen-eral opin-ion of his mer-its, were
he presen-ted to the com-pany as a har-poon-eer, say; and if in emu-la-tion
of the naval of-ficers he should ap-pend the ini-tials S.W.F. (Sperm Whale
Fish-ery) to his vis-it-ing card, such a pro-ced-ure would be deemed
pre-em-in-ently pre-sum-ing and ri-dicu-lous.

Doubt-less one lead-ing reason why the world de-clines hon-or-ing us
whale-men, is this: they think that, at best, our vo-ca-tion amounts to a
but-cher-ing sort of busi-ness; and that when act-ively en-gaged therein, we
are sur-roun-ded by all man-ner of de-file-ments. Butchers we are, that is
true. But butchers, also, and butchers of the blood-i-est badge have been
all Mar-tial Com-mand-ers whom the world in-vari-ably de-lights to honor. And
as for the mat-ter of the al-leged un-clean-li-ness of our busi-ness, ye
shall soon be ini-ti-ated into cer-tain facts hitherto pretty gen-er-ally
un-known, and which, upon the whole, will tri-umphantly plant the sperm
whale-ship at least among the clean-li-est things of this tidy earth. But
even grant-ing the charge in ques-tion to be true; what dis-ordered
slip-pery decks of a whale-ship are com-par-able to the un-speak-able
car-rion of those battle-fields from which so many sol-diers re-turn to
drink in all ladies’ plaudits? And if the idea of peril so much
en-hances the pop-u-lar con-ceit of the sol-dier’s pro-fes-sion; let me as-sure
ye that many a vet-eran who has freely marched up to a bat-tery, would
quickly re-coil at the ap-par-i-tion of the sperm whale’s vast tail,
fan-ning into ed-dies the air over his head. For what are the
com-pre-hens-ible ter-rors of man com-pared with the in-ter-linked ter-rors and
won-ders of God!

But, though the world scouts at us whale hunters, yet does it
un-wit-tingly pay us the pro-found-est homage; yea, an all-abound-ing
ad-or-a-tion! for al-most all the tapers, lamps, and candles that burn
round the globe, burn, as be-fore so many shrines, to our glory!

But look at this mat-ter in other lights; weigh it in all sorts of
scales; see what we whale-men are, and have been.

Why did the Dutch in De Witt’s time have ad-mir-als of their whal-ing
fleets? Why did Louis XVI. of France, at his own per-sonal ex-pense, fit
out whal-ing ships from Dunkirk, and po-litely in-vite to that town some
score or two of fam-il-ies from our own is-land of Nan-tucket? Why did
Bri-tain between the years 1750 and 1788 pay to her whale-men in boun-ties
up-wards of £1,000,000? And lastly, how comes it that we whale-men of
Amer-ica now out-num-ber all the rest of the ban-ded whale-men in the world;
sail a navy of up-wards of seven hun-dred ves-sels; manned by eight-een
thou-sand men; yearly con-sum-ing 4,000,000 of dol-lars; the ships worth,
at the time of sail-ing, $20,000,000! and every year im-port-ing into our
har-bors a well reaped har-vest of $7,000,000. How comes all this, if
there be not some-thing puis-sant in whal-ing?

But this is not the half; look again.

I freely as-sert, that the cos-mo-pol-ite philo-sopher can-not, for his life,
point out one single peace-ful in-flu-ence, which within the last sixty
years has op-er-ated more po-ten-tially upon the whole broad world, taken
in one ag-greg-ate, than the high and mighty busi-ness of whal-ing. One way
and an-other, it has be-got-ten events so re-mark-able in them-selves, and so
con-tinu-ously mo-ment-ous in their se-quen-tial is-sues, that whal-ing may
well be re-garded as that Egyp-tian mother, who bore off-spring them-selves
preg-nant from her womb. It would be a hope-less, end-less task to
cata-logue all these things. Let a hand-ful suf-fice. For many years past
the whale-ship has been the pi-on-eer in fer-ret-ing out the re-motest and
least known parts of the earth. She has ex-plored seas and ar-chipela-goes
which had no chart, where no Cook or Van-couver had ever sailed. If
Amer-ican and European men-of-war now peace-fully ride in once sav-age
har-bors, let them fire sa-lutes to the honor and glory of the
whale-ship, which ori-gin-ally showed them the way, and first in-ter-preted
between them and the sav-ages. They may cel-eb-rate as they will the
her-oes of Ex-plor-ing Ex-ped-i-tions, your Cooks, your Kru-sen-sterns; but I
say that scores of an-onym-ous Cap-tains have sailed out of Nan-tucket,
that were as great, and greater than your Cook and your Kru-sen-stern.
For in their suc-cour-less empty-handed-ness, they, in the hea-then-ish
sharked wa-ters, and by the beaches of un-re-cor-ded, javelin is-lands,
battled with vir-gin won-ders and ter-rors that Cook with all his mar-ines
and mus-kets would not will-ingly have dared. All that is made such a
flour-ish of in the old South Sea Voy-ages, those things were but the
life-time com-mon-places of our heroic Nan-tuck-eters. Often, ad-ven-tures
which Van-couver ded-ic-ates three chapters to, these men ac-coun-ted
un-worthy of be-ing set down in the ship’s com-mon log. Ah, the world! Oh,
the world!

Until the whale fish-ery roun-ded Cape Horn, no com-merce but co-lo-nial,
scarcely any in-ter-course but co-lo-nial, was car-ried on between Europe
and the long line of the op-u-lent Span-ish provinces on the Pa-cific
coast. It was the whale-man who first broke through the jeal-ous policy
of the Span-ish crown, touch-ing those colon-ies; and, if space per-mit-ted,
it might be dis-tinctly shown how from those whale-men at last even-tu-ated
the lib-er-a-tion of Peru, Chili, and Bolivia from the yoke of Old Spain,
and the es-tab-lish-ment of the eternal demo-cracy in those parts.

That great Amer-ica on the other side of the sphere, Aus-tralia, was
given to the en-lightened world by the whale-man. After its first
blun-der-born dis-cov-ery by a Dutch-man, all other ships long shunned
those shores as pes-ti-fer-ously bar-bar-ous; but the whale-ship touched
there. The whale-ship is the true mother of that now mighty colony.
Moreover, in the in-fancy of the first Aus-tralian set-tle-ment, the
emig-rants were sev-eral times saved from star-va-tion by the be-ne-vol-ent
bis-cuit of the whale-ship luck-ily drop-ping an an-chor in their wa-ters.
The un-coun-ted isles of all Polyne-sia con-fess the same truth, and do
com-mer-cial homage to the whale-ship, that cleared the way for the
mis-sion-ary and the mer-chant, and in many cases car-ried the prim-it-ive
mis-sion-ar-ies to their first des-tin-a-tions. If that double-bolted land,
Japan, is ever to be-come hos-pit-able, it is the whale-ship alone to whom
the credit will be due; for already she is on the threshold.

But if, in the face of all this, you still de-clare that whal-ing has no
æs-thet-ic-ally noble as-so-ci-ations con-nec-ted with it, then am I ready to
shiver fifty lances with you there, and un-horse you with a split hel-met
every time.

The whale has no fam-ous au-thor, and whal-ing no fam-ous chron-icler, you
will say.

_The whale no fam-ous au-thor, and whal-ing no fam-ous chron-icler?_ Who
wrote the first ac-count of our Le-viathan? Who but mighty Job! And who
com-posed the first nar-rat-ive of a whal-ing-voy-age? Who, but no less a
prince than Al-fred the Great, who, with his own royal pen, took down
the words from Other, the Nor-we-gian whale-hunter of those times! And
who pro-nounced our glow-ing eu-logy in Parlia-ment? Who, but Ed-mund Burke!

True enough, but then whale-men them-selves are poor dev-ils; they have no
good blood in their veins.

_No good blood in their veins?_ They have some-thing bet-ter than royal
blood there. The grand-mother of Ben-jamin Frank-lin was Mary Mor-rel;
af-ter-wards, by mar-riage, Mary Fol-ger, one of the old set-tlers of
Nan-tucket, and the an-ces-tress to a long line of Fol-gers and
har-poon-eers—all kith and kin to noble Ben-jamin—this day dart-ing the
barbed iron from one side of the world to the other.

Good again; but then all con-fess that some-how whal-ing is not
re-spect-able.

_Whal-ing not re-spect-able?_ Whal-ing is im-per-ial! By old Eng-lish
stat-utory law, the whale is de-clared “a royal fish.” *

Oh, that’s only nom-inal! The whale him-self has never figured in any
grand im-pos-ing way.

_The whale never figured in any grand im-pos-ing way?_ In one of the
mighty tri-umphs given to a Ro-man gen-eral upon his en-ter-ing the world’s
cap-ital, the bones of a whale, brought all the way from the Syrian
coast, were the most con-spicu-ous ob-ject in the cym-balled pro-ces-sion.*

*See sub-sequent chapters for some-thing more on this head.

Grant it, since you cite it; but, say what you will, there is no real
dig-nity in whal-ing.

_No dig-nity in whal-ing?_ The dig-nity of our call-ing the very heav-ens
at-test. Cetus is a con-stel-la-tion in the South! No more! Drive down your
hat in pres-ence of the Czar, and take it off to Queequeg! No more! I
know a man that, in his life-time, has taken three hun-dred and fifty
whales. I ac-count that man more hon-or-able than that great cap-tain of
an-tiquity who boas-ted of tak-ing as many walled towns.

And, as for me, if, by any pos-sib-il-ity, there be any as yet
un-dis-covered prime thing in me; if I shall ever de-serve any real re-pute
in that small but high hushed world which I might not be un-reas-on-ably
am-bi-tious of; if here-after I shall do any-thing that, upon the whole, a
man might rather have done than to have left un-done; if, at my death,
my ex-ecut-ors, or more prop-erly my cred-it-ors, find any pre-cious MSS. in
my desk, then here I pro-spect-ively ascribe all the honor and the glory
to whal-ing; for a whale-ship was my Yale Col-lege and my Har-vard.


CHAPTER 25. Post-script.

In be-half of the dig-nity of whal-ing, I would fain ad-vance naught but
sub-stan-ti-ated facts. But after em-battling his facts, an ad-voc-ate who
should wholly sup-press a not un-reas-on-able sur-mise, which might tell
elo-quently upon his cause—such an ad-voc-ate, would he not be
blame-worthy?

It is well known that at the coron-a-tion of kings and queens, even
mod-ern ones, a cer-tain curi-ous pro-cess of season-ing them for their
func-tions is gone through. There is a salt-cel-lar of state, so called,
and there may be a castor of state. How they use the salt,
pre-cisely—who knows? Cer-tain I am, how-ever, that a king’s head is
sol-emnly oiled at his coron-a-tion, even as a head of salad. Can it be,
though, that they anoint it with a view of mak-ing its in-terior run
well, as they anoint ma-chinery? Much might be ru-min-ated here,
con-cern-ing the es-sen-tial dig-nity of this regal pro-cess, be-cause in
com-mon life we es-teem but meanly and con-tempt-ibly a fel-low who anoints
his hair, and palp-ably smells of that anoint-ing. In truth, a ma-ture man
who uses hair-oil, un-less medi-cin-ally, that man has prob-ably got a
quoggy spot in him some-where. As a gen-eral rule, he can’t amount to
much in his to-tal-ity.

But the only thing to be con-sidered here, is this—what kind of oil is
used at coron-a-tions? Cer-tainly it can-not be olive oil, nor ma-cas-sar
oil, nor castor oil, nor bear’s oil, nor train oil, nor cod-liver oil.
What then can it pos-sibly be, but sperm oil in its un-man-u-fac-tured,
un-pol-luted state, the sweetest of all oils?

Think of that, ye loyal Bri-tons! we whale-men sup-ply your kings and
queens with coron-a-tion stuff!


CHAPTER 26. Knights and Squires.

The chief mate of the Pequod was Star-buck, a nat-ive of Nan-tucket, and a
Quaker by des-cent. He was a long, earn-est man, and though born on an
icy coast, seemed well ad-ap-ted to en-dure hot lat-it-udes, his flesh be-ing
hard as twice-baked bis-cuit. Trans-por-ted to the In-dies, his live blood
would not spoil like bottled ale. He must have been born in some time
of gen-eral drought and fam-ine, or upon one of those fast days for which
his state is fam-ous. Only some thirty arid sum-mers had he seen; those
sum-mers had dried up all his phys-ical su-per-flu-ous-ness. But this, his
thin-ness, so to speak, seemed no more the token of wast-ing anxi-et-ies
and cares, than it seemed the in-dic-a-tion of any bod-ily blight. It was
merely the con-dens-a-tion of the man. He was by no means ill-look-ing;
quite the con-trary. His pure tight skin was an ex-cel-lent fit; and
closely wrapped up in it, and em-balmed with in-ner health and strength,
like a re-viv-i-fied Egyp-tian, this Star-buck seemed pre-pared to en-dure for
long ages to come, and to en-dure al-ways, as now; for be it Polar snow
or tor-rid sun, like a pat-ent chro-no-meter, his in-terior vi-tal-ity was
war-ran-ted to do well in all cli-mates. Look-ing into his eyes, you seemed
to see there the yet linger-ing im-ages of those thou-sand-fold per-ils he
had calmly con-fron-ted through life. A staid, stead-fast man, whose life
for the most part was a telling pan-to-mime of ac-tion, and not a tame
chapter of sounds. Yet, for all his hardy sobri-ety and forti-tude, there
were cer-tain qual-it-ies in him which at times af-fected, and in some
cases seemed well nigh to over-bal-ance all the rest. Un-com-monly
con-scien-tious for a sea-man, and en-dued with a deep nat-ural rev-er-ence,
the wild wa-tery loneli-ness of his life did there-fore strongly in-cline
him to su-per-sti-tion; but to that sort of su-per-sti-tion, which in some
or-gan-iz-a-tions seems rather to spring, some-how, from in-tel-li-gence than
from ig-nor-ance. Out-ward portents and in-ward presen-ti-ments were his. And
if at times these things bent the wel-ded iron of his soul, much more
did his far-away do-mestic memor-ies of his young Cape wife and child,
tend to bend him still more from the ori-ginal rug-ged-ness of his nature,
and open him still fur-ther to those lat-ent in-flu-ences which, in some
hon-est-hearted men, re-strain the gush of dare-devil dar-ing, so of-ten
evinced by oth-ers in the more per-il-ous vi-cis-situdes of the fish-ery. “I
will have no man in my boat,” said Star-buck, “who is not afraid of a
whale.” By this, he seemed to mean, not only that the most re-li-able and
use-ful cour-age was that which arises from the fair es-tim-a-tion of the
en-countered peril, but that an ut-terly fear-less man is a far more
dan-ger-ous com-rade than a cow-ard.

“Aye, aye,” said Stubb, the second mate, “Star-buck, there, is as
care-ful a man as you’ll find any-where in this fish-ery.” But we shall
ere long see what that word “care-ful” pre-cisely means when used by a
man like Stubb, or al-most any other whale hunter.

Star-buck was no cru-sader after per-ils; in him cour-age was not a
sen-ti-ment; but a thing simply use-ful to him, and al-ways at hand upon
all mor-tally prac-tical oc-ca-sions. Besides, he thought, per-haps, that in
this busi-ness of whal-ing, cour-age was one of the great staple out-fits
of the ship, like her beef and her bread, and not to be fool-ishly
wasted. Where-fore he had no fancy for lower-ing for whales after
sun-down; nor for per-sist-ing in fight-ing a fish that too much per-sisted
in fight-ing him. For, thought Star-buck, I am here in this crit-ical
ocean to kill whales for my liv-ing, and not to be killed by them for
theirs; and that hun-dreds of men had been so killed Star-buck well knew.
What doom was his own father’s? Where, in the bot-tom-less deeps, could
he find the torn limbs of his brother?

With memor-ies like these in him, and, moreover, given to a cer-tain
su-per-sti-tious-ness, as has been said; the cour-age of this Star-buck which
could, nev-er-the-less, still flour-ish, must in-deed have been ex-treme. But
it was not in reas-on-able nature that a man so or-gan-ized, and with such
ter-rible ex-per-i-ences and re-mem-brances as he had; it was not in nature
that these things should fail in lat-ently en-gen-der-ing an ele-ment in
him, which, un-der suit-able cir-cum-stances, would break out from its
con-fine-ment, and burn all his cour-age up. And brave as he might be, it
was that sort of bravery chiefly, vis-ible in some in-trepid men, which,
while gen-er-ally abid-ing firm in the con-flict with seas, or winds, or
whales, or any of the or-din-ary ir-ra-tional hor-rors of the world, yet
can-not with-stand those more ter-rific, be-cause more spir-itual ter-rors,
which some-times men-ace you from the con-cen-trat-ing brow of an en-raged
and mighty man.

But were the com-ing nar-rat-ive to re-veal in any in-stance, the com-plete
abase-ment of poor Star-buck’s forti-tude, scarce might I have the heart
to write it; for it is a thing most sor-row-ful, nay shock-ing, to ex-pose
the fall of valour in the soul. Men may seem de-test-able as joint
stock-com-pan-ies and na-tions; knaves, fools, and mur-der-ers there may be;
men may have mean and mea-gre faces; but man, in the ideal, is so noble
and so spark-ling, such a grand and glow-ing creature, that over any
ig-no-mini-ous blem-ish in him all his fel-lows should run to throw their
cost-li-est robes. That im-macu-late man-li-ness we feel within ourselves, so
far within us, that it re-mains in-tact though all the outer char-ac-ter
seem gone; bleeds with keen-est an-guish at the un-draped spec-tacle of a
valor-ruined man. Nor can piety it-self, at such a shame-ful sight,
com-pletely stifle her up-braid-ings against the per-mit-ting stars. But
this au-gust dig-nity I treat of, is not the dig-nity of kings and robes,
but that abound-ing dig-nity which has no robed in-vest-it-ure. Thou shalt
see it shin-ing in the arm that wields a pick or drives a spike; that
demo-cratic dig-nity which, on all hands, ra-di-ates without end from God;
Him-self! The great God ab-so-lute! The centre and cir-cum-fer-ence of all
demo-cracy! His om-ni-pres-ence, our di-vine equal-ity!

If, then, to mean-est mar-iners, and reneg-ades and cast-aways, I shall
here-after ascribe high qual-it-ies, though dark; weave round them tra-gic
graces; if even the most mourn-ful, per-chance the most abased, among
them all, shall at times lift him-self to the ex-al-ted mounts; if I shall
touch that work-man’s arm with some eth-er-eal light; if I shall spread a
rain-bow over his dis-astrous set of sun; then against all mor-tal crit-ics
bear me out in it, thou just Spirit of Equal-ity, which hast spread one
royal mantle of hu-man-ity over all my kind! Bear me out in it, thou
great demo-cratic God! who didst not re-fuse to the swart con-vict,
Bun-yan, the pale, po-etic pearl; Thou who didst clothe with doubly
hammered leaves of finest gold, the stumped and paupered arm of old
Cer-vantes; Thou who didst pick up Andrew Jack-son from the pebbles; who
didst hurl him upon a war-horse; who didst thun-der him higher than a
throne! Thou who, in all Thy mighty, earthly march-ings, ever cullest
Thy se-lect-est cham-pi-ons from the kingly com-mons; bear me out in it, O
God!


CHAPTER 27. Knights and Squires.

Stubb was the second mate. He was a nat-ive of Cape Cod; and hence,
ac-cord-ing to local us-age, was called a Cape-Cod-man. A happy-go-lucky;
neither craven nor vali-ant; tak-ing per-ils as they came with an
in-dif-fer-ent air; and while en-gaged in the most im-min-ent crisis of the
chase, toil-ing away, calm and col-lec-ted as a jour-ney-man joiner en-gaged
for the year. Good-hu-mored, easy, and care-less, he presided over his
whale-boat as if the most deadly en-counter were but a din-ner, and his
crew all in-vited guests. He was as par-tic-u-lar about the com-fort-able
ar-range-ment of his part of the boat, as an old stage-driver is about
the snug-ness of his box. When close to the whale, in the very
death-lock of the fight, he handled his un-pity-ing lance coolly and
off-handedly, as a whist-ling tinker his ham-mer. He would hum over his
old ri-gadig tunes while flank and flank with the most ex-as-per-ated
mon-ster. Long us-age had, for this Stubb, con-ver-ted the jaws of death
into an easy chair. What he thought of death it-self, there is no
telling. Whether he ever thought of it at all, might be a ques-tion;
but, if he ever did chance to cast his mind that way after a
com-fort-able din-ner, no doubt, like a good sailor, he took it to be a
sort of call of the watch to tumble aloft, and be-stir them-selves there,
about some-thing which he would find out when he obeyed the or-der, and
not sooner.

What, per-haps, with other things, made Stubb such an easy-go-ing,
un-fear-ing man, so cheer-ily trudging off with the bur-den of life in a
world full of grave ped-lars, all bowed to the ground with their packs;
what helped to bring about that al-most im-pi-ous good-hu-mor of his; that
thing must have been his pipe. For, like his nose, his short, black
little pipe was one of the reg-u-lar fea-tures of his face. You would
al-most as soon have ex-pec-ted him to turn out of his bunk without his
nose as without his pipe. He kept a whole row of pipes there ready
loaded, stuck in a rack, within easy reach of his hand; and, whenever
he turned in, he smoked them all out in suc-ces-sion, light-ing one from
the other to the end of the chapter; then load-ing them again to be in
read-i-ness anew. For, when Stubb dressed, in-stead of first put-ting his
legs into his trowsers, he put his pipe into his mouth.

I say this con-tinual smoking must have been one cause, at least, of his
pe-cu-liar dis-pos-i-tion; for every one knows that this earthly air,
whether ashore or afloat, is ter-ribly in-fec-ted with the name-less
miser-ies of the num-ber-less mor-tals who have died ex-hal-ing it; and as in
time of the chol-era, some people go about with a cam-phor-ated
handker-chief to their mouths; so, like-wise, against all mor-tal
tribu-la-tions, Stubb’s to-bacco smoke might have op-er-ated as a sort of
dis-in-fect-ing agent.

The third mate was Flask, a nat-ive of Tis-bury, in Martha’s Vine-yard. A
short, stout, ruddy young fel-low, very pug-na-cious con-cern-ing whales,
who some-how seemed to think that the great le-viath-ans had per-son-ally
and hered-it-ar-ily af-fron-ted him; and there-fore it was a sort of point of
honor with him, to des-troy them whenever en-countered. So ut-terly lost
was he to all sense of rev-er-ence for the many mar-vels of their majestic
bulk and mys-tic ways; and so dead to any-thing like an ap-pre-hen-sion of
any pos-sible danger from en-coun-ter-ing them; that in his poor opin-ion,
the won-drous whale was but a spe-cies of mag-ni-fied mouse, or at least
wa-ter-rat, re-quir-ing only a little cir-cum-ven-tion and some small
ap-plic-a-tion of time and trouble in or-der to kill and boil. This
ig-nor-ant, un-con-scious fear-less-ness of his made him a little wag-gish in
the mat-ter of whales; he fol-lowed these fish for the fun of it; and a
three years’ voy-age round Cape Horn was only a jolly joke that las-ted
that length of time. As a car-penter’s nails are di-vided into wrought
nails and cut nails; so man-kind may be sim-il-arly di-vided. Little Flask
was one of the wrought ones; made to clinch tight and last long. They
called him King-Post on board of the Pequod; be-cause, in form, he could
be well likened to the short, square tim-ber known by that name in
Arc-tic whalers; and which by the means of many ra-di-at-ing side tim-bers
in-ser-ted into it, serves to brace the ship against the icy con-cus-sions
of those bat-ter-ing seas.

Now these three mates—Star-buck, Stubb, and Flask, were mo-ment-ous men.
They it was who by uni-ver-sal pre-scrip-tion com-manded three of the
Pequod’s boats as heads-men. In that grand or-der of battle in which
Cap-tain Ahab would prob-ably mar-shal his forces to des-cend on the
whales, these three heads-men were as cap-tains of com-pan-ies. Or, be-ing
armed with their long keen whal-ing spears, they were as a picked trio
of lan-cers; even as the har-poon-eers were flingers of javelins.

And since in this fam-ous fish-ery, each mate or heads-man, like a Gothic
Knight of old, is al-ways ac-com-pan-ied by his boat-steerer or har-poon-eer,
who in cer-tain con-junc-tures provides him with a fresh lance, when the
former one has been badly twis-ted, or el-bowed in the as-sault; and
moreover, as there gen-er-ally sub-sists between the two, a close in-tim-acy
and friend-li-ness; it is there-fore but meet, that in this place we set
down who the Pequod’s har-poon-eers were, and to what heads-man each of
them be-longed.

First of all was Queequeg, whom Star-buck, the chief mate, had se-lec-ted
for his squire. But Queequeg is already known.

Next was Tasht-ego, an un-mixed In-dian from Gay Head, the most west-erly
promon-tory of Martha’s Vine-yard, where there still ex-ists the last
rem-nant of a vil-lage of red men, which has long sup-plied the
neigh-bor-ing is-land of Nan-tucket with many of her most dar-ing
har-poon-eers. In the fish-ery, they usu-ally go by the gen-eric name of
Gay-Head-ers. Tasht-ego’s long, lean, sable hair, his high cheek bones,
and black round-ing eyes—for an In-dian, Ori-ental in their large-ness, but
Antarc-tic in their glit-ter-ing ex-pres-sion—all this suf-fi-ciently
pro-claimed him an in-her-itor of the un-viti-ated blood of those proud
war-rior hunters, who, in quest of the great New Eng-land moose, had
scoured, bow in hand, the ab-ori-ginal forests of the main. But no longer
snuff-ing in the trail of the wild beasts of the wood-land, Tasht-ego now
hunted in the wake of the great whales of the sea; the un-err-ing har-poon
of the son fitly re-pla-cing the in-fal-lible ar-row of the sires. To look
at the tawny brawn of his lithe snaky limbs, you would al-most have
cred-ited the su-per-sti-tions of some of the earlier Pur-it-ans, and
half-be-lieved this wild In-dian to be a son of the Prince of the Powers
of the Air. Tasht-ego was Stubb the second mate’s squire.

Third among the har-poon-eers was Dag-goo, a gi-gantic, coal-black
negro-sav-age, with a lion-like tread—an Ahas-uerus to be-hold. Sus-pen-ded
from his ears were two golden hoops, so large that the sail-ors called
them ring-bolts, and would talk of se-cur-ing the top-sail hal-yards to
them. In his youth Dag-goo had vol-un-tar-ily shipped on board of a whaler,
ly-ing in a lonely bay on his nat-ive coast. And never hav-ing been
any-where in the world but in Africa, Nan-tucket, and the pa-gan har-bors
most fre-quen-ted by whale-men; and hav-ing now led for many years the bold
life of the fish-ery in the ships of own-ers un-com-monly heed-ful of what
man-ner of men they shipped; Dag-goo re-tained all his bar-baric vir-tues,
and erect as a gir-affe, moved about the decks in all the pomp of six
feet five in his socks. There was a cor-por-eal hu-mil-ity in look-ing up at
him; and a white man stand-ing be-fore him seemed a white flag come to
beg truce of a fort-ress. Curi-ous to tell, this im-per-ial negro,
Ahas-uerus Dag-goo, was the Squire of little Flask, who looked like a
chess-man be-side him. As for the residue of the Pequod’s com-pany, be it
said, that at the present day not one in two of the many thou-sand men
be-fore the mast em-ployed in the Amer-ican whale fish-ery, are Amer-ic-ans
born, though pretty nearly all the of-ficers are. Herein it is the same
with the Amer-ican whale fish-ery as with the Amer-ican army and mil-it-ary
and mer-chant navies, and the en-gin-eer-ing forces em-ployed in the
con-struc-tion of the Amer-ican Canals and Rail-roads. The same, I say,
be-cause in all these cases the nat-ive Amer-ican lib-er-ally provides the
brains, the rest of the world as gen-er-ously sup-ply-ing the muscles. No
small num-ber of these whal-ing sea-men be-long to the Azores, where the
out-ward bound Nan-tucket whalers fre-quently touch to aug-ment their crews
from the hardy peas-ants of those rocky shores. In like man-ner, the
Green-land whalers sail-ing out of Hull or Lon-don, put in at the Shet-land
Is-lands, to re-ceive the full com-ple-ment of their crew. Upon the pas-sage
home-wards, they drop them there again. How it is, there is no telling,
but Islanders seem to make the best whale-men. They were nearly all
Islanders in the Pequod, _Isol-a-toes_ too, I call such, not
ac-know-ledging the com-mon con-tin-ent of men, but each _Isol-ato_ liv-ing on
a sep-ar-ate con-tin-ent of his own. Yet now, fed-er-ated along one keel,
what a set these Isol-a-toes were! An An-acharsis Clootz depu-ta-tion from
all the isles of the sea, and all the ends of the earth, ac-com-pa-ny-ing
Old Ahab in the Pequod to lay the world’s griev-ances be-fore that bar
from which not very many of them ever come back. Black Little Pip—he
never did—oh, no! he went be-fore. Poor Alabama boy! On the grim
Pequod’s fore-castle, ye shall ere long see him, beat-ing his tam-bour-ine;
pre-lusive of the eternal time, when sent for, to the great quarter-deck
on high, he was bid strike in with an-gels, and beat his tam-bour-ine in
glory; called a cow-ard here, hailed a hero there!


CHAPTER 28. Ahab.

For sev-eral days after leav-ing Nan-tucket, noth-ing above hatches was
seen of Cap-tain Ahab. The mates reg-u-larly re-lieved each other at the
watches, and for aught that could be seen to the con-trary, they seemed
to be the only com-mand-ers of the ship; only they some-times is-sued from
the cabin with or-ders so sud-den and per-emp-tory, that after all it was
plain they but com-manded vi-cari-ously. Yes, their su-preme lord and
dic-tator was there, though hitherto un-seen by any eyes not per-mit-ted to
pen-et-rate into the now sac-red re-treat of the cabin.

Every time I as-cen-ded to the deck from my watches be-low, I in-stantly
gazed aft to mark if any strange face were vis-ible; for my first vague
dis-quiet-ude touch-ing the un-known cap-tain, now in the se-clu-sion of the
sea, be-came al-most a per-turb-a-tion. This was strangely heightened at
times by the ragged Eli-jah’s diabol-ical in-co-her-ences un-in-vitedly
re-cur-ring to me, with a subtle en-ergy I could not have be-fore con-ceived
of. But poorly could I with-stand them, much as in other moods I was
al-most ready to smile at the sol-emn whim-sic-al-it-ies of that out-land-ish
prophet of the wharves. But whatever it was of ap-pre-hens-ive-ness or
un-eas-i-ness—to call it so—which I felt, yet whenever I came to look
about me in the ship, it seemed against all war-rantry to cher-ish such
emo-tions. For though the har-poon-eers, with the great body of the crew,
were a far more bar-baric, hea-then-ish, and mot-ley set than any of the
tame mer-chant-ship com-pan-ies which my pre-vi-ous ex-per-i-ences had made me
ac-quain-ted with, still I ascribed this—and rightly ascribed it—to the
fierce unique-ness of the very nature of that wild Scand-inavian vo-ca-tion
in which I had so aban-donedly em-barked. But it was es-pe-cially the
as-pect of the three chief of-ficers of the ship, the mates, which was
most for-cibly cal-cu-lated to al-lay these col-our-less mis-giv-ings, and
in-duce con-fid-ence and cheer-ful-ness in every pre-sent-ment of the voy-age.
Three bet-ter, more likely sea-of-ficers and men, each in his own
dif-fer-ent way, could not read-ily be found, and they were every one of
them Amer-ic-ans; a Nan-tuck-eter, a Vine-yarder, a Cape man. Now, it be-ing
Christ-mas when the ship shot from out her har-bor, for a space we had
bit-ing Polar weather, though all the time run-ning away from it to the
south-ward; and by every de-gree and minute of lat-it-ude which we sailed,
gradu-ally leav-ing that mer-ci-less winter, and all its in-tol-er-able
weather be-hind us. It was one of those less lower-ing, but still grey
and gloomy enough morn-ings of the trans-ition, when with a fair wind the
ship was rush-ing through the wa-ter with a vin-dict-ive sort of leap-ing
and mel-an-choly rapid-ity, that as I moun-ted to the deck at the call of
the forenoon watch, so soon as I lev-elled my glance to-wards the
taffrail, fore-bod-ing shivers ran over me. Real-ity out-ran ap-pre-hen-sion;
Cap-tain Ahab stood upon his quarter-deck.

There seemed no sign of com-mon bod-ily ill-ness about him, nor of the
re-cov-ery from any. He looked like a man cut away from the stake, when
the fire has over-run-ningly wasted all the limbs without con-sum-ing them,
or tak-ing away one particle from their com-pacted aged ro-bust-ness. His
whole high, broad form, seemed made of solid bronze, and shaped in an
un-al-ter-able mould, like Cellini’s cast Perseus. Thread-ing its way out
from among his grey hairs, and con-tinu-ing right down one side of his
tawny scorched face and neck, till it dis-ap-peared in his cloth-ing, you
saw a slender rod-like mark, liv-idly whit-ish. It re-sembled that
per-pen-dic-u-lar seam some-times made in the straight, lofty trunk of a
great tree, when the up-per light-ning tear-ingly darts down it, and
without wrench-ing a single twig, peels and grooves out the bark from
top to bot-tom, ere run-ning off into the soil, leav-ing the tree still
greenly alive, but branded. Whether that mark was born with him, or
whether it was the scar left by some des-per-ate wound, no one could
cer-tainly say. By some ta-cit con-sent, through-out the voy-age little or
no al-lu-sion was made to it, es-pe-cially by the mates. But once
Tasht-ego’s senior, an old Gay-Head In-dian among the crew,
su-per-sti-tiously as-ser-ted that not till he was full forty years old did
Ahab be-come that way branded, and then it came upon him, not in the
fury of any mor-tal fray, but in an ele-mental strife at sea. Yet, this
wild hint seemed in-fer-en-tially neg-at-ived, by what a grey Manxman
in-sinu-ated, an old sepulchral man, who, hav-ing never be-fore sailed out
of Nan-tucket, had never ere this laid eye upon wild Ahab. Never-the-less,
the old sea-tra-di-tions, the im-me-morial credu-lit-ies, pop-ularly in-ves-ted
this old Manxman with preter-nat-ural powers of dis-cern-ment. So that no
white sailor ser-i-ously con-tra-dicted him when he said that if ever
Cap-tain Ahab should be tran-quilly laid out—which might hardly come to
pass, so he muttered—then, who-ever should do that last of-fice for the
dead, would find a birth-mark on him from crown to sole.

So power-fully did the whole grim as-pect of Ahab af-fect me, and the
livid brand which streaked it, that for the first few mo-ments I hardly
noted that not a little of this over-bear-ing grim-ness was ow-ing to the
bar-baric white leg upon which he partly stood. It had pre-vi-ously come
to me that this ivory leg had at sea been fash-ioned from the pol-ished
bone of the sperm whale’s jaw. “Aye, he was dis-masted off Japan,” said
the old Gay-Head In-dian once; “but like his dis-masted craft, he shipped
an-other mast without com-ing home for it. He has a quiver of ’em.”

I was struck with the sin-gu-lar pos-ture he main-tained. Upon each side of
the Pequod’s quarter deck, and pretty close to the mizzen shrouds,
there was an auger hole, bored about half an inch or so, into the
plank. His bone leg stead-ied in that hole; one arm el-ev-ated, and
hold-ing by a shroud; Cap-tain Ahab stood erect, look-ing straight out
bey-ond the ship’s ever-pitch-ing prow. There was an in-fin-ity of firmest
forti-tude, a de-term-in-ate, un-sur-render-able wil-ful-ness, in the fixed and
fear-less, for-ward ded-ic-a-tion of that glance. Not a word he spoke; nor
did his of-ficers say aught to him; though by all their minutest
ges-tures and ex-pres-sions, they plainly showed the un-easy, if not
pain-ful, con-scious-ness of be-ing un-der a troubled mas-ter-eye. And not
only that, but moody stricken Ahab stood be-fore them with a cru-ci-fix-ion
in his face; in all the name-less regal over-bear-ing dig-nity of some
mighty woe.

Ere long, from his first visit in the air, he with-drew into his cabin.
But after that morn-ing, he was every day vis-ible to the crew; either
stand-ing in his pivot-hole, or seated upon an ivory stool he had; or
heav-ily walk-ing the deck. As the sky grew less gloomy; in-deed, began to
grow a little gen-ial, he be-came still less and less a re-cluse; as if,
when the ship had sailed from home, noth-ing but the dead wintry
bleak-ness of the sea had then kept him so se-cluded. And, by and by, it
came to pass, that he was al-most con-tinu-ally in the air; but, as yet,
for all that he said, or per-cept-ibly did, on the at last sunny deck, he
seemed as un-ne-ces-sary there as an-other mast. But the Pequod was only
mak-ing a pas-sage now; not reg-u-larly cruis-ing; nearly all whal-ing
pre-par-at-ives need-ing su-per-vi-sion the mates were fully com-pet-ent to, so
that there was little or noth-ing, out of him-self, to em-ploy or ex-cite
Ahab, now; and thus chase away, for that one in-ter-val, the clouds that
layer upon layer were piled upon his brow, as ever all clouds choose
the lofti-est peaks to pile them-selves upon.

Never-the-less, ere long, the warm, warb-ling per-suas-ive-ness of the
pleas-ant, hol-i-day weather we came to, seemed gradu-ally to charm him
from his mood. For, as when the red-cheeked, dan-cing girls, April and
May, trip home to the wintry, mis-an-thropic woods; even the barest,
rugged-est, most thun-der-cloven old oak will at least send forth some
few green sprouts, to wel-come such glad-hearted vis-it-ants; so Ahab did,
in the end, a little re-spond to the play-ful al-lur-ings of that girl-ish
air. More than once did he put forth the faint blos-som of a look,
which, in any other man, would have soon flowered out in a smile.


CHAPTER 29. Enter Ahab; to Him, Stubb.

Some days elapsed, and ice and ice-bergs all astern, the Pequod now went
rolling through the bright Quito spring, which, at sea, al-most
per-petu-ally reigns on the threshold of the eternal August of the
Tropic. The warmly cool, clear, ringing, per-fumed, over-flow-ing,
re-dund-ant days, were as crys-tal gob-lets of Per-sian sher-bet, heaped
up—flaked up, with rose-wa-ter snow. The starred and stately nights
seemed haughty dames in jew-elled vel-vets, nurs-ing at home in lonely
pride, the memory of their ab-sent con-quer-ing Earls, the golden helmeted
suns! For sleep-ing man, ’twas hard to choose between such win-some days
and such se-du-cing nights. But all the witcher-ies of that un-wan-ing
weather did not merely lend new spells and po-ten-cies to the out-ward
world. In-ward they turned upon the soul, es-pe-cially when the still mild
hours of eve came on; then, memory shot her crys-tals as the clear ice
most forms of noise-less twi-lights. And all these subtle agen-cies, more
and more they wrought on Ahab’s tex-ture.

Old age is al-ways wake-ful; as if, the longer linked with life, the less
man has to do with aught that looks like death. Among sea-com-mand-ers,
the old grey-beards will of-ten-est leave their berths to visit the
night-cloaked deck. It was so with Ahab; only that now, of late, he
seemed so much to live in the open air, that truly speak-ing, his vis-its
were more to the cabin, than from the cabin to the planks. “It feels
like go-ing down into one’s tomb,”—he would mut-ter to him-self—“for an
old cap-tain like me to be des-cend-ing this nar-row scuttle, to go to my
grave-dug berth.”

So, al-most every twenty-four hours, when the watches of the night were
set, and the band on deck sen-tinelled the slum-bers of the band be-low;
and when if a rope was to be hauled upon the fore-castle, the sail-ors
flung it not rudely down, as by day, but with some cau-tious-ness dropt
it to its place for fear of dis-turb-ing their slum-ber-ing ship-mates; when
this sort of steady quiet-ude would be-gin to pre-vail, ha-bitu-ally, the
si-lent steers-man would watch the cabin-scuttle; and ere long the old
man would emerge, grip-ping at the iron ban-is-ter, to help his crippled
way. Some con-sid-er-ing touch of hu-man-ity was in him; for at times like
these, he usu-ally ab-stained from patrolling the quarter-deck; be-cause
to his wear-ied mates, seek-ing re-pose within six inches of his ivory
heel, such would have been the re-ver-ber-at-ing crack and din of that bony
step, that their dreams would have been on the crunch-ing teeth of
sharks. But once, the mood was on him too deep for com-mon re-gard-ings;
and as with heavy, lum-ber-like pace he was meas-ur-ing the ship from
taffrail to main-mast, Stubb, the old second mate, came up from be-low,
with a cer-tain un-as-sured, de-prec-at-ing hu-mor-ous-ness, hin-ted that if
Cap-tain Ahab was pleased to walk the planks, then, no one could say
nay; but there might be some way of muffling the noise; hint-ing
some-thing in-dis-tinctly and hes-it-at-ingly about a globe of tow, and the
in-ser-tion into it, of the ivory heel. Ah! Stubb, thou didst not know
Ahab then.

“Am I a can-non-ball, Stubb,” said Ahab, “that thou wouldst wad me that
fash-ion? But go thy ways; I had for-got. Below to thy nightly grave;
where such as ye sleep between shrouds, to use ye to the filling one at
last.—Down, dog, and ken-nel!”

Start-ing at the un-forseen con-clud-ing ex-clam-a-tion of the so sud-denly
scorn-ful old man, Stubb was speech-less a mo-ment; then said ex-citedly,
“I am not used to be spoken to that way, sir; I do but less than half
like it, sir.”

“Avast! grit-ted Ahab between his set teeth, and vi-ol-ently mov-ing away,
as if to avoid some pas-sion-ate tempta-tion.

“No, sir; not yet,” said Stubb, em-boldened, “I will not tamely be
called a dog, sir.”

“Then be called ten times a don-key, and a mule, and an ass, and be-gone,
or I’ll clear the world of thee!”

As he said this, Ahab ad-vanced upon him with such over-bear-ing ter-rors
in his as-pect, that Stubb in-vol-un-tar-ily re-treated.

“I was never served so be-fore without giv-ing a hard blow for it,”
muttered Stubb, as he found him-self des-cend-ing the cabin-scuttle. “It’s
very queer. Stop, Stubb; some-how, now, I don’t well know whether to go
back and strike him, or—what’s that?—down here on my knees and pray for
him? Yes, that was the thought com-ing up in me; but it would be the
first time I ever _did_ pray. It’s queer; very queer; and he’s queer
too; aye, take him fore and aft, he’s about the queerest old man Stubb
ever sailed with. How he flashed at me!—his eyes like powder-pans! is
he mad? Any-way there’s some-thing on his mind, as sure as there must be
some-thing on a deck when it cracks. He aint in his bed now, either,
more than three hours out of the twenty-four; and he don’t sleep then.
Didn’t that Dough-Boy, the stew-ard, tell me that of a morn-ing he al-ways
finds the old man’s ham-mock clothes all rumpled and tumbled, and the
sheets down at the foot, and the cov-er-lid al-most tied into knots, and
the pil-low a sort of fright-ful hot, as though a baked brick had been on
it? A hot old man! I guess he’s got what some folks ashore call a
con-science; it’s a kind of Tic-Dolly-row they say—worse nor a
toothache. Well, well; I don’t know what it is, but the Lord keep me
from catch-ing it. He’s full of riddles; I won-der what he goes into the
after hold for, every night, as Dough-Boy tells me he sus-pects; what’s
that for, I should like to know? Who’s made ap-point-ments with him in
the hold? Ain’t that queer, now? But there’s no telling, it’s the old
game—Here goes for a snooze. Damn me, it’s worth a fel-low’s while to be
born into the world, if only to fall right asleep. And now that I think
of it, that’s about the first thing ba-bies do, and that’s a sort of
queer, too. Damn me, but all things are queer, come to think of ’em.
But that’s against my prin-ciples. Think not, is my el-ev-enth
com-mand-ment; and sleep when you can, is my twelfth—So here goes again.
But how’s that? didn’t he call me a dog? blazes! he called me ten times
a don-key, and piled a lot of jack-asses on top of _that!_ He might as
well have kicked me, and done with it. Maybe he _did_ kick me, and I
didn’t ob-serve it, I was so taken all aback with his brow, some-how. It
flashed like a bleached bone. What the devil’s the mat-ter with me? I
don’t stand right on my legs. Com-ing afoul of that old man has a sort
of turned me wrong side out. By the Lord, I must have been dream-ing,
though—How? how? how?—but the only way’s to stash it; so here goes to
ham-mock again; and in the morn-ing, I’ll see how this plaguey jug-gling
thinks over by day-light.”


CHAPTER 30. The Pipe.

When Stubb had de-par-ted, Ahab stood for a while lean-ing over the
bul-warks; and then, as had been usual with him of late, call-ing a
sailor of the watch, he sent him be-low for his ivory stool, and also
his pipe. Light-ing the pipe at the bin-nacle lamp and plant-ing the stool
on the weather side of the deck, he sat and smoked.

In old Norse times, the thrones of the sea-lov-ing Dan-ish kings were
fab-ric-ated, saith tra-di-tion, of the tusks of the nar-whale. How could
one look at Ahab then, seated on that tri-pod of bones, without
be-think-ing him of the roy-alty it sym-bol-ized? For a Khan of the plank,
and a king of the sea, and a great lord of Le-viath-ans was Ahab.

Some mo-ments passed, dur-ing which the thick va-por came from his mouth
in quick and con-stant puffs, which blew back again into his face. “How
now,” he so-li-lo-quized at last, with-draw-ing the tube, “this smoking no
longer soothes. Oh, my pipe! hard must it go with me if thy charm be
gone! Here have I been un-con-sciously toil-ing, not pleas-ur-ing—aye, and
ig-nor-antly smoking to wind-ward all the while; to wind-ward, and with
such nervous whiffs, as if, like the dy-ing whale, my fi-nal jets were
the strongest and fullest of trouble. What busi-ness have I with this
pipe? This thing that is meant for se-rene-ness, to send up mild white
va-pors among mild white hairs, not among torn iron-grey locks like
mine. I’ll smoke no more—”

He tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea. The fire hissed in the
waves; the same in-stant the ship shot by the bubble the sink-ing pipe
made. With slouched hat, Ahab lurch-ingly paced the planks.


CHAPTER 31. Queen Mab.

Next morn-ing Stubb ac-cos-ted Flask.

“Such a queer dream, King-Post, I never had. You know the old man’s
ivory leg, well I dreamed he kicked me with it; and when I tried to
kick back, upon my soul, my little man, I kicked my leg right off! And
then, presto! Ahab seemed a pyr-amid, and I, like a blaz-ing fool, kept
kick-ing at it. But what was still more curi-ous, Flask—you know how
curi-ous all dreams are—through all this rage that I was in, I some-how
seemed to be think-ing to my-self, that after all, it was not much of an
in-sult, that kick from Ahab. ‘Why,’ thinks I, ‘what’s the row? It’s not
a real leg, only a false leg.’ And there’s a mighty dif-fer-ence between
a liv-ing thump and a dead thump. That’s what makes a blow from the
hand, Flask, fifty times more sav-age to bear than a blow from a cane.
The liv-ing mem-ber—that makes the liv-ing in-sult, my little man. And
thinks I to my-self all the while, mind, while I was stub-bing my silly
toes against that cursed pyr-amid—so con-foun-dedly con-tra-dict-ory was it
all, all the while, I say, I was think-ing to my-self, ‘what’s his leg
now, but a cane—a whale-bone cane. Yes,’ thinks I, ‘it was only a
play-ful cudgel-ling—in fact, only a whale-bon-ing that he gave me—not a
base kick. Besides,’ thinks I, ‘look at it once; why, the end of it—the
foot part—what a small sort of end it is; whereas, if a broad footed
farmer kicked me, _there’s_ a dev-il-ish broad in-sult. But this in-sult is
whittled down to a point only.’ But now comes the greatest joke of the
dream, Flask. While I was bat-ter-ing away at the pyr-amid, a sort of
badger-haired old mer-man, with a hump on his back, takes me by the
shoulders, and slews me round. ‘What are you ’bout?’ says he. Slid!
man, but I was frightened. Such a phiz! But, some-how, next mo-ment I was
over the fright. ‘What am I about?’ says I at last. ‘And what busi-ness
is that of yours, I should like to know, Mr. Hump-back? Do _y-ou_ want a
kick?’ By the lord, Flask, I had no sooner said that, than he turned
round his stern to me, bent over, and drag-ging up a lot of sea-weed he
had for a clout—what do you think, I saw?—why thun-der alive, man, his
stern was stuck full of mar-lin-spikes, with the points out. Says I, on
second thoughts, ‘I guess I won’t kick you, old fel-low.’ ‘Wise Stubb,’
said he, ‘wise Stubb;’ and kept mut-ter-ing it all the time, a sort of
eat-ing of his own gums like a chim-ney hag. See-ing he wasn’t go-ing to
stop say-ing over his ‘wise Stubb, wise Stubb,’ I thought I might as
well fall to kick-ing the pyr-amid again. But I had only just lif-ted my
foot for it, when he roared out, ‘Stop that kick-ing!’ ‘Hal-loa,’ says I,
‘what’s the mat-ter now, old fel-low?’ ‘Look ye here,’ says he; ‘let’s
ar-gue the in-sult. Cap-tain Ahab kicked ye, didn’t he?’ ‘Yes, he did,’
says I—‘right _here_ it was.’ ‘Very good,’ says he—‘he used his ivory
leg, didn’t he?’ ‘Yes, he did,’ says I. ‘Well then,’ says he, ‘wise
Stubb, what have you to com-plain of? Didn’t he kick with right good
will? it wasn’t a com-mon pitch pine leg he kicked with, was it? No, you
were kicked by a great man, and with a beau-ti-ful ivory leg, Stubb. It’s
an honor; I con-sider it an honor. Listen, wise Stubb. In old Eng-land
the greatest lords think it great glory to be slapped by a queen, and
made garter-knights of; but, be _y-our_ boast, Stubb, that ye were
kicked by old Ahab, and made a wise man of. Re-mem-ber what I say; _be_
kicked by him; ac-count his kicks hon-ors; and on no ac-count kick back;
for you can’t help your-self, wise Stubb. Don’t you see that pyr-amid?’
With that, he all of a sud-den seemed some-how, in some queer fash-ion, to
swim off into the air. I snored; rolled over; and there I was in my
ham-mock! Now, what do you think of that dream, Flask?”

“I don’t know; it seems a sort of fool-ish to me, tho.’”

“May be; may be. But it’s made a wise man of me, Flask. D’ye see Ahab
stand-ing there, side-ways look-ing over the stern? Well, the best thing
you can do, Flask, is to let the old man alone; never speak to him,
whatever he says. Hal-loa! What’s that he shouts? Hark!”

“Mast-head, there! Look sharp, all of ye! There are whales here-abouts!

“If ye see a white one, split your lungs for him!

“What do you think of that now, Flask? ain’t there a small drop of
some-thing queer about that, eh? A white whale—did ye mark that, man?
Look ye—there’s some-thing spe-cial in the wind. Stand by for it, Flask.
Ahab has that that’s bloody on his mind. But, mum; he comes this way.”


CHAPTER 32. Cet-o-logy.

Already we are boldly launched upon the deep; but soon we shall be lost
in its un-shored, har-bour-less im-mens-it-ies. Ere that come to pass; ere
the Pequod’s weedy hull rolls side by side with the barnacled hulls of
the le-viathan; at the out-set it is but well to at-tend to a mat-ter
al-most in-dis-pens-able to a thor-ough ap-pre-ci-at-ive un-der-stand-ing of the
more spe-cial le-viath-anic rev-el-a-tions and al-lu-sions of all sorts which
are to fol-low.

It is some sys-tem-at-ized ex-hib-i-tion of the whale in his broad gen-era,
that I would now fain put be-fore you. Yet is it no easy task. The
clas-si-fic-a-tion of the con-stitu-ents of a chaos, noth-ing less is here
es-sayed. Listen to what the best and latest au-thor-it-ies have laid down.

“No branch of Zoo-logy is so much in-volved as that which is en-titled
Cet-o-logy,” says Cap-tain Scoresby, A.D. 1820.

“It is not my in-ten-tion, were it in my power, to enter into the in-quiry
as to the true method of di-vid-ing the ceta-cea into groups and fam-il-ies.
* * * Ut-ter con-fu-sion ex-ists among the his-tor-i-ans of this an-imal”
(sperm whale), says Sur-geon Beale, A.D. 1839.

“Un-fit-ness to pur-sue our re-search in the un-fathom-able wa-ters.”
“Im-pen-et-rable veil cov-er-ing our know-ledge of the ceta-cea.” “A field
strewn with thorns.” “All these in-com-plete in-dic-a-tions but serve to
tor-ture us nat-ur-al-ists.”

Thus speak of the whale, the great Cuvier, and John Hunter, and Lesson,
those lights of zo-ology and ana-tomy. Never-the-less, though of real
know-ledge there be little, yet of books there are a plenty; and so in
some small de-gree, with cet-o-logy, or the sci-ence of whales. Many are
the men, small and great, old and new, lands-men and sea-men, who have at
large or in little, writ-ten of the whale. Run over a few:—The Authors
of the Bible; Aris-totle; Pliny; Aldrovandi; Sir Tho-mas Browne; Ges-ner;
Ray; Lin-næus; Rondele-tius; Wil-loughby; Green; Ar-tedi; Sib-bald; Bris-son;
Marten; Lacépède; Bon-neterre; Des-marest; Baron Cuvier; Fre-d-er-ick
Cuvier; John Hunter; Owen; Scoresby; Beale; Ben-nett; J. Ross Browne;
the Author of Miriam Coffin; Olmstead; and the Rev. T. Cheever. But to
what ul-ti-mate gen-er-al-iz-ing pur-pose all these have writ-ten, the above
cited ex-tracts will show.

Of the names in this list of whale au-thors, only those fol-low-ing Owen
ever saw liv-ing whales; and but one of them was a real pro-fes-sional
har-poon-eer and whale-man. I mean Cap-tain Scoresby. On the sep-ar-ate
sub-ject of the Green-land or right-whale, he is the best ex-ist-ing
au-thor-ity. But Scoresby knew noth-ing and says noth-ing of the great
sperm whale, com-pared with which the Green-land whale is al-most un-worthy
men-tion-ing. And here be it said, that the Green-land whale is an usurper
upon the throne of the seas. He is not even by any means the largest of
the whales. Yet, ow-ing to the long pri-or-ity of his claims, and the
pro-found ig-nor-ance which, till some sev-enty years back, in-ves-ted the
then fab-ulous or ut-terly un-known sperm-whale, and which ig-nor-ance to
this present day still reigns in all but some few sci-entific re-treats
and whale-ports; this usurp-a-tion has been every way com-plete. Re-fer-ence
to nearly all the le-viath-anic al-lu-sions in the great po-ets of past
days, will sat-isfy you that the Green-land whale, without one rival, was
to them the mon-arch of the seas. But the time has at last come for a
new pro-clam-a-tion. This is Char-ing Cross; hear ye! good people all,—the
Green-land whale is de-posed,—the great sperm whale now reigneth!

There are only two books in be-ing which at all pre-tend to put the
liv-ing sperm whale be-fore you, and at the same time, in the re-motest
de-gree suc-ceed in the at-tempt. Those books are Beale’s and Ben-nett’s;
both in their time sur-geons to Eng-lish South-Sea whale-ships, and both
ex-act and re-li-able men. The ori-ginal mat-ter touch-ing the sperm whale to
be found in their volumes is ne-ces-sar-ily small; but so far as it goes,
it is of ex-cel-lent qual-ity, though mostly con-fined to sci-entific
de-scrip-tion. As yet, how-ever, the sperm whale, sci-entific or po-etic,
lives not com-plete in any lit-er-at-ure. Far above all other hunted
whales, his is an un-writ-ten life.

Now the vari-ous spe-cies of whales need some sort of pop-u-lar
com-pre-hens-ive clas-si-fic-a-tion, if only an easy out-line one for the
present, here-after to be filled in all its de-part-ments by sub-sequent
laborers. As no bet-ter man ad-vances to take this mat-ter in hand, I
hereupon of-fer my own poor en-deavors. I prom-ise noth-ing com-plete;
be-cause any hu-man thing sup-posed to be com-plete, must for that very
reason in-fal-libly be faulty. I shall not pre-tend to a minute ana-tom-ical
de-scrip-tion of the vari-ous spe-cies, or—in this place at least—to much
of any de-scrip-tion. My ob-ject here is simply to pro-ject the draught of
a sys-tem-at-iz-a-tion of cet-o-logy. I am the ar-chi-tect, not the builder.

But it is a pon-der-ous task; no or-din-ary let-ter-sorter in the
Post-Of-fice is equal to it. To grope down into the bot-tom of the sea
after them; to have one’s hands among the un-speak-able found-a-tions,
ribs, and very pel-vis of the world; this is a fear-ful thing. What am I
that I should es-say to hook the nose of this le-viathan! The aw-ful
taunt-ings in Job might well ap-pal me. Will he (the le-viathan) make a
cov-en-ant with thee? Be-hold the hope of him is vain! But I have swam
through lib-rar-ies and sailed through oceans; I have had to do with
whales with these vis-ible hands; I am in earn-est; and I will try. There
are some pre-lim-in-ar-ies to settle.

First: The un-cer-tain, un-settled con-di-tion of this sci-ence of Cet-o-logy
is in the very ves-ti-bule at-tested by the fact, that in some quar-ters it
still re-mains a moot point whether a whale be a fish. In his Sys-tem of
Nature, A.D. 1776, Lin-næus de-clares, “I hereby sep-ar-ate the whales from
the fish.” But of my own know-ledge, I know that down to the year 1850,
sharks and shad, alewives and her-ring, against Lin-næus’s ex-press edict,
were still found di-vid-ing the pos-ses-sion of the same seas with the
Le-viathan.

The grounds upon which Lin-næus would fain have ban-ished the whales from
the wa-ters, he states as fol-lows: “On ac-count of their warm bi-loc-u-lar
heart, their lungs, their mov-able eye-lids, their hol-low ears, penem
intrantem fem-i-nam mam-mis lact-antem,” and fi-nally, “ex lege naturæ jure
mer-itoque.” I sub-mit-ted all this to my friends Simeon Macey and Char-ley
Coffin, of Nan-tucket, both mess-mates of mine in a cer-tain voy-age, and
they united in the opin-ion that the reas-ons set forth were al-to-gether
in-suf-fi-cient. Char-ley pro-fanely hin-ted they were hum-bug.

Be it known that, waiv-ing all ar-gu-ment, I take the good old fash-ioned
ground that the whale is a fish, and call upon holy Jo-nah to back me.
This fun-da-mental thing settled, the next point is, in what in-ternal
re-spect does the whale dif-fer from other fish. Above, Lin-næus has given
you those items. But in brief, they are these: lungs and warm blood;
whereas, all other fish are lung-less and cold blooded.

Next: how shall we define the whale, by his ob-vi-ous ex-tern-als, so as
con-spicu-ously to la-bel him for all time to come? To be short, then, a
whale is _a spout-ing fish with a ho-ri-zontal tail_. There you have him.
However con-trac-ted, that defin-i-tion is the res-ult of ex-pan-ded
med-it-a-tion. A wal-rus spouts much like a whale, but the wal-rus is not a
fish, be-cause he is am-phi-bi-ous. But the last term of the defin-i-tion is
still more co-gent, as coupled with the first. Al-most any one must have
no-ticed that all the fish fa-mil-iar to lands-men have not a flat, but a
ver-tical, or up-and-down tail. Whereas, among spout-ing fish the tail,
though it may be sim-il-arly shaped, in-vari-ably as-sumes a ho-ri-zontal
po-s-i-tion.

By the above defin-i-tion of what a whale is, I do by no means ex-clude
from the le-viath-anic broth-er-hood any sea creature hitherto iden-ti-fied
with the whale by the best in-formed Nan-tuck-eters; nor, on the other
hand, link with it any fish hitherto au-thor-it-at-ively re-garded as
alien.* Hence, all the smal-ler, spout-ing, and ho-ri-zontal tailed fish
must be in-cluded in this ground-plan of Cet-o-logy. Now, then, come the
grand di-vi-sions of the en-tire whale host.

*I am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled Lam-at-ins and
Dugongs (Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of Nan-tucket) are
in-cluded by many nat-ur-al-ists among the whales. But as these pig-fish
are a noisy, con-tempt-ible set, mostly lurk-ing in the mouths of rivers,
and feed-ing on wet hay, and es-pe-cially as they do not spout, I deny
their cre-den-tials as whales; and have presen-ted them with their
pass-ports to quit the King-dom of Cet-o-logy.

First: Ac-cord-ing to mag-nitude I di-vide the whales into three primary
BOOKS (sub-divis-ible into CHAPTERS), and these shall com-pre-hend them
all, both small and large.

I. THE FOLIO WHALE; II. the OCTAVO WHALE; III. the DUODECIMO WHALE.

As the type of the FOLIO I present the _Sperm Whale_; of the OCTAVO,
the _Gram-pus_; of the DUODECIMO, the _Por-poise_.

FOLIOS. Among these I here in-clude the fol-low-ing chapters:—I. The
_Sperm Whale_; II. the _Right Whale_; III. the _Fin-Back Whale_; IV.
the _Hump-backed Whale_; V. the _Razor Back Whale_; VI. the _Sul-phur
Bot-tom Whale_.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER I. (_Sperm Whale_).—This whale, among the
Eng-lish of old vaguely known as the Trumpa whale, and the Physeter
whale, and the An-vil Headed whale, is the present Cach-alot of the
French, and the Pott-s-fich of the Ger-mans, and the Mac-ro-ceph-alus of the
Long Words. He is, without doubt, the largest in-hab-it-ant of the globe;
the most for-mid-able of all whales to en-counter; the most majestic in
as-pect; and lastly, by far the most valu-able in com-merce; he be-ing the
only creature from which that valu-able sub-stance, sper-ma-ceti, is
ob-tained. All his pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies will, in many other places, be en-larged
upon. It is chiefly with his name that I now have to do. Philo-lo-gic-ally
con-sidered, it is ab-surd. Some cen-tur-ies ago, when the Sperm whale was
al-most wholly un-known in his own proper in-di-vidu-al-ity, and when his oil
was only ac-ci-dent-ally ob-tained from the stran-ded fish; in those days
sper-ma-ceti, it would seem, was pop-ularly sup-posed to be de-rived from a
creature identical with the one then known in Eng-land as the Green-land
or Right Whale. It was the idea also, that this same sper-ma-ceti was
that quick-en-ing hu-mor of the Green-land Whale which the first syl-lable
of the word lit-er-ally ex-presses. In those times, also, sper-ma-ceti was
ex-ceed-ingly scarce, not be-ing used for light, but only as an oint-ment
and medic-a-ment. It was only to be had from the drug-gists as you
nowadays buy an ounce of rhu-barb. When, as I opine, in the course of
time, the true nature of sper-ma-ceti be-came known, its ori-ginal name was
still re-tained by the deal-ers; no doubt to en-hance its value by a
no-tion so strangely sig-ni-fic-ant of its scarcity. And so the ap-pel-la-tion
must at last have come to be be-stowed upon the whale from which this
sper-ma-ceti was really de-rived.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER II. (_Right Whale_).—In one re-spect this is
the most ven-er-able of the le-viath-ans, be-ing the one first reg-u-larly
hunted by man. It yields the art-icle com-monly known as whale-bone or
baleen; and the oil spe-cially known as “whale oil,” an in-ferior art-icle
in com-merce. Among the fish-er-men, he is in-dis-crim-in-ately des-ig-nated by
all the fol-low-ing titles: The Whale; the Green-land Whale; the Black
Whale; the Great Whale; the True Whale; the Right Whale. There is a
deal of ob-scur-ity con-cern-ing the iden-tity of the spe-cies thus
mul-ti-tudin-ously bap-tised. What then is the whale, which I in-clude in
the second spe-cies of my Folios? It is the Great Mys-ticetus of the
Eng-lish nat-ur-al-ists; the Green-land Whale of the Eng-lish whale-men; the
Baleine Ordin-aire of the French whale-men; the Grow-lands Walfish of the
Swedes. It is the whale which for more than two cen-tur-ies past has been
hunted by the Dutch and Eng-lish in the Arc-tic seas; it is the whale
which the Amer-ican fish-er-men have long pur-sued in the In-dian ocean, on
the Brazil Banks, on the Nor’ West Coast, and vari-ous other parts of
the world, des-ig-nated by them Right Whale Cruis-ing Grounds.

Some pre-tend to see a dif-fer-ence between the Green-land whale of the
Eng-lish and the right whale of the Amer-ic-ans. But they pre-cisely agree
in all their grand fea-tures; nor has there yet been presen-ted a single
de-term-in-ate fact upon which to ground a rad-ical dis-tinc-tion. It is by
end-less sub-di-vi-sions based upon the most in-con-clus-ive dif-fer-ences, that
some de-part-ments of nat-ural his-tory be-come so re-pellingly in-tric-ate.
The right whale will be else-where treated of at some length, with
ref-er-ence to elu-cid-at-ing the sperm whale.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER III. (_Fin-Back_).—Under this head I reckon
a mon-ster which, by the vari-ous names of Fin-Back, Tall-Spout, and
Long-John, has been seen al-most in every sea and is com-monly the whale
whose dis-tant jet is so of-ten descried by pas-sen-gers cross-ing the
At-lantic, in the New York packet-tracks. In the length he at-tains, and
in his baleen, the Fin-back re-sembles the right whale, but is of a less
portly girth, and a lighter col-our, ap-proach-ing to olive. His great
lips present a cable-like as-pect, formed by the in-ter-twist-ing, slant-ing
folds of large wrinkles. His grand dis-tin-guish-ing fea-ture, the fin,
from which he de-rives his name, is of-ten a con-spicu-ous ob-ject. This fin
is some three or four feet long, grow-ing ver-tic-ally from the hinder
part of the back, of an an-gu-lar shape, and with a very sharp poin-ted
end. Even if not the slight-est other part of the creature be vis-ible,
this isol-ated fin will, at times, be seen plainly pro-ject-ing from the
sur-face. When the sea is mod-er-ately calm, and slightly marked with
spher-ical ripples, and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shad-ows
upon the wrinkled sur-face, it may well be sup-posed that the wa-tery
circle sur-round-ing it some-what re-sembles a dial, with its style and
wavy hour-lines graved on it. On that Ahaz-dial the shadow of-ten goes
back. The Fin-Back is not gregari-ous. He seems a whale-hater, as some
men are man-haters. Very shy; al-ways go-ing sol-it-ary; un-ex-pec-tedly
rising to the sur-face in the re-motest and most sul-len wa-ters; his
straight and single lofty jet rising like a tall mis-an-thropic spear
upon a bar-ren plain; gif-ted with such won-drous power and ve-lo-city in
swim-ming, as to defy all present pur-suit from man; this le-viathan seems
the ban-ished and un-con-quer-able Cain of his race, bear-ing for his mark
that style upon his back. From hav-ing the baleen in his mouth, the
Fin-Back is some-times in-cluded with the right whale, among a the-or-etic
spe-cies de-nom-in-ated _Whale-bone whales_, that is, whales with baleen. Of
these so called Whale-bone whales, there would seem to be sev-eral
vari-et-ies, most of which, how-ever, are little known. Broad-nosed whales
and beaked whales; pike-headed whales; bunched whales; un-der-jawed
whales and rostrated whales, are the fish-er-men’s names for a few sorts.

In con-nec-tion with this ap-pel-lat-ive of “Whale-bone whales,” it is of
great im-port-ance to men-tion, that how-ever such a no-men-clature may be
con-veni-ent in fa-cil-it-at-ing al-lu-sions to some kind of whales, yet it is
in vain to at-tempt a clear clas-si-fic-a-tion of the Le-viathan, foun-ded
upon either his baleen, or hump, or fin, or teeth; not-with-stand-ing that
those marked parts or fea-tures very ob-vi-ously seem bet-ter ad-ap-ted to
af-ford the basis for a reg-u-lar sys-tem of Cet-o-logy than any other
de-tached bod-ily dis-tinc-tions, which the whale, in his kinds, presents.
How then? The baleen, hump, back-fin, and teeth; these are things whose
pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies are in-dis-crim-in-ately dis-persed among all sorts of whales,
without any re-gard to what may be the nature of their struc-ture in
other and more es-sen-tial par-tic-u-lars. Thus, the sperm whale and the
hump-backed whale, each has a hump; but there the simil-it-ude ceases.
Then, this same hump-backed whale and the Green-land whale, each of these
has baleen; but there again the simil-it-ude ceases. And it is just the
same with the other parts above men-tioned. In vari-ous sorts of whales,
they form such ir-reg-u-lar com-bin-a-tions; or, in the case of any one of
them de-tached, such an ir-reg-u-lar isol-a-tion; as ut-terly to defy all
gen-eral meth-od-iz-a-tion formed upon such a basis. On this rock every one
of the whale-nat-ur-al-ists has split.

But it may pos-sibly be con-ceived that, in the in-ternal parts of the
whale, in his ana-tomy—there, at least, we shall be able to hit the
right clas-si-fic-a-tion. Nay; what thing, for ex-ample, is there in the
Green-land whale’s ana-tomy more strik-ing than his baleen? Yet we have
seen that by his baleen it is im-possible cor-rectly to clas-sify the
Green-land whale. And if you des-cend into the bowels of the vari-ous
le-viath-ans, why there you will not find dis-tinc-tions a fiftieth part as
avail-able to the sys-tem-at-izer as those ex-ternal ones already
enu-mer-ated. What then re-mains? noth-ing but to take hold of the whales
bod-ily, in their en-tire lib-eral volume, and boldly sort them that way.
And this is the Bib-li-o-graph-ical sys-tem here ad-op-ted; and it is the only
one that can pos-sibly suc-ceed, for it alone is prac-tic-able. To pro-ceed.

BOOK I. (_Folio_) CHAPTER IV. (_Hump Back_).—This whale is of-ten seen
on the north-ern Amer-ican coast. He has been fre-quently cap-tured there,
and towed into har-bor. He has a great pack on him like a ped-dler; or
you might call him the Elephant and Castle whale. At any rate, the
pop-u-lar name for him does not suf-fi-ciently dis-tin-guish him, since the
sperm whale also has a hump though a smal-ler one. His oil is not very
valu-able. He has baleen. He is the most game-some and light-hearted of
all the whales, mak-ing more gay foam and white wa-ter gen-er-ally than any
other of them.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER V. (_Razor Back_).—Of this whale little is
known but his name. I have seen him at a dis-tance off Cape Horn. Of a
re-tir-ing nature, he eludes both hunters and philo-soph-ers. Though no
cow-ard, he has never yet shown any part of him but his back, which
rises in a long sharp ridge. Let him go. I know little more of him, nor
does any-body else.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER VI. (_Sul-phur Bot-tom_).—Another re-tir-ing
gen-tle-man, with a brim-stone belly, doubt-less got by scrap-ing along the
Tar-tarian tiles in some of his pro-founder divings. He is sel-dom seen;
at least I have never seen him ex-cept in the re-moter south-ern seas, and
then al-ways at too great a dis-tance to study his coun-ten-ance. He is
never chased; he would run away with rope-walks of line. Prodi-gies are
told of him. Adieu, Sul-phur Bot-tom! I can say noth-ing more that is true
of ye, nor can the old-est Nan-tuck-eter.

Thus ends BOOK I. (_Folio_), and now be-gins BOOK II. (_Octa-vo_).

OCTAVOES.*—These em-brace the whales of mid-dling mag-nitude, among which
present may be numbered:—I., the _Gram-pus_; II., the _Black Fish_;
III., the _Nar-whale_; IV., the _Thrash-er_; V., the _Killer_.

*Why this book of whales is not de-nom-in-ated the Quarto is very plain.
Be-cause, while the whales of this or-der, though smal-ler than those of
the former or-der, nev-er-the-less re-tain a pro-por-tion-ate like-ness to them
in fig-ure, yet the book-binder’s Quarto volume in its di-men-sioned form
does not pre-serve the shape of the Folio volume, but the Octavo volume
does.

BOOK II. (_Octa-vo_), CHAPTER I. (_Gram-pus_).—Though this fish, whose
loud son-or-ous breath-ing, or rather blow-ing, has fur-nished a pro-verb to
lands-men, is so well known a den-izen of the deep, yet is he not
pop-ularly classed among whales. But pos-sess-ing all the grand
dis-tinct-ive fea-tures of the le-viathan, most nat-ur-al-ists have re-cog-nised
him for one. He is of mod-er-ate octavo size, vary-ing from fif-teen to
twenty-five feet in length, and of cor-res-pond-ing di-men-sions round the
waist. He swims in herds; he is never reg-u-larly hunted, though his oil
is con-sid-er-able in quant-ity, and pretty good for light. By some
fish-er-men his ap-proach is re-garded as pre-mon-it-ory of the ad-vance of the
great sperm whale.

BOOK II. (_Octa-vo_), CHAPTER II. (_Black Fish_).—I give the pop-u-lar
fish-er-men’s names for all these fish, for gen-er-ally they are the best.
Where any name hap-pens to be vague or in-ex-press-ive, I shall say so, and
sug-gest an-other. I do so now, touch-ing the Black Fish, so-called,
be-cause black-ness is the rule among al-most all whales. So, call him the
Hy-ena Whale, if you please. His vo-ra-city is well known, and from the
cir-cum-stance that the in-ner angles of his lips are curved up-wards, he
car-ries an ever-last-ing Mephis-tophelean grin on his face. This whale
av-er-ages some six-teen or eight-een feet in length. He is found in al-most
all lat-it-udes. He has a pe-cu-liar way of show-ing his dorsal hooked fin
in swim-ming, which looks some-thing like a Ro-man nose. When not more
prof-it-ably em-ployed, the sperm whale hunters some-times cap-ture the
Hy-ena whale, to keep up the sup-ply of cheap oil for do-mestic
em-ploy-ment—as some frugal house-keep-ers, in the ab-sence of com-pany, and
quite alone by them-selves, burn un-sa-vory tal-low in-stead of odor-ous wax.
Though their blub-ber is very thin, some of these whales will yield you
up-wards of thirty gal-lons of oil.

BOOK II. (_Octa-vo_), CHAPTER III. (_Nar-whale_), that is, _Nostril
whale_.—Another in-stance of a curi-ously named whale, so named I sup-pose
from his pe-cu-liar horn be-ing ori-gin-ally mis-taken for a peaked nose. The
creature is some six-teen feet in length, while its horn av-er-ages five
feet, though some ex-ceed ten, and even at-tain to fif-teen feet. Strictly
speak-ing, this horn is but a lengthened tusk, grow-ing out from the jaw
in a line a little de-pressed from the ho-ri-zontal. But it is only found
on the sin-is-ter side, which has an ill ef-fect, giv-ing its owner
some-thing ana-log-ous to the as-pect of a clumsy left-handed man. What
pre-cise pur-pose this ivory horn or lance an-swers, it would be hard to
say. It does not seem to be used like the blade of the sword-fish and
bill-fish; though some sail-ors tell me that the Nar-whale em-ploys it for
a rake in turn-ing over the bot-tom of the sea for food. Char-ley Coffin
said it was used for an ice-pier-cer; for the Nar-whale, rising to the
sur-face of the Polar Sea, and find-ing it sheeted with ice, thrusts his
horn up, and so breaks through. But you can-not prove either of these
sur-mises to be cor-rect. My own opin-ion is, that how-ever this one-sided
horn may really be used by the Nar-whale—how-ever that may be—it would
cer-tainly be very con-veni-ent to him for a folder in read-ing pamph-lets.
The Nar-whale I have heard called the Tusked whale, the Horned whale,
and the Uni-corn whale. He is cer-tainly a curi-ous ex-ample of the
Uni-c-ornism to be found in al-most every king-dom of an-im-ated nature. From
cer-tain cloistered old au-thors I have gathered that this same
sea-uni-corn’s horn was in an-cient days re-garded as the great an-ti-dote
against poison, and as such, pre-par-a-tions of it brought im-mense prices.
It was also dis-tilled to a volat-ile salts for faint-ing ladies, the same
way that the horns of the male deer are man-u-fac-tured into hartshorn.
Ori-gin-ally it was in it-self ac-coun-ted an ob-ject of great curi-os-ity.
Black Let-ter tells me that Sir Martin Frobisher on his re-turn from that
voy-age, when Queen Bess did gal-lantly wave her jew-elled hand to him
from a win-dow of Green-wich Palace, as his bold ship sailed down the
Thames; “when Sir Martin re-turned from that voy-age,” saith Black
Let-ter, “on bended knees he presen-ted to her high-ness a prodi-gious long
horn of the Nar-whale, which for a long period after hung in the castle
at Wind-sor.” An Irish au-thor avers that the Earl of Leicester, on
bended knees, did like-wise present to her high-ness an-other horn,
per-tain-ing to a land beast of the uni-corn nature.

The Nar-whale has a very pic-tur-esque, leo-pard-like look, be-ing of a
milk-white ground col-our, dot-ted with round and ob-long spots of black.
His oil is very su-per-ior, clear and fine; but there is little of it,
and he is sel-dom hunted. He is mostly found in the cir-cum-polar seas.

BOOK II. (_Octa-vo_), CHAPTER IV. (_Killer_).—Of this whale little is
pre-cisely known to the Nan-tuck-eter, and noth-ing at all to the pro-fessed
nat-ur-al-ist. From what I have seen of him at a dis-tance, I should say
that he was about the big-ness of a gram-pus. He is very sav-age—a sort of
Fee-gee fish. He some-times takes the great Folio whales by the lip, and
hangs there like a leech, till the mighty brute is wor-ried to death.
The Killer is never hunted. I never heard what sort of oil he has.
Ex-cep-tion might be taken to the name be-stowed upon this whale, on the
ground of its in-dis-tinct-ness. For we are all killers, on land and on
sea; Bona-partes and Sharks in-cluded.

BOOK II. (_Octa-vo_), CHAPTER V. (_Thrash-er_).—This gen-tle-man is fam-ous
for his tail, which he uses for a fer-ule in thrash-ing his foes. He
mounts the Folio whale’s back, and as he swims, he works his pas-sage by
flog-ging him; as some school-mas-ters get along in the world by a sim-ilar
pro-cess. Still less is known of the Thrasher than of the Killer. Both
are out-laws, even in the law-less seas.

 Thus ends BOOK II. (_Octa-vo_), and be-gins BOOK III. (_Duo-decimo_).

DUODECIMOES.—These in-clude the smal-ler whales. I. The Huzza Por-poise.
II. The Al-ger-ine Por-poise. III. The Mealy-mouthed Por-poise.

To those who have not chanced spe-cially to study the sub-ject, it may
pos-sibly seem strange, that fishes not com-monly ex-ceed-ing four or five
feet should be mar-shalled among WHALES—a word, which, in the pop-u-lar
sense, al-ways con-veys an idea of huge-ness. But the creatures set down
above as Duo-decimoes are in-fal-libly whales, by the terms of my
defin-i-tion of what a whale is—_i.e._ a spout-ing fish, with a ho-ri-zontal
tail.

BOOK III. (_Duo-decimo_), CHAPTER 1. (_Huzza Por-poise_).—This is the
com-mon por-poise found al-most all over the globe. The name is of my own
be-stowal; for there are more than one sort of por-poises, and some-thing
must be done to dis-tin-guish them. I call him thus, be-cause he al-ways
swims in hil-ari-ous shoals, which upon the broad sea keep toss-ing
them-selves to heaven like caps in a Fourth-of-July crowd. Their
ap-pear-ance is gen-er-ally hailed with de-light by the mar-iner. Full of
fine spir-its, they in-vari-ably come from the breezy bil-lows to wind-ward.
They are the lads that al-ways live be-fore the wind. They are ac-coun-ted
a lucky omen. If you your-self can with-stand three cheers at be-hold-ing
these vi-va-cious fish, then heaven help ye; the spirit of godly
gamesome-ness is not in ye. A well-fed, plump Huzza Por-poise will yield
you one good gal-lon of good oil. But the fine and del-ic-ate fluid
ex-trac-ted from his jaws is ex-ceed-ingly valu-able. It is in re-quest among
jew-ellers and watch-makers. Sail-ors put it on their hones. Por-poise meat
is good eat-ing, you know. It may never have oc-curred to you that a
por-poise spouts. Indeed, his spout is so small that it is not very
read-ily dis-cern-ible. But the next time you have a chance, watch him;
and you will then see the great Sperm whale him-self in mini-ature.

BOOK III. (_Duo-decimo_), CHAPTER II. (_Al-ger-ine Por-poise_).—A pir-ate.
Very sav-age. He is only found, I think, in the Pa-cific. He is some-what
lar-ger than the Huzza Por-poise, but much of the same gen-eral make.
Pro-voke him, and he will buckle to a shark. I have lowered for him many
times, but never yet saw him cap-tured.

BOOK III. (_Duo-decimo_), CHAPTER III. (_Mealy-mouthed Por-poise_).—The
largest kind of Por-poise; and only found in the Pa-cific, so far as it
is known. The only Eng-lish name, by which he has hitherto been
des-ig-nated, is that of the fish-ers—Right-Whale Por-poise, from the
cir-cum-stance that he is chiefly found in the vi-cin-ity of that Folio. In
shape, he dif-fers in some de-gree from the Huzza Por-poise, be-ing of a
less ro-tund and jolly girth; in-deed, he is of quite a neat and
gen-tle-man-like fig-ure. He has no fins on his back (most other por-poises
have), he has a lovely tail, and sen-ti-mental In-dian eyes of a hazel
hue. But his mealy-mouth spoils all. Though his en-tire back down to his
side fins is of a deep sable, yet a bound-ary line, dis-tinct as the mark
in a ship’s hull, called the “bright waist,” that line streaks him from
stem to stern, with two sep-ar-ate col-ours, black above and white be-low.
The white com-prises part of his head, and the whole of his mouth, which
makes him look as if he had just es-caped from a felo-ni-ous visit to a
meal-bag. A most mean and mealy as-pect! His oil is much like that of
the com-mon por-poise.

  * * * * * *

Bey-ond the DUODECIMO, this sys-tem does not pro-ceed, inas-much as the
Por-poise is the smal-lest of the whales. Above, you have all the
Le-viath-ans of note. But there are a rabble of un-cer-tain, fu-git-ive,
half-fab-ulous whales, which, as an Amer-ican whale-man, I know by
repu-ta-tion, but not per-son-ally. I shall enu-mer-ate them by their
fore-castle ap-pel-la-tions; for pos-sibly such a list may be valu-able to
fu-ture in-vest-ig-at-ors, who may com-plete what I have here but be-gun. If
any of the fol-low-ing whales, shall here-after be caught and marked, then
he can read-ily be in-cor-por-ated into this Sys-tem, ac-cord-ing to his
Folio, Octavo, or Duo-decimo mag-nitude:—The Bottle-Nose Whale; the Junk
Whale; the Pud-ding-Headed Whale; the Cape Whale; the Lead-ing Whale; the
Can-non Whale; the Scragg Whale; the Coppered Whale; the Elephant Whale;
the Ice-berg Whale; the Quog Whale; the Blue Whale; etc. From Icelandic,
Dutch, and old Eng-lish au-thor-it-ies, there might be quoted other lists
of un-cer-tain whales, blessed with all man-ner of un-couth names. But I
omit them as al-to-gether ob-sol-ete; and can hardly help sus-pect-ing them
for mere sounds, full of Le-viath-an-ism, but sig-ni-fy-ing noth-ing.

Fin-ally: It was stated at the out-set, that this sys-tem would not be
here, and at once, per-fec-ted. You can-not but plainly see that I have
kept my word. But I now leave my cet-o-lo-gical Sys-tem stand-ing thus
un-fin-ished, even as the great Cathed-ral of Co-logne was left, with the
crane still stand-ing upon the top of the un-com-pleted tower. For small
erec-tions may be fin-ished by their first ar-chi-tects; grand ones, true
ones, ever leave the cope-stone to pos-ter-ity. God keep me from ever
com-plet-ing any-thing. This whole book is but a draught—nay, but the
draught of a draught. Oh, Time, Strength, Cash, and Pa-tience!


CHAPTER 33. The Speck-snyder.

Con-cern-ing the of-ficers of the whale-craft, this seems as good a place
as any to set down a little do-mestic pe-cu-li-ar-ity on ship-board, arising
from the ex-ist-ence of the har-poon-eer class of of-ficers, a class un-known
of course in any other mar-ine than the whale-fleet.

The large im-port-ance at-tached to the har-poon-eer’s vo-ca-tion is evinced
by the fact, that ori-gin-ally in the old Dutch Fish-ery, two cen-tur-ies
and more ago, the com-mand of a whale ship was not wholly lodged in the
per-son now called the cap-tain, but was di-vided between him and an
of-ficer called the Speck-snyder. Lit-er-ally this word means Fat-Cut-ter;
us-age, how-ever, in time made it equi-val-ent to Chief Har-poon-eer. In
those days, the cap-tain’s au-thor-ity was re-stric-ted to the nav-ig-a-tion
and gen-eral man-age-ment of the ves-sel; while over the whale-hunt-ing
de-part-ment and all its con-cerns, the Speck-snyder or Chief Har-poon-eer
reigned su-preme. In the Brit-ish Green-land Fish-ery, un-der the cor-rup-ted
title of Speck-sion-eer, this old Dutch of-fi-cial is still re-tained, but
his former dig-nity is sadly abridged. At present he ranks simply as
senior Har-poon-eer; and as such, is but one of the cap-tain’s more
in-ferior sub-al-terns. Never-the-less, as upon the good con-duct of the
har-poon-eers the suc-cess of a whal-ing voy-age largely de-pends, and since
in the Amer-ican Fish-ery he is not only an im-port-ant of-ficer in the
boat, but un-der cer-tain cir-cum-stances (night watches on a whal-ing
ground) the com-mand of the ship’s deck is also his; there-fore the grand
polit-ical maxim of the sea de-mands, that he should nom-in-ally live apart
from the men be-fore the mast, and be in some way dis-tin-guished as their
pro-fes-sional su-per-ior; though al-ways, by them, fa-mil-iarly re-garded as
their so-cial equal.

Now, the grand dis-tinc-tion drawn between of-ficer and man at sea, is
this—the first lives aft, the last for-ward. Hence, in whale-ships and
mer-chant-men alike, the mates have their quar-ters with the cap-tain; and
so, too, in most of the Amer-ican whalers the har-poon-eers are lodged in
the after part of the ship. That is to say, they take their meals in
the cap-tain’s cabin, and sleep in a place in-dir-ectly com-mu-nic-at-ing with
it.

Though the long period of a South-ern whal-ing voy-age (by far the longest
of all voy-ages now or ever made by man), the pe-cu-liar per-ils of it, and
the com-munity of in-terest pre-vail-ing among a com-pany, all of whom, high
or low, de-pend for their profits, not upon fixed wages, but upon their
com-mon luck, to-gether with their com-mon vi-gil-ance, in-trep-id-ity, and
hard work; though all these things do in some cases tend to be-get a
less rig-or-ous dis-cip-line than in mer-chant-men gen-er-ally; yet, never mind
how much like an old Meso-pot-amian fam-ily these whale-men may, in some
prim-it-ive in-stances, live to-gether; for all that, the punc-tili-ous
ex-tern-als, at least, of the quarter-deck are sel-dom ma-ter-i-ally re-laxed,
and in no in-stance done away. Indeed, many are the Nan-tucket ships in
which you will see the skip-per parad-ing his quarter-deck with an elated
grandeur not sur-passed in any mil-it-ary navy; nay, ex-tort-ing al-most as
much out-ward homage as if he wore the im-per-ial purple, and not the
shab-bi-est of pi-lot-cloth.

And though of all men the moody cap-tain of the Pequod was the least
given to that sort of shal-low-est as-sump-tion; and though the only homage
he ever ex-ac-ted, was im-pli-cit, in-stant-an-eous obed-i-ence; though he
re-quired no man to re-move the shoes from his feet ere step-ping upon the
quarter-deck; and though there were times when, ow-ing to pe-cu-liar
cir-cum-stances con-nec-ted with events here-after to be de-tailed, he
ad-dressed them in un-usual terms, whether of con-des-cen-sion or _in
terrorem_, or oth-er-wise; yet even Cap-tain Ahab was by no means
un-ob-serv-ant of the para-mount forms and us-ages of the sea.

Nor, per-haps, will it fail to be even-tu-ally per-ceived, that be-hind
those forms and us-ages, as it were, he some-times masked him-self;
in-cid-ent-ally mak-ing use of them for other and more private ends than
they were le-git-im-ately in-ten-ded to sub-serve. That cer-tain sul-tan-ism of
his brain, which had oth-er-wise in a good de-gree re-mained un-mani-fes-ted;
through those forms that same sul-tan-ism be-came in-carn-ate in an
ir-res-ist-ible dic-tat-or-ship. For be a man’s in-tel-lec-tual su-peri-or-ity what
it will, it can never as-sume the prac-tical, avail-able su-prem-acy over
other men, without the aid of some sort of ex-ternal arts and
en-trench-ments, al-ways, in them-selves, more or less paltry and base.
This it is, that for ever keeps God’s true princes of the Em-pire from
the world’s hust-ings; and leaves the highest hon-ors that this air can
give, to those men who be-come fam-ous more through their in-fin-ite
in-feri-or-ity to the choice hid-den hand-ful of the Div-ine In-ert, than
through their un-doubted su-peri-or-ity over the dead level of the mass.
Such large vir-tue lurks in these small things when ex-treme polit-ical
su-per-sti-tions in-vest them, that in some royal in-stances even to idiot
im-be-cil-ity they have im-par-ted po-tency. But when, as in the case of
Nich-olas the Czar, the ringed crown of geo-graph-ical em-pire en-circles an
im-per-ial brain; then, the ple-beian herds crouch abased be-fore the
tre-mend-ous cent-ral-iz-a-tion. Nor, will the tra-gic dram-at-ist who would
de-pict mor-tal in-dom-it-able-ness in its fullest sweep and dir-ect swing,
ever for-get a hint, in-cid-ent-ally so im-port-ant in his art, as the one
now al-luded to.

But Ahab, my Cap-tain, still moves be-fore me in all his Nan-tucket
grim-ness and shag-gi-ness; and in this epis-ode touch-ing Em-per-ors and
Kings, I must not con-ceal that I have only to do with a poor old
whale-hunter like him; and, there-fore, all out-ward majestical trap-pings
and hous-ings are denied me. Oh, Ahab! what shall be grand in thee, it
must needs be plucked at from the skies, and dived for in the deep, and
fea-tured in the un-bod-ied air!


CHAPTER 34. The Cabin-Table.

It is noon; and Dough-Boy, the stew-ard, thrust-ing his pale
loaf-of-bread face from the cabin-scuttle, an-nounces din-ner to his lord
and mas-ter; who, sit-ting in the lee quarter-boat, has just been tak-ing
an ob-ser-va-tion of the sun; and is now mutely reck-on-ing the lat-it-ude on
the smooth, medal-lion-shaped tab-let, re-served for that daily pur-pose on
the up-per part of his ivory leg. From his com-plete in-at-ten-tion to the
tid-ings, you would think that moody Ahab had not heard his menial. But
presently, catch-ing hold of the mizen shrouds, he swings him-self to the
deck, and in an even, un-ex-hil-ar-ated voice, say-ing, “Din-ner, Mr.
Star-buck,” dis-ap-pears into the cabin.

When the last echo of his sul-tan’s step has died away, and Star-buck,
the first Emir, has every reason to sup-pose that he is seated, then
Star-buck rouses from his quiet-ude, takes a few turns along the planks,
and, after a grave peep into the bin-nacle, says, with some touch of
pleas-ant-ness, “Din-ner, Mr. Stubb,” and des-cends the scuttle. The second
Emir lounges about the rig-ging awhile, and then slightly shak-ing the
main brace, to see whether it will be all right with that im-port-ant
rope, he like-wise takes up the old bur-den, and with a rapid “Din-ner,
Mr. Flask,” fol-lows after his pre-de-cessors.

But the third Emir, now see-ing him-self all alone on the quarter-deck,
seems to feel re-lieved from some curi-ous re-straint; for, tip-ping all
sorts of know-ing winks in all sorts of dir-ec-tions, and kick-ing off his
shoes, he strikes into a sharp but noise-less squall of a horn-pipe right
over the Grand Turk’s head; and then, by a dex-ter-ous sleight, pitch-ing
his cap up into the mizen-top for a shelf, he goes down rol-lick-ing so
far at least as he re-mains vis-ible from the deck, re-vers-ing all other
pro-ces-sions, by bring-ing up the rear with mu-sic. But ere step-ping into
the cabin door-way be-low, he pauses, ships a new face al-to-gether, and,
then, in-de-pend-ent, hil-ari-ous little Flask enters King Ahab’s pres-ence,
in the char-ac-ter of Ab-jectus, or the Slave.

It is not the least among the strange things bred by the in-tense
ar-ti-fi-cial-ness of sea-us-ages, that while in the open air of the deck
some of-ficers will, upon pro-voca-tion, bear them-selves boldly and
de-fy-ingly enough to-wards their com-mander; yet, ten to one, let those
very of-ficers the next mo-ment go down to their cus-tom-ary din-ner in that
same com-mander’s cabin, and straight-way their in-of-fens-ive, not to say
de-prec-at-ory and humble air to-wards him, as he sits at the head of the
table; this is mar-vel-lous, some-times most com-ical. Where-fore this
dif-fer-ence? A prob-lem? Per-haps not. To have been Belshaz-zar, King of
Babylon; and to have been Belshaz-zar, not haught-ily but cour-teously,
therein cer-tainly must have been some touch of mundane grandeur. But he
who in the rightly regal and in-tel-li-gent spirit presides over his own
private din-ner-table of in-vited guests, that man’s un-chal-lenged power
and domin-ion of in-di-vidual in-flu-ence for the time; that man’s roy-alty
of state tran-scends Belshaz-zar’s, for Belshaz-zar was not the greatest.
Who has but once dined his friends, has tasted what it is to be Cæsar.
It is a witch-ery of so-cial czar-ship which there is no with-stand-ing.
Now, if to this con-sid-er-a-tion you su-per-add the of-fi-cial su-prem-acy of a
ship-mas-ter, then, by in-fer-ence, you will de-rive the cause of that
pe-cu-li-ar-ity of sea-life just men-tioned.

Over his ivory-in-laid table, Ahab presided like a mute, maned sea-lion
on the white coral beach, sur-roun-ded by his war-like but still
de-fer-en-tial cubs. In his own proper turn, each of-ficer waited to be
served. They were as little chil-dren be-fore Ahab; and yet, in Ahab,
there seemed not to lurk the smal-lest so-cial ar-rog-ance. With one mind,
their in-tent eyes all fastened upon the old man’s knife, as he carved
the chief dish be-fore him. I do not sup-pose that for the world they
would have pro-faned that mo-ment with the slight-est ob-ser-va-tion, even
upon so neut-ral a topic as the weather. No! And when reach-ing out his
knife and fork, between which the slice of beef was locked, Ahab
thereby mo-tioned Star-buck’s plate to-wards him, the mate re-ceived his
meat as though re-ceiv-ing alms; and cut it ten-derly; and a little
star-ted if, per-chance, the knife grazed against the plate; and chewed
it noise-lessly; and swal-lowed it, not without cir-cum-spec-tion. For, like
the Coron-a-tion ban-quet at Frank-fort, where the Ger-man Em-peror
pro-foundly dines with the seven Im-per-ial Elect-ors, so these cabin meals
were some-how sol-emn meals, eaten in aw-ful si-lence; and yet at table old
Ahab for-bade not con-ver-sa-tion; only he him-self was dumb. What a re-lief
it was to chok-ing Stubb, when a rat made a sud-den racket in the hold
be-low. And poor little Flask, he was the young-est son, and little boy
of this weary fam-ily party. His were the shin-bones of the sa-line beef;
his would have been the drum-sticks. For Flask to have pre-sumed to help
him-self, this must have seemed to him tan-tamount to lar-ceny in the
first de-gree. Had he helped him-self at that table, doubt-less, never
more would he have been able to hold his head up in this hon-est world;
nev-er-the-less, strange to say, Ahab never for-bade him. And had Flask
helped him-self, the chances were Ahab had never so much as no-ticed it.
Least of all, did Flask pre-sume to help him-self to but-ter. Whether he
thought the own-ers of the ship denied it to him, on ac-count of its
clot-ting his clear, sunny com-plex-ion; or whether he deemed that, on so
long a voy-age in such mar-ket-less wa-ters, but-ter was at a premium, and
there-fore was not for him, a sub-al-tern; how-ever it was, Flask, alas!
was a but-ter-less man!

Another thing. Flask was the last per-son down at the din-ner, and Flask
is the first man up. Con-sider! For hereby Flask’s din-ner was badly
jammed in point of time. Star-buck and Stubb both had the start of him;
and yet they also have the priv-ilege of loun-ging in the rear. If Stubb
even, who is but a peg higher than Flask, hap-pens to have but a small
ap-pet-ite, and soon shows symp-toms of con-clud-ing his re-past, then Flask
must be-stir him-self, he will not get more than three mouth-fuls that
day; for it is against holy us-age for Stubb to pre-cede Flask to the
deck. There-fore it was that Flask once ad-mit-ted in private, that ever
since he had arisen to the dig-nity of an of-ficer, from that mo-ment he
had never known what it was to be oth-er-wise than hungry, more or less.
For what he ate did not so much re-lieve his hun-ger, as keep it im-mor-tal
in him. Peace and sat-is-fac-tion, thought Flask, have for ever de-par-ted
from my stom-ach. I am an of-ficer; but, how I wish I could fish a bit of
old-fash-ioned beef in the fore-castle, as I used to when I was be-fore
the mast. There’s the fruits of pro-mo-tion now; there’s the van-ity of
glory: there’s the in-san-ity of life! Besides, if it were so that any
mere sailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask in Flask’s
of-fi-cial ca-pa-city, all that sailor had to do, in or-der to ob-tain ample
ven-geance, was to go aft at din-ner-time, and get a peep at Flask
through the cabin sky-light, sit-ting silly and dum-foundered be-fore
aw-ful Ahab.

Now, Ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the first table
in the Pequod’s cabin. After their de-par-ture, tak-ing place in in-ver-ted
or-der to their ar-rival, the can-vas cloth was cleared, or rather was
re-stored to some hur-ried or-der by the pal-lid stew-ard. And then the
three har-poon-eers were bid-den to the feast, they be-ing its re-sid-uary
leg-atees. They made a sort of tem-por-ary ser-vants’ hall of the high and
mighty cabin.

In strange con-trast to the hardly tol-er-able con-straint and name-less
in-vis-ible dom-in-eer-ings of the cap-tain’s table, was the en-tire care-free
li-cense and ease, the al-most frantic demo-cracy of those in-ferior
fel-lows the har-poon-eers. While their mas-ters, the mates, seemed afraid
of the sound of the hinges of their own jaws, the har-poon-eers chewed
their food with such a rel-ish that there was a re-port to it. They dined
like lords; they filled their bel-lies like In-dian ships all day load-ing
with spices. Such portent-ous ap-pet-ites had Queequeg and Tasht-ego, that
to fill out the va-can-cies made by the pre-vi-ous re-past, of-ten the pale
Dough-Boy was fain to bring on a great baron of salt-junk, seem-ingly
quar-ried out of the solid ox. And if he were not lively about it, if he
did not go with a nimble hop-skip-and-jump, then Tasht-ego had an
un-gen-tle-manly way of ac-cel-er-at-ing him by dart-ing a fork at his back,
har-poon-wise. And once Dag-goo, seized with a sud-den hu-mor, as-sisted
Dough-Boy’s memory by snatch-ing him up bod-ily, and thrust-ing his head
into a great empty wooden trencher, while Tasht-ego, knife in hand,
began lay-ing out the circle pre-lim-in-ary to scalping him. He was
nat-ur-ally a very nervous, shud-der-ing sort of little fel-low, this
bread-faced stew-ard; the pro-geny of a bank-rupt baker and a hos-pital
nurse. And what with the stand-ing spec-tacle of the black ter-rific Ahab,
and the peri-od-ical tu-mul-tu-ous vis-it-a-tions of these three sav-ages,
Dough-Boy’s whole life was one con-tinual lip-quiver. Com-monly, after
see-ing the har-poon-eers fur-nished with all things they de-man-ded, he
would es-cape from their clutches into his little pantry ad-join-ing, and
fear-fully peep out at them through the blinds of its door, till all was
over.

It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against Tasht-ego, op-pos-ing
his filed teeth to the In-dian’s: cross-wise to them, Dag-goo seated on
the floor, for a bench would have brought his hearse-plumed head to the
low car-lines; at every mo-tion of his co-lossal limbs, mak-ing the low
cabin frame-work to shake, as when an African ele-phant goes pas-sen-ger in
a ship. But for all this, the great negro was won-der-fully ab-ste-mi-ous,
not to say dainty. It seemed hardly pos-sible that by such com-par-at-ively
small mouth-fuls he could keep up the vi-tal-ity dif-fused through so
broad, baronial, and su-perb a per-son. But, doubt-less, this noble sav-age
fed strong and drank deep of the abound-ing ele-ment of air; and through
his dilated nos-trils snuffed in the sub-lime life of the worlds. Not by
beef or by bread, are gi-ants made or nour-ished. But Queequeg, he had a
mor-tal, bar-baric smack of the lip in eat-ing—an ugly sound enough—so
much so, that the trem-bling Dough-Boy al-most looked to see whether any
marks of teeth lurked in his own lean arms. And when he would hear
Tasht-ego singing out for him to pro-duce him-self, that his bones might
be picked, the simple-wit-ted stew-ard all but shattered the crock-ery
hanging round him in the pantry, by his sud-den fits of the palsy. Nor
did the whet-stone which the har-poon-eers car-ried in their pock-ets, for
their lances and other weapons; and with which whet-stones, at din-ner,
they would os-ten-ta-tiously sharpen their knives; that grat-ing sound did
not at all tend to tran-quil-lize poor Dough-Boy. How could he for-get
that in his Is-land days, Queequeg, for one, must cer-tainly have been
guilty of some mur-der-ous, con-vivial in-dis-cre-tions. Alas! Dough-Boy!
hard fares the white waiter who waits upon can-ni-bals. Not a nap-kin
should he carry on his arm, but a buck-ler. In good time, though, to his
great de-light, the three salt-sea war-ri-ors would rise and de-part; to
his cred-u-lous, fable-mon-ger-ing ears, all their mar-tial bones jingling
in them at every step, like Moor-ish sci-metars in scab-bards.

But, though these bar-bar-i-ans dined in the cabin, and nom-in-ally lived
there; still, be-ing any-thing but sedent-ary in their habits, they were
scarcely ever in it ex-cept at meal-times, and just be-fore sleep-ing-time,
when they passed through it to their own pe-cu-liar quar-ters.

In this one mat-ter, Ahab seemed no ex-cep-tion to most Amer-ican whale
cap-tains, who, as a set, rather in-cline to the opin-ion that by rights
the ship’s cabin be-longs to them; and that it is by cour-tesy alone that
any-body else is, at any time, per-mit-ted there. So that, in real truth,
the mates and har-poon-eers of the Pequod might more prop-erly be said to
have lived out of the cabin than in it. For when they did enter it, it
was some-thing as a street-door enters a house; turn-ing in-wards for a
mo-ment, only to be turned out the next; and, as a per-man-ent thing,
resid-ing in the open air. Nor did they lose much hereby; in the cabin
was no com-pan-ion-ship; so-cially, Ahab was in-ac-cess-ible. Though nom-in-ally
in-cluded in the census of Christen-dom, he was still an alien to it. He
lived in the world, as the last of the Grisly Bears lived in settled
Mis-souri. And as when Spring and Sum-mer had de-par-ted, that wild Logan
of the woods, bury-ing him-self in the hol-low of a tree, lived out the
winter there, suck-ing his own paws; so, in his in-clement, howl-ing old
age, Ahab’s soul, shut up in the caved trunk of his body, there fed
upon the sul-len paws of its gloom!


CHAPTER 35. The Mast-Head.

It was dur-ing the more pleas-ant weather, that in due ro-ta-tion with the
other sea-men my first mast-head came round.

In most Amer-ican whale-men the mast-heads are manned al-most
sim-ul-tan-eously with the ves-sel’s leav-ing her port; even though she may
have fif-teen thou-sand miles, and more, to sail ere reach-ing her proper
cruis-ing ground. And if, after a three, four, or five years’ voy-age she
is draw-ing nigh home with any-thing empty in her—say, an empty vial
even—then, her mast-heads are kept manned to the last; and not till her
sky-sail-poles sail in among the spires of the port, does she al-to-gether
re-lin-quish the hope of cap-tur-ing one whale more.

Now, as the busi-ness of stand-ing mast-heads, ashore or afloat, is a
very an-cient and in-ter-est-ing one, let us in some meas-ure ex-pa-ti-ate
here. I take it, that the earli-est stand-ers of mast-heads were the old
Egyp-tians; be-cause, in all my re-searches, I find none prior to them.
For though their pro-gen-it-ors, the build-ers of Ba-bel, must doubt-less, by
their tower, have in-ten-ded to rear the lofti-est mast-head in all Asia,
or Africa either; yet (ere the fi-nal truck was put to it) as that great
stone mast of theirs may be said to have gone by the board, in the
dread gale of God’s wrath; there-fore, we can-not give these Ba-bel
build-ers pri-or-ity over the Egyp-tians. And that the Egyp-tians were a
na-tion of mast-head stand-ers, is an as-ser-tion based upon the gen-eral
be-lief among archæo-lo-gists, that the first pyr-am-ids were foun-ded for
as-tro-nom-ical pur-poses: a the-ory sin-gu-larly sup-por-ted by the pe-cu-liar
stair-like form-a-tion of all four sides of those edi-fices; whereby, with
prodi-gious long up-lift-ings of their legs, those old as-tro-nomers were
wont to mount to the apex, and sing out for new stars; even as the
look-outs of a mod-ern ship sing out for a sail, or a whale just bear-ing
in sight. In Saint Styl-ites, the fam-ous Chris-tian her-mit of old times,
who built him a lofty stone pil-lar in the desert and spent the whole
lat-ter por-tion of his life on its sum-mit, hoist-ing his food from the
ground with a tackle; in him we have a re-mark-able in-stance of a
daunt-less stander-of-mast-heads; who was not to be driven from his
place by fogs or frosts, rain, hail, or sleet; but vali-antly fa-cing
everything out to the last, lit-er-ally died at his post. Of mod-ern
stand-ers-of-mast-heads we have but a life-less set; mere stone, iron,
and bronze men; who, though well cap-able of fa-cing out a stiff gale,
are still en-tirely in-com-pet-ent to the busi-ness of singing out upon
dis-cov-er-ing any strange sight. There is Na-po-leon; who, upon the top of
the column of Ven-dome, stands with arms fol-ded, some one hun-dred and
fifty feet in the air; care-less, now, who rules the decks be-low;
whether Louis Phil-ippe, Louis Blanc, or Louis the Devil. Great
Wash-ing-ton, too, stands high aloft on his tower-ing main-mast in
Bal-timore, and like one of Her-cules’ pil-lars, his column marks that
point of hu-man grandeur bey-ond which few mor-tals will go. Ad-miral
Nel-son, also, on a cap-stan of gun-metal, stands his mast-head in
Tra-fal-gar Square; and ever when most ob-scured by that Lon-don smoke,
token is yet given that a hid-den hero is there; for where there is
smoke, must be fire. But neither great Wash-ing-ton, nor Na-po-leon, nor
Nel-son, will an-swer a single hail from be-low, how-ever madly in-voked to
be-friend by their coun-sels the dis-trac-ted decks upon which they gaze;
how-ever it may be sur-mised, that their spir-its pen-et-rate through the
thick haze of the fu-ture, and descry what shoals and what rocks must be
shunned.

It may seem un-war-rant-able to couple in any re-spect the mast-head
stand-ers of the land with those of the sea; but that in truth it is not
so, is plainly evinced by an item for which Obed Macy, the sole
his-tor-ian of Nan-tucket, stands ac-count-able. The worthy Obed tells us,
that in the early times of the whale fish-ery, ere ships were reg-u-larly
launched in pur-suit of the game, the people of that is-land erec-ted
lofty spars along the sea-coast, to which the look-outs as-cen-ded by
means of nailed cleats, some-thing as fowls go up-stairs in a hen-house.
A few years ago this same plan was ad-op-ted by the Bay whale-men of New
Zea-l-and, who, upon descry-ing the game, gave no-tice to the ready-manned
boats nigh the beach. But this cus-tom has now be-come ob-sol-ete; turn we
then to the one proper mast-head, that of a whale-ship at sea. The
three mast-heads are kept manned from sun-rise to sun-set; the sea-men
tak-ing their reg-u-lar turns (as at the helm), and re-liev-ing each other
every two hours. In the se-rene weather of the trop-ics it is ex-ceed-ingly
pleas-ant the mast-head; nay, to a dreamy med-it-at-ive man it is
de-light-ful. There you stand, a hun-dred feet above the si-lent decks,
strid-ing along the deep, as if the masts were gi-gantic stilts, while
be-neath you and between your legs, as it were, swim the hugest mon-sters
of the sea, even as ships once sailed between the boots of the fam-ous
Co-los-sus at old Rhodes. There you stand, lost in the in-fin-ite series of
the sea, with noth-ing ruffled but the waves. The tranced ship
in-dol-ently rolls; the drowsy trade winds blow; everything re-solves you
into lan-guor. For the most part, in this tropic whal-ing life, a sub-lime
un-event-ful-ness in-vests you; you hear no news; read no gaz-ettes; ex-tras
with start-ling ac-counts of com-mon-places never de-lude you into
un-ne-ces-sary ex-cite-ments; you hear of no do-mestic af-flic-tions; bank-rupt
se-cur-it-ies; fall of stocks; are never troubled with the thought of what
you shall have for din-ner—for all your meals for three years and more
are snugly stowed in casks, and your bill of fare is im-mut-able.

In one of those south-ern whales-men, on a long three or four years’
voy-age, as of-ten hap-pens, the sum of the vari-ous hours you spend at the
mast-head would amount to sev-eral en-tire months. And it is much to be
de-plored that the place to which you de-vote so con-sid-er-able a por-tion
of the whole term of your nat-ural life, should be so sadly des-ti-tute of
any-thing ap-proach-ing to a cosy in-hab-it-ive-ness, or ad-ap-ted to breed a
com-fort-able loc-al-ness of feel-ing, such as per-tains to a bed, a ham-mock,
a hearse, a sen-try box, a pul-pit, a coach, or any other of those small
and snug con-triv-ances in which men tem-por-ar-ily isol-ate them-selves. Your
most usual point of perch is the head of the t’ gal-lant-mast, where you
stand upon two thin par-al-lel sticks (al-most pe-cu-liar to whale-men)
called the t’ gal-lant cross-trees. Here, tossed about by the sea, the
be-gin-ner feels about as cosy as he would stand-ing on a bull’s horns. To
be sure, in cold weather you may carry your house aloft with you, in
the shape of a watch-coat; but prop-erly speak-ing the thick-est
watch-coat is no more of a house than the un-clad body; for as the soul
is glued in-side of its fleshy tab-er-nacle, and can-not freely move about
in it, nor even move out of it, without run-ning great risk of per-ish-ing
(like an ig-nor-ant pil-grim cross-ing the snowy Alps in winter); so a
watch-coat is not so much of a house as it is a mere en-vel-ope, or
ad-di-tional skin en-cas-ing you. You can-not put a shelf or chest of
draw-ers in your body, and no more can you make a con-veni-ent closet of
your watch-coat.

Con-cern-ing all this, it is much to be de-plored that the mast-heads of a
south-ern whale ship are un-provided with those en-vi-able little tents or
pul-pits, called _crow’s-nests_, in which the look-outs of a Green-land
whaler are pro-tec-ted from the in-clement weather of the frozen seas. In
the fireside nar-rat-ive of Cap-tain Sleet, en-titled “A Voy-age among the
Ice-bergs, in quest of the Green-land Whale, and in-cid-ent-ally for the
re-dis-cov-ery of the Lost Icelandic Co-lon-ies of Old Green-land;” in this
ad-mir-able volume, all stand-ers of mast-heads are fur-nished with a
charm-ingly cir-cum-stan-tial ac-count of the then re-cently in-ven-ted
_crow’s-nest_ of the Gla-cier, which was the name of Cap-tain Sleet’s
good craft. He called it the _Sleet’s crow’s-nest_, in honor of
him-self; he be-ing the ori-ginal in-ventor and pat-entee, and free from all
ri-dicu-lous false del-ic-acy, and hold-ing that if we call our own chil-dren
after our own names (we fath-ers be-ing the ori-ginal in-vent-ors and
pat-entees), so like-wise should we de-nom-in-ate after ourselves any other
ap-par-atus we may be-get. In shape, the Sleet’s crow’s-nest is some-thing
like a large tierce or pipe; it is open above, how-ever, where it is
fur-nished with a mov-able side-screen to keep to wind-ward of your head
in a hard gale. Be-ing fixed on the sum-mit of the mast, you as-cend into
it through a little trap-hatch in the bot-tom. On the after side, or
side next the stern of the ship, is a com-fort-able seat, with a locker
un-der-neath for um-brel-las, com-fort-ers, and coats. In front is a leather
rack, in which to keep your speak-ing trum-pet, pipe, tele-scope, and
other naut-ical con-veni-ences. When Cap-tain Sleet in per-son stood his
mast-head in this crow’s-nest of his, he tells us that he al-ways had a
rifle with him (also fixed in the rack), to-gether with a powder flask
and shot, for the pur-pose of pop-ping off the stray nar-whales, or
vag-rant sea uni-corns in-fest-ing those wa-ters; for you can-not
suc-cess-fully shoot at them from the deck ow-ing to the res-ist-ance of the
wa-ter, but to shoot down upon them is a very dif-fer-ent thing. Now, it
was plainly a labor of love for Cap-tain Sleet to de-scribe, as he does,
all the little de-tailed con-veni-ences of his crow’s-nest; but though he
so en-larges upon many of these, and though he treats us to a very
sci-entific ac-count of his ex-per-i-ments in this crow’s-nest, with a small
com-pass he kept there for the pur-pose of coun-ter-act-ing the er-rors
res-ult-ing from what is called the “local at-trac-tion” of all bin-nacle
mag-nets; an er-ror ascrib-able to the ho-ri-zontal vi-cin-ity of the iron in
the ship’s planks, and in the Gla-cier’s case, per-haps, to there hav-ing
been so many broken-down black-smiths among her crew; I say, that though
the Cap-tain is very dis-creet and sci-entific here, yet, for all his
learned “bin-nacle de-vi-ations,” “azi-muth com-pass ob-ser-va-tions,” and
“ap-prox-im-ate er-rors,” he knows very well, Cap-tain Sleet, that he was
not so much im-mersed in those pro-found mag-netic med-it-a-tions, as to fail
be-ing at-trac-ted oc-ca-sion-ally to-wards that well re-plen-ished little
case-bottle, so nicely tucked in on one side of his crow’s nest, within
easy reach of his hand. Though, upon the whole, I greatly ad-mire and
even love the brave, the hon-est, and learned Cap-tain; yet I take it
very ill of him that he should so ut-terly ig-nore that case-bottle,
see-ing what a faith-ful friend and com-forter it must have been, while
with mittened fin-gers and hooded head he was study-ing the math-em-at-ics
aloft there in that bird’s nest within three or four perches of the
pole.

But if we South-ern whale-fish-ers are not so snugly housed aloft as
Cap-tain Sleet and his Green-land-men were; yet that dis-ad-vant-age is
greatly counter-bal-anced by the widely con-trast-ing serenity of those
se-duct-ive seas in which we South fish-ers mostly float. For one, I used
to lounge up the rig-ging very leis-urely, rest-ing in the top to have a
chat with Queequeg, or any one else off duty whom I might find there;
then as-cend-ing a little way fur-ther, and throw-ing a lazy leg over the
top-sail yard, take a pre-lim-in-ary view of the wa-tery pas-tures, and so
at last mount to my ul-ti-mate des-tin-a-tion.

Let me make a clean breast of it here, and frankly ad-mit that I kept
but sorry guard. With the prob-lem of the uni-verse re-volving in me, how
could I—be-ing left com-pletely to my-self at such a thought-en-gen-der-ing
alti-tude—how could I but lightly hold my ob-lig-a-tions to ob-serve all
whale-ships’ stand-ing or-ders, “Keep your weather eye open, and sing out
every time.”

And let me in this place mov-ingly ad-mon-ish you, ye ship-own-ers of
Nan-tucket! Be-ware of en-list-ing in your vi-gil-ant fish-er-ies any lad with
lean brow and hol-low eye; given to un-season-able med-it-at-ive-ness; and who
of-fers to ship with the Phæ-don in-stead of Bowditch in his head. Be-ware
of such an one, I say; your whales must be seen be-fore they can be
killed; and this sunken-eyed young Platon-ist will tow you ten wakes
round the world, and never make you one pint of sperm the richer. Nor
are these mon-i-tions at all un-needed. For nowadays, the whale-fish-ery
fur-nishes an asylum for many ro-mantic, mel-an-choly, and ab-sent-minded
young men, dis-gus-ted with the cark-ing cares of earth, and seek-ing
sen-ti-ment in tar and blub-ber. Childe Harold not un-fre-quently perches
him-self upon the mast-head of some luck-less dis-ap-poin-ted whale-ship,
and in moody phrase ejac-u-lates:—


“Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll! Ten thou-sand
blub-ber-hunters sweep over thee in vain.”



Very of-ten do the cap-tains of such ships take those ab-sent-minded young
philo-soph-ers to task, up-braid-ing them with not feel-ing suf-fi-cient
“in-terest” in the voy-age; half-hint-ing that they are so hope-lessly lost
to all hon-or-able am-bi-tion, as that in their secret souls they would
rather not see whales than oth-er-wise. But all in vain; those young
Platon-ists have a no-tion that their vis-ion is im-per-fect; they are
short-sighted; what use, then, to strain the visual nerve? They have
left their op-era-glasses at home.

“Why, thou mon-key,” said a har-poon-eer to one of these lads, “we’ve been
cruis-ing now hard upon three years, and thou hast not raised a whale
yet. Whales are scarce as hen’s teeth whenever thou art up here.”
Per-haps they were; or per-haps there might have been shoals of them in
the far ho-ri-zon; but lulled into such an opium-like list-less-ness of
va-cant, un-con-scious rev-erie is this ab-sent-minded youth by the blend-ing
ca-dence of waves with thoughts, that at last he loses his iden-tity;
takes the mys-tic ocean at his feet for the vis-ible im-age of that deep,
blue, bot-tom-less soul, per-vad-ing man-kind and nature; and every strange,
half-seen, glid-ing, beau-ti-ful thing that eludes him; every
dimly-dis-covered, up-ris-ing fin of some un-dis-cern-ible form, seems to him
the em-bod-i-ment of those elu-sive thoughts that only people the soul by
con-tinu-ally flit-ting through it. In this en-chanted mood, thy spirit
ebbs away to whence it came; be-comes dif-fused through time and space;
like Cran-mer’s sprinkled Pan-the-istic ashes, form-ing at last a part of
every shore the round globe over.

There is no life in thee, now, ex-cept that rock-ing life im-par-ted by a
gently rolling ship; by her, bor-rowed from the sea; by the sea, from
the in-scrut-able tides of God. But while this sleep, this dream is on
ye, move your foot or hand an inch; slip your hold at all; and your
iden-tity comes back in hor-ror. Over Des-car-tian vor-tices you hover. And
per-haps, at mid-day, in the fairest weather, with one half-throttled
shriek you drop through that trans-par-ent air into the sum-mer sea, no
more to rise for ever. Heed it well, ye Pan-the-ists!


CHAPTER 36. The Quarter-Deck.

(_Enter Ahab: Then, all._)

It was not a great while after the af-fair of the pipe, that one morn-ing
shortly after break-fast, Ahab, as was his wont, as-cen-ded the
cabin-gang-way to the deck. There most sea-cap-tains usu-ally walk at that
hour, as coun-try gen-tle-men, after the same meal, take a few turns in
the garden.

Soon his steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro he paced his old
rounds, upon planks so fa-mil-iar to his tread, that they were all over
den-ted, like geo-lo-gical stones, with the pe-cu-liar mark of his walk. Did
you fix-edly gaze, too, upon that ribbed and den-ted brow; there also,
you would see still stranger foot-prints—the foot-prints of his one
un-sleep-ing, ever-pa-cing thought.

But on the oc-ca-sion in ques-tion, those dents looked deeper, even as his
nervous step that morn-ing left a deeper mark. And, so full of his
thought was Ahab, that at every uni-form turn that he made, now at the
main-mast and now at the bin-nacle, you could al-most see that thought
turn in him as he turned, and pace in him as he paced; so com-pletely
pos-sess-ing him, in-deed, that it all but seemed the in-ward mould of
every outer move-ment.

“D’ye mark him, Flask?” whispered Stubb; “the chick that’s in him pecks
the shell. ’Twill soon be out.”

The hours wore on;—Ahab now shut up within his cabin; anon, pa-cing the
deck, with the same in-tense bigotry of pur-pose in his as-pect.

It drew near the close of day. Sud-denly he came to a halt by the
bul-warks, and in-sert-ing his bone leg into the auger-hole there, and
with one hand grasp-ing a shroud, he ordered Star-buck to send every-body
aft.

“Sir!” said the mate, as-ton-ished at an or-der sel-dom or never given on
ship-board ex-cept in some ex-traordin-ary case.

“Send every-body aft,” re-peated Ahab. “Mast-heads, there! come down!”

When the en-tire ship’s com-pany were as-sembled, and with curi-ous and not
wholly un-ap-pre-hens-ive faces, were eye-ing him, for he looked not un-like
the weather ho-ri-zon when a storm is com-ing up, Ahab, after rap-idly
glan-cing over the bul-warks, and then dart-ing his eyes among the crew,
star-ted from his stand-point; and as though not a soul were nigh him
re-sumed his heavy turns upon the deck. With bent head and half-slouched
hat he con-tin-ued to pace, un-mind-ful of the won-der-ing whis-per-ing among
the men; till Stubb cau-tiously whispered to Flask, that Ahab must have
summoned them there for the pur-pose of wit-ness-ing a ped-es-trian feat.
But this did not last long. Ve-he-mently paus-ing, he cried:—

“What do ye do when ye see a whale, men?”

“Sing out for him!” was the im-puls-ive re-join-der from a score of clubbed
voices.

“Good!” cried Ahab, with a wild ap-proval in his tones; ob-serving the
hearty an-im-a-tion into which his un-ex-pec-ted ques-tion had so mag-net-ic-ally
thrown them.

“And what do ye next, men?”

“Lower away, and after him!”

“And what tune is it ye pull to, men?”

“A dead whale or a stove boat!”

More and more strangely and fiercely glad and ap-prov-ing, grew the
coun-ten-ance of the old man at every shout; while the mar-iners began to
gaze curi-ously at each other, as if mar-vel-ling how it was that they
them-selves be-came so ex-cited at such seem-ingly pur-pose-less ques-tions.

But, they were all eager-ness again, as Ahab, now half-re-volving in his
pivot-hole, with one hand reach-ing high up a shroud, and tightly,
al-most con-vuls-ively grasp-ing it, ad-dressed them thus:—

“All ye mast-head-ers have be-fore now heard me give or-ders about a white
whale. Look ye! d’ye see this Span-ish ounce of gold?”—hold-ing up a
broad bright coin to the sun—“it is a six-teen dol-lar piece, men. D’ye
see it? Mr. Star-buck, hand me yon top-maul.”

While the mate was get-ting the ham-mer, Ahab, without speak-ing, was
slowly rub-bing the gold piece against the skirts of his jacket, as if
to heighten its lustre, and without us-ing any words was mean-while lowly
hum-ming to him-self, pro-du-cing a sound so strangely muffled and
in-ar-tic-u-late that it seemed the mech-an-ical hum-ming of the wheels of his
vi-tal-ity in him.

Re-ceiv-ing the top-maul from Star-buck, he ad-vanced to-wards the main-mast
with the ham-mer up-lif-ted in one hand, ex-hib-it-ing the gold with the
other, and with a high raised voice ex-claim-ing: “Who-so-ever of ye raises
me a white-headed whale with a wrinkled brow and a crooked jaw;
who-so-ever of ye raises me that white-headed whale, with three holes
punc-tured in his star-board fluke—look ye, who-so-ever of ye raises me
that same white whale, he shall have this gold ounce, my boys!”

“Huzza! huzza!” cried the sea-men, as with swinging tar-paul-ins they
hailed the act of nail-ing the gold to the mast.

“It’s a white whale, I say,” re-sumed Ahab, as he threw down the
top-maul: “a white whale. Skin your eyes for him, men; look sharp for
white wa-ter; if ye see but a bubble, sing out.”

All this while Tasht-ego, Dag-goo, and Queequeg had looked on with even
more in-tense in-terest and sur-prise than the rest, and at the men-tion of
the wrinkled brow and crooked jaw they had star-ted as if each was
sep-ar-ately touched by some spe-cific re-col-lec-tion.

“Cap-tain Ahab,” said Tasht-ego, “that white whale must be the same that
some call Moby Dick.”

“Moby Dick?” shouted Ahab. “Do ye know the white whale then, Tash?”

“Does he fan-tail a little curi-ous, sir, be-fore he goes down?” said the
Gay-Header de-lib-er-ately.

“And has he a curi-ous spout, too,” said Dag-goo, “very bushy, even for a
par-ma-cetty, and mighty quick, Cap-tain Ahab?”

“And he have one, two, three—oh! good many iron in him hide, too,
Cap-tain,” cried Queequeg dis-join-tedly, “all twiske-tee be-twisk, like
him—him—” fal-ter-ing hard for a word, and screw-ing his hand round and
round as though un-cork-ing a bottle—“like him—him—”

“Cork-screw!” cried Ahab, “aye, Queequeg, the har-poons lie all twis-ted
and wrenched in him; aye, Dag-goo, his spout is a big one, like a whole
shock of wheat, and white as a pile of our Nan-tucket wool after the
great an-nual sheep-shear-ing; aye, Tasht-ego, and he fan-tails like a
split jib in a squall. Death and dev-ils! men, it is Moby Dick ye have
seen—Moby Dick—Moby Dick!”

“Cap-tain Ahab,” said Star-buck, who, with Stubb and Flask, had thus far
been eye-ing his su-per-ior with in-creas-ing sur-prise, but at last seemed
struck with a thought which some-what ex-plained all the won-der. “Cap-tain
Ahab, I have heard of Moby Dick—but it was not Moby Dick that took off
thy leg?”

“Who told thee that?” cried Ahab; then paus-ing, “Aye, Star-buck; aye, my
hearties all round; it was Moby Dick that dis-masted me; Moby Dick that
brought me to this dead stump I stand on now. Aye, aye,” he shouted
with a ter-rific, loud, an-imal sob, like that of a heart-stricken moose;
“Aye, aye! it was that ac-cursed white whale that razed me; made a poor
peg-ging lub-ber of me for ever and a day!” Then toss-ing both arms, with
meas-ure-less im-prec-a-tions he shouted out: “Aye, aye! and I’ll chase him
round Good Hope, and round the Horn, and round the Nor-way Mael-strom,
and round per-di-tion’s flames be-fore I give him up. And this is what ye
have shipped for, men! to chase that white whale on both sides of land,
and over all sides of earth, till he spouts black blood and rolls fin
out. What say ye, men, will ye splice hands on it, now? I think ye do
look brave.”

“Aye, aye!” shouted the har-poon-eers and sea-men, run-ning closer to the
ex-cited old man: “A sharp eye for the white whale; a sharp lance for
Moby Dick!”

“God bless ye,” he seemed to half sob and half shout. “God bless ye,
men. Ste-w-ard! go draw the great meas-ure of grog. But what’s this long
face about, Mr. Star-buck; wilt thou not chase the white whale? art not
game for Moby Dick?”

“I am game for his crooked jaw, and for the jaws of Death too, Cap-tain
Ahab, if it fairly comes in the way of the busi-ness we fol-low; but I
came here to hunt whales, not my com-mander’s ven-geance. How many
bar-rels will thy ven-geance yield thee even if thou get-test it, Cap-tain
Ahab? it will not fetch thee much in our Nan-tucket mar-ket.”

“Nan-tucket mar-ket! Hoot! But come closer, Star-buck; thou re-quirest a
little lower layer. If money’s to be the meas-urer, man, and the
ac-count-ants have com-puted their great count-ing-house the globe, by
gird-ling it with guineas, one to every three parts of an inch; then,
let me tell thee, that my ven-geance will fetch a great premium _here!_”

“He smites his chest,” whispered Stubb, “what’s that for? me-thinks it
rings most vast, but hol-low.”

“Ven-geance on a dumb brute!” cried Star-buck, “that simply smote thee
from blind-est in-stinct! Mad-ness! To be en-raged with a dumb thing,
Cap-tain Ahab, seems blas-phem-ous.”

“Hark ye yet again—the little lower layer. All vis-ible ob-jects, man,
are but as paste-board masks. But in each event—in the liv-ing act, the
un-doubted deed—there, some un-known but still reas-on-ing thing puts forth
the mould-ings of its fea-tures from be-hind the un-reas-on-ing mask. If man
will strike, strike through the mask! How can the pris-oner reach
out-side ex-cept by thrust-ing through the wall? To me, the white whale is
that wall, shoved near to me. So-me-times I think there’s naught bey-ond.
But ’tis enough. He tasks me; he heaps me; I see in him out-rageous
strength, with an in-scrut-able malice sinew-ing it. That in-scrut-able
thing is chiefly what I hate; and be the white whale agent, or be the
white whale prin-cipal, I will wreak that hate upon him. Talk not to me
of blas-phemy, man; I’d strike the sun if it in-sul-ted me. For could the
sun do that, then could I do the other; since there is ever a sort of
fair play herein, jeal-ousy presid-ing over all cre-ations. But not my
mas-ter, man, is even that fair play. Who’s over me? Truth hath no
con-fines. Take off thine eye! more in-tol-er-able than fiends’ glar-ings is
a dolt-ish stare! So, so; thou redden-est and palest; my heat has melted
thee to an-ger-glow. But look ye, Star-buck, what is said in heat, that
thing un-says it-self. There are men from whom warm words are small
in-dig-nity. I meant not to in-cense thee. Let it go. Look! see yon-der
Turk-ish cheeks of spot-ted tawn—liv-ing, breath-ing pic-tures painted by
the sun. The Pagan leo-pards—the un-reck-ing and un-wor-ship-ping things,
that live; and seek, and give no reas-ons for the tor-rid life they feel!
The crew, man, the crew! Are they not one and all with Ahab, in this
mat-ter of the whale? See Stubb! he laughs! See yon-der Chilian! he
snorts to think of it. Stand up amid the gen-eral hur-ricane, thy one
tost sap-ling can-not, Star-buck! And what is it? Reckon it. ’Tis but to
help strike a fin; no won-drous feat for Star-buck. What is it more? From
this one poor hunt, then, the best lance out of all Nan-tucket, surely
he will not hang back, when every fore-mast-hand has clutched a
whet-stone? Ah! con-strain-ings seize thee; I see! the bil-low lifts thee!
Speak, but speak!—Aye, aye! thy si-lence, then, _that_ voices thee.
(_Aside_) So-mething shot from my dilated nos-trils, he has in-haled it in
his lungs. Star-buck now is mine; can-not op-pose me now, without
re-bel-lion.”

“God keep me!—keep us all!” mur-mured Star-buck, lowly.

But in his joy at the en-chanted, ta-cit ac-qui-es-cence of the mate, Ahab
did not hear his fore-bod-ing in-voc-a-tion; nor yet the low laugh from the
hold; nor yet the pres-aging vi-bra-tions of the winds in the cord-age; nor
yet the hol-low flap of the sails against the masts, as for a mo-ment
their hearts sank in. For again Star-buck’s down-cast eyes lighted up
with the stub-born-ness of life; the sub-ter-ranean laugh died away; the
winds blew on; the sails filled out; the ship heaved and rolled as
be-fore. Ah, ye ad-mon-i-tions and warn-ings! why stay ye not when ye come?
But rather are ye pre-dic-tions than warn-ings, ye shad-ows! Yet not so
much pre-dic-tions from without, as veri-fic-a-tions of the fore-go-ing things
within. For with little ex-ternal to con-strain us, the in-ner-most
ne-ces-sit-ies in our be-ing, these still drive us on.

“The meas-ure! the meas-ure!” cried Ahab.

Re-ceiv-ing the brim-ming pew-ter, and turn-ing to the har-poon-eers, he
ordered them to pro-duce their weapons. Then ran-ging them be-fore him
near the cap-stan, with their har-poons in their hands, while his three
mates stood at his side with their lances, and the rest of the ship’s
com-pany formed a circle round the group; he stood for an in-stant
search-ingly eye-ing every man of his crew. But those wild eyes met his,
as the blood-shot eyes of the prairie wolves meet the eye of their
leader, ere he rushes on at their head in the trail of the bison; but,
alas! only to fall into the hid-den snare of the In-dian.

“Drink and pass!” he cried, hand-ing the heavy charged flagon to the
nearest sea-man. “The crew alone now drink. Round with it, round! Short
draughts—long swal-lows, men; ’tis hot as Satan’s hoof. So, so; it goes
round ex-cel-lently. It spir-al-izes in ye; forks out at the
ser-pent-snap-ping eye. Well done; al-most drained. That way it went, this
way it comes. Hand it me—here’s a hol-low! Men, ye seem the years; so
brim-ming life is gulped and gone. Ste-w-ard, re-fill!

“At-tend now, my braves. I have mustered ye all round this cap-stan; and
ye mates, flank me with your lances; and ye har-poon-eers, stand there
with your irons; and ye, stout mar-iners, ring me in, that I may in some
sort re-vive a noble cus-tom of my fish-er-man fath-ers be-fore me. O men,
you will yet see that—Ha! boy, come back? bad pen-nies come not sooner.
Hand it me. Why, now, this pew-ter had run brim-ming again, wer’t not
thou St. Vitus’ imp—away, thou ague!

“Ad-vance, ye mates! Cross your lances full be-fore me. Well done! Let me
touch the axis.” So say-ing, with ex-ten-ded arm, he grasped the three
level, ra-di-at-ing lances at their crossed centre; while so do-ing,
sud-denly and nervously twitched them; mean-while, glan-cing in-tently from
Star-buck to Stubb; from Stubb to Flask. It seemed as though, by some
name-less, in-terior vo-li-tion, he would fain have shocked into them the
same fiery emo-tion ac-cu-mu-lated within the Ley-den jar of his own
mag-netic life. The three mates quailed be-fore his strong, sus-tained,
and mys-tic as-pect. Stubb and Flask looked side-ways from him; the hon-est
eye of Star-buck fell down-right.

“In vain!” cried Ahab; “but, maybe, ’tis well. For did ye three but
once take the full-forced shock, then mine own elec-tric thing, _that_
had per-haps ex-pired from out me. Per-chance, too, it would have dropped
ye dead. Per-chance ye need it not. Down lances! And now, ye mates, I do
ap-point ye three cup-bear-ers to my three pa-gan kins-men there—yon three
most hon-or-able gen-tle-men and no-ble-men, my vali-ant har-poon-eers. Dis-dain
the task? What, when the great Pope washes the feet of beg-gars, us-ing
his tiara for ewer? Oh, my sweet car-din-als! your own con-des-cen-sion,
_that_ shall bend ye to it. I do not or-der ye; ye will it. Cut your
seiz-ings and draw the poles, ye har-poon-eers!”

Si-lently obey-ing the or-der, the three har-poon-eers now stood with the
de-tached iron part of their har-poons, some three feet long, held, barbs
up, be-fore him.

“Stab me not with that keen steel! Cant them; cant them over! know ye
not the gob-let end? Turn up the socket! So, so; now, ye cup-bear-ers,
ad-vance. The irons! take them; hold them while I fill!” Forth-with,
slowly go-ing from one of-ficer to the other, he brimmed the har-poon
sock-ets with the fiery wa-ters from the pew-ter.

“Now, three to three, ye stand. Com-mend the mur-der-ous chalices! Bestow
them, ye who are now made parties to this in-dis-sol-uble league. Ha!
Star-buck! but the deed is done! Yon rat-i-fy-ing sun now waits to sit upon
it. Drink, ye har-poon-eers! drink and swear, ye men that man the
death-ful whale-boat’s bow—Death to Moby Dick! God hunt us all, if we do
not hunt Moby Dick to his death!” The long, barbed steel gob-lets were
lif-ted; and to cries and mal-edic-tions against the white whale, the
spir-its were sim-ul-tan-eously quaffed down with a hiss. Star-buck paled,
and turned, and shivered. Once more, and fi-nally, the re-plen-ished
pew-ter went the rounds among the frantic crew; when, wav-ing his free
hand to them, they all dis-persed; and Ahab re-tired within his cabin.


CHAPTER 37. Sun-set.

_The cabin; by the stern win-dows; Ahab sit-ting alone, and gaz-ing out_.

I leave a white and tur-bid wake; pale wa-ters, paler cheeks, where’er I
sail. The en-vi-ous bil-lows side-long swell to whelm my track; let them;
but first I pass.

Yon-der, by ever-brim-ming gob-let’s rim, the warm waves blush like wine.
The gold brow plumbs the blue. The diver sun—slow dived from noon—goes
down; my soul mounts up! she wear-ies with her end-less hill. Is, then,
the crown too heavy that I wear? this Iron Crown of Lom-bardy. Yet is it
bright with many a gem; I the wearer, see not its far flash-ings; but
darkly feel that I wear that, that dazzlingly con-founds. ’Tis iron—that
I know—not gold. ’Tis split, too—that I feel; the jagged edge galls me
so, my brain seems to beat against the solid metal; aye, steel skull,
mine; the sort that needs no hel-met in the most brain-bat-ter-ing fight!

Dry heat upon my brow? Oh! time was, when as the sun-rise nobly spurred
me, so the sun-set soothed. No more. This lovely light, it lights not
me; all love-li-ness is an-guish to me, since I can ne’er en-joy. Gif-ted
with the high per-cep-tion, I lack the low, en-joy-ing power; damned, most
subtly and most ma-lig-nantly! damned in the midst of Paradise! Good
night—good night! (_wav-ing his hand, he moves from the win-dow_.)

’Twas not so hard a task. I thought to find one stub-born, at the least;
but my one cogged circle fits into all their vari-ous wheels, and they
re-volve. Or, if you will, like so many ant-hills of powder, they all
stand be-fore me; and I their match. Oh, hard! that to fire oth-ers, the
match it-self must needs be wast-ing! What I’ve dared, I’ve willed; and
what I’ve willed, I’ll do! They think me mad—Star-buck does; but I’m
de-moniac, I am mad-ness maddened! That wild mad-ness that’s only calm to
com-pre-hend it-self! The proph-ecy was that I should be dis-membered;
and—Aye! I lost this leg. I now proph-esy that I will dis-mem-ber my
dis-mem-berer. Now, then, be the prophet and the ful-filler one. That’s
more than ye, ye great gods, ever were. I laugh and hoot at ye, ye
cricket-play-ers, ye pu-gil-ists, ye deaf Burkes and blinded Bendi-goes! I
will not say as school-boys do to bul-lies—Take some one of your own
size; don’t pom-mel _me!_ No, ye’ve knocked me down, and I am up again;
but _ye_ have run and hid-den. Come forth from be-hind your cot-ton bags!
I have no long gun to reach ye. Come, Ahab’s com-pli-ments to ye; come
and see if ye can swerve me. Swerve me? ye can-not swerve me, else ye
swerve yourselves! man has ye there. Swerve me? The path to my fixed
pur-pose is laid with iron rails, whereon my soul is grooved to run.
Over un-soun-ded gorges, through the rifled hearts of moun-tains, un-der
tor-rents’ beds, un-err-ingly I rush! Naught’s an obstacle, naught’s an
angle to the iron way!


CHAPTER 38. Dusk.

_By the Main-mast; Star-buck lean-ing against it_.

My soul is more than matched; she’s over-manned; and by a mad-man!
In-suf-fer-able sting, that san-ity should ground arms on such a field! But
he drilled deep down, and blas-ted all my reason out of me! I think I
see his im-pi-ous end; but feel that I must help him to it. Will I, nill
I, the in-ef-fable thing has tied me to him; tows me with a cable I have
no knife to cut. Hor-rible old man! Who’s over him, he cries;—aye, he
would be a demo-crat to all above; look, how he lords it over all be-low!
Oh! I plainly see my miser-able of-fice,—to obey, re-belling; and worse
yet, to hate with touch of pity! For in his eyes I read some lurid woe
would shrivel me up, had I it. Yet is there hope. Time and tide flow
wide. The hated whale has the round wa-tery world to swim in, as the
small gold-fish has its glassy globe. His heaven-in-sult-ing pur-pose, God
may wedge aside. I would up heart, were it not like lead. But my whole
clock’s run down; my heart the all-con-trolling weight, I have no key to
lift again.

[_A burst of rev-elry from the fore-castle_.]

Oh, God! to sail with such a hea-then crew that have small touch of
hu-man moth-ers in them! Whelped some-where by the shark-ish sea. The white
whale is their demi-g-or-gon. Hark! the in-fernal or-gies! that rev-elry is
for-ward! mark the un-fal-ter-ing si-lence aft! Me-thinks it pic-tures life.
Fore-most through the spark-ling sea shoots on the gay, em-battled,
ban-ter-ing bow, but only to drag dark Ahab after it, where he broods
within his stern-ward cabin, buil-ded over the dead wa-ter of the wake,
and fur-ther on, hunted by its wolfish gurg-lings. The long howl thrills
me through! Peace! ye rev-el-lers, and set the watch! Oh, life! ’tis in
an hour like this, with soul beat down and held to know-ledge,—as wild,
un-tutored things are forced to feed—Oh, life! ’tis now that I do feel
the lat-ent hor-ror in thee! but ’tis not me! that hor-ror’s out of me!
and with the soft feel-ing of the hu-man in me, yet will I try to fight
ye, ye grim, phantom fu-tures! Stand by me, hold me, bind me, O ye
blessed in-flu-ences!


CHAPTER 39. First Night-Watch.

Fore-Top.

(_Stubb solus, and mend-ing a brace_.)

Ha! ha! ha! ha! hem! clear my throat!—I’ve been think-ing over it ever
since, and that ha, ha’s the fi-nal con-sequence. Why so? Be-cause a
laugh’s the wisest, easi-est an-swer to all that’s queer; and come what
will, one com-fort’s al-ways left—that un-fail-ing com-fort is, it’s all
pre-des-tin-ated. I heard not all his talk with Star-buck; but to my poor
eye Star-buck then looked some-thing as I the other even-ing felt. Be sure
the old Mogul has fixed him, too. I twigged it, knew it; had had the
gift, might read-ily have proph-esied it—for when I clapped my eye upon
his skull I saw it. Well, Stubb, _wise_ Stubb—that’s my title—well,
Stubb, what of it, Stubb? Here’s a car-case. I know not all that may be
com-ing, but be it what it will, I’ll go to it laugh-ing. Such a wag-gish
leer-ing as lurks in all your hor-ribles! I feel funny. Fa, la! lirra,
skirra! What’s my juicy little pear at home do-ing now? Cry-ing its eyes
out?—Giv-ing a party to the last ar-rived har-poon-eers, I dare say, gay as
a frig-ate’s pen-nant, and so am I—fa, la! lirra, skirra! Oh—


We’ll drink to-night with hearts as light, To love, as gay and fleet-ing
As bubbles that swim, on the beaker’s brim, And break on the lips while
meet-ing.



A brave stave that—who calls? Mr. Star-buck? Aye, aye, sir—(_Aside_)
he’s my su-per-ior, he has his too, if I’m not mis-taken.—Aye, aye, sir,
just through with this job—com-ing.


CHAPTER 40. Mid-night, Fore-castle.

HARPOONEERS AND SAILORS.

(_Fore-sail rises and dis-cov-ers the watch stand-ing, loun-ging, lean-ing,
and ly-ing in vari-ous at-ti-tudes, all singing in chor-us_.)


  Farewell and adieu to you, Span-ish ladies! Farewell and adieu to you,
  ladies of Spain! Our cap-tain’s com-manded.—



1ST NANTUCKET SAILOR. Oh, boys, don’t be sen-ti-mental; it’s bad for the
di-ges-tion! Take a tonic, fol-low me!

(_Sings, and all fol-low._)


 Our cap-tain stood upon the deck, A spy-glass in his hand, A view-ing of
 those gal-lant whales That blew at every strand. Oh, your tubs in your
 boats, my boys, And by your braces stand, And we’ll have one of those
 fine whales, Hand, boys, over hand! So, be cheery, my lads! may your
 hearts never fail! While the bold har-pooner is strik-ing the whale!



MATE’S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK. Eight bells there, for-ward!

2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR. Avast the chorus! Eight bells there! d’ye hear,
bell-boy? Strike the bell eight, thou Pip! thou black-ling! and let me
call the watch. I’ve the sort of mouth for that—the hogshead mouth. So,
so, (_thrusts his head down the scuttle_,) Star-bo-l-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y!
Eight bells there be-low! Tumble up!

DUTCH SAILOR. Grand snooz-ing to-night, maty; fat night for that. I mark
this in our old Mogul’s wine; it’s quite as dead-en-ing to some as
fil-lip-ing to oth-ers. We sing; they sleep—aye, lie down there, like
ground-tier butts. At ’em again! There, take this cop-per-pump, and hail
’em through it. Tell ’em to avast dream-ing of their lasses. Tell ’em
it’s the re-sur-rec-tion; they must kiss their last, and come to judg-ment.
That’s the way—_that’s_ it; thy throat ain’t spoiled with eat-ing
Am-s-ter-dam but-ter.

FRENCH SAILOR. Hist, boys! let’s have a jig or two be-fore we ride to
an-chor in Blanket Bay. What say ye? There comes the other watch. Stand
by all legs! Pip! little Pip! hur-rah with your tam-bour-ine!

PIP. (_Sulky and sleepy._) Don’t know where it is.

FRENCH SAILOR. Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears. Jig it, men, I
say; merry’s the word; hur-rah! Damn me, won’t you dance? Form, now,
In-dian-file, and gal-lop into the double-shuffle? Throw yourselves!
Legs! legs!

ICELAND SAILOR. I don’t like your floor, maty; it’s too springy to my
taste. I’m used to ice-floors. I’m sorry to throw cold wa-ter on the
sub-ject; but ex-cuse me.

MALTESE SAILOR. Me too; where’s your girls? Who but a fool would take
his left hand by his right, and say to him-self, how d’ye do? Part-ners!
I must have part-ners!

SICILIAN SAILOR. Aye; girls and a green!—then I’ll hop with ye; yea,
turn grasshop-per!

LONG-ISLAND SAILOR. Well, well, ye sulkies, there’s plenty more of us.
Hoe corn when you may, say I. All legs go to har-vest soon. Ah! here
comes the mu-sic; now for it!

AZORE SAILOR. (_As-cend-ing, and pitch-ing the tam-bour-ine up the
scuttle_.) Here you are, Pip; and there’s the wind-lass-bitts; up you
mount! Now, boys! (_The half of them dance to the tam-bour-ine; some go
be-low; some sleep or lie among the coils of rig-ging. Oaths a-plenty_.)

AZORE SAILOR. (_Dan-cing_) Go it, Pip! Bang it, bell-boy! Rig it, dig
it, stig it, quig it, bell-boy! Make fire-flies; break the jin-glers!

PIP. Jin-glers, you say?—there goes an-other, dropped off; I pound it so.

CHINA SAILOR. Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away; make a pa-goda of
thy-self.

FRENCH SAILOR. Merry-mad! Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump through
it! Split jibs! tear yourselves!

TASHTEGO. (_Quietly smoking._) That’s a white man; he calls that fun:
humph! I save my sweat.

OLD MANX SAILOR. I won-der whether those jolly lads be-think them of what
they are dan-cing over. I’ll dance over your grave, I will—that’s the
bitterest threat of your night-wo-men, that beat head-winds round
corners. O Christ! to think of the green navies and the green-skulled
crews! Well, well; be-like the whole world’s a ball, as you schol-ars
have it; and so ’tis right to make one ball-room of it. Dance on, lads,
you’re young; I was once.

3D NANTUCKET SAILOR. Spell oh!—whew! this is worse than pulling after
whales in a calm—give us a whiff, Tash.

(_They cease dan-cing, and gather in clusters. Mean-time the sky
darkens—the wind rises_.)

LASCAR SAILOR. By Brahma! boys, it’ll be douse sail soon. The sky-born,
high-tide Ganges turned to wind! Thou show-est thy black brow, Seeva!

MALTESE SAILOR. (_Re-clin-ing and shak-ing his cap_.) It’s the waves—the
snow’s caps turn to jig it now. They’ll shake their tas-sels soon. Now
would all the waves were wo-men, then I’d go drown, and chassee with
them ever-more! There’s naught so sweet on earth—heaven may not match
it!—as those swift glances of warm, wild bos-oms in the dance, when the
over-ar-bor-ing arms hide such ripe, burst-ing grapes.

SICILIAN SAILOR. (_Re-clin-ing_.) Tell me not of it! Hark ye, lad—fleet
in-ter-la-cings of the limbs—lithe sway-ings—coy-ings—flut-ter-ings! lip!
heart! hip! all graze: un-ceas-ing touch and go! not taste, ob-serve ye,
else come sati-ety. Eh, Pagan? (_Nudging_.)

TAHITAN SAILOR. (_Re-clin-ing on a mat_.) Hail, holy na-ked-ness of our
dan-cing girls!—the Heeva-Heeva! Ah! low veiled, high palmed Tahiti! I
still rest me on thy mat, but the soft soil has slid! I saw thee woven
in the wood, my mat! green the first day I brought ye thence; now worn
and wil-ted quite. Ah me!—not thou nor I can bear the change! How then,
if so be trans-planted to yon sky? Hear I the roar-ing streams from
Piro-hitee’s peak of spears, when they leap down the crags and drown the
vil-lages?—The blast! the blast! Up, spine, and meet it! (_Leaps to his
feet_.)

PORTUGUESE SAILOR. How the sea rolls swash-ing ’gainst the side! Stand
by for reef-ing, hearties! the winds are just cross-ing swords, pell-mell
they’ll go lunging presently.

DANISH SAILOR. Crack, crack, old ship! so long as thou crack-est, thou
hold-est! Well done! The mate there holds ye to it stiffly. He’s no more
afraid than the isle fort at Cat-tegat, put there to fight the Baltic
with storm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes!

4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR. He has his or-ders, mind ye that. I heard old Ahab
tell him he must al-ways kill a squall, some-thing as they burst a
wa-ter-spout with a pis-tol—fire your ship right into it!

ENGLISH SAILOR. Blood! but that old man’s a grand old cove! We are the
lads to hunt him up his whale!

ALL. Aye! aye!

OLD MANX SAILOR. How the three pines shake! Pines are the hard-est sort
of tree to live when shif-ted to any other soil, and here there’s none
but the crew’s cursed clay. Steady, helms-man! steady. This is the sort
of weather when brave hearts snap ashore, and keeled hulls split at
sea. Our cap-tain has his birth-mark; look yon-der, boys, there’s an-other
in the sky—lurid-like, ye see, all else pitch black.

DAGGOO. What of that? Who’s afraid of black’s afraid of me! I’m
quar-ried out of it!

SPANISH SAILOR. (_Aside_.) He wants to bully, ah!—the old grudge makes
me touchy (_Ad-van-cing_.) Aye, har-poon-eer, thy race is the un-deni-able
dark side of man-kind—dev-il-ish dark at that. No of-fence.

DAGGOO (_grimly_). None.

ST. JAGO’S SAILOR. That Span-iard’s mad or drunk. But that can’t be, or
else in his one case our old Mogul’s fire-wa-ters are some-what long in
work-ing.

5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR. What’s that I saw—light-ning? Yes.

SPANISH SAILOR. No; Dag-goo show-ing his teeth.

DAGGOO (_s-pring-ing_). Swal-low thine, man-ni-kin! White skin, white liver!

SPANISH SAILOR (_meet-ing him_). Knife thee heart-ily! big frame, small
spirit!

ALL. A row! a row! a row!

TASHTEGO (_with a whiff_). A row a’low, and a row aloft—Gods and
men—both brawl-ers! Humph!

BELFAST SAILOR. A row! ar-rah a row! The Vir-gin be blessed, a row!
Plunge in with ye!

ENGLISH SAILOR. Fair play! Sn-atch the Span-iard’s knife! A ring, a ring!

OLD MANX SAILOR. Ready formed. There! the ringed ho-ri-zon. In that ring
Cain struck Abel. Sweet work, right work! No? Why then, God, mad’st
thou the ring?

MATE’S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK. Hands by the hal-yards! in
top-gal-lant sails! Stand by to reef top-sails!

ALL. The squall! the squall! jump, my jol-lies! (_They scat-ter_.)

PIP (_shrink-ing un-der the wind-lass_). Jol-lies? Lord help such jol-lies!
Crish, crash! there goes the jib-stay! Blang-whang! God! Duck lower,
Pip, here comes the royal yard! It’s worse than be-ing in the whirled
woods, the last day of the year! Who’d go climb-ing after chest-nuts now?
But there they go, all curs-ing, and here I don’t. Fine pro-spects to
’em; they’re on the road to heaven. Hold on hard! Jim-mini, what a
squall! But those chaps there are worse yet—they are your white
squalls, they. White squalls? white whale, shirr! shirr! Here have I
heard all their chat just now, and the white whale—shirr! shirr!—but
spoken of once! and only this even-ing—it makes me jingle all over like
my tam-bour-ine—that anaconda of an old man swore ’em in to hunt him! Oh,
thou big white God aloft there some-where in yon dark-ness, have mercy on
this small black boy down here; pre-serve him from all men that have no
bowels to feel fear!


CHAPTER 41. Moby Dick.

I, Ish-mael, was one of that crew; my shouts had gone up with the rest;
my oath had been wel-ded with theirs; and stronger I shouted, and more
did I ham-mer and clinch my oath, be-cause of the dread in my soul. A
wild, mys-tical, sym-path-et-ical feel-ing was in me; Ahab’s quench-less feud
seemed mine. With greedy ears I learned the his-tory of that mur-der-ous
mon-ster against whom I and all the oth-ers had taken our oaths of
vi-ol-ence and re-venge.

For some time past, though at in-ter-vals only, the un-ac-com-pan-ied,
se-cluded White Whale had haunted those un-civ-il-ized seas mostly
fre-quen-ted by the Sperm Whale fish-er-men. But not all of them knew of
his ex-ist-ence; only a few of them, com-par-at-ively, had know-ingly seen
him; while the num-ber who as yet had ac-tu-ally and know-ingly given
battle to him, was small in-deed. For, ow-ing to the large num-ber of
whale-cruis-ers; the dis-orderly way they were sprinkled over the en-tire
wa-tery cir-cum-fer-ence, many of them ad-ven-tur-ously push-ing their quest
along sol-it-ary lat-it-udes, so as sel-dom or never for a whole twelve-month
or more on a stretch, to en-counter a single news-telling sail of any
sort; the in-or-din-ate length of each sep-ar-ate voy-age; the ir-reg-u-lar-ity
of the times of sail-ing from home; all these, with other cir-cum-stances,
dir-ect and in-dir-ect, long ob-struc-ted the spread through the whole
world-wide whal-ing-fleet of the spe-cial in-di-vidu-al-iz-ing tid-ings
con-cern-ing Moby Dick. It was hardly to be doubted, that sev-eral ves-sels
re-por-ted to have en-countered, at such or such a time, or on such or
such a me-ridian, a Sperm Whale of un-com-mon mag-nitude and ma-lig-nity,
which whale, after do-ing great mis-chief to his as-sail-ants, had
com-pletely es-caped them; to some minds it was not an un-fair
pre-sump-tion, I say, that the whale in ques-tion must have been no other
than Moby Dick. Yet as of late the Sperm Whale fish-ery had been marked
by vari-ous and not un-fre-quent in-stances of great fe-ro-city, cun-ning, and
malice in the mon-ster at-tacked; there-fore it was, that those who by
ac-ci-dent ig-nor-antly gave battle to Moby Dick; such hunters, per-haps,
for the most part, were con-tent to ascribe the pe-cu-liar ter-ror he bred,
more, as it were, to the per-ils of the Sperm Whale fish-ery at large,
than to the in-di-vidual cause. In that way, mostly, the dis-astrous
en-counter between Ahab and the whale had hitherto been pop-ularly
re-garded.

And as for those who, pre-vi-ously hear-ing of the White Whale, by chance
caught sight of him; in the be-gin-ning of the thing they had every one
of them, al-most, as boldly and fear-lessly lowered for him, as for any
other whale of that spe-cies. But at length, such calam-it-ies did en-sue
in these as-saults—not re-stric-ted to sprained wrists and ankles, broken
limbs, or de-vour-ing am-pu-ta-tions—but fatal to the last de-gree of
fatal-ity; those re-peated dis-astrous re-pulses, all ac-cu-mu-lat-ing and
pil-ing their ter-rors upon Moby Dick; those things had gone far to shake
the forti-tude of many brave hunters, to whom the story of the White
Whale had even-tu-ally come.

Nor did wild ru-mors of all sorts fail to ex-ag-ger-ate, and still the more
hor-rify the true his-tor-ies of these deadly en-coun-ters. For not only do
fab-ulous ru-mors nat-ur-ally grow out of the very body of all sur-pris-ing
ter-rible events,—as the smit-ten tree gives birth to its fungi; but, in
mari-time life, far more than in that of terra firma, wild ru-mors
abound, wherever there is any ad-equate real-ity for them to cling to.
And as the sea sur-passes the land in this mat-ter, so the whale fish-ery
sur-passes every other sort of mari-time life, in the won-der-ful-ness and
fear-ful-ness of the ru-mors which some-times cir-cu-late there. For not only
are whale-men as a body un-ex-empt from that ig-nor-ance and
su-per-sti-tious-ness hered-it-ary to all sail-ors; but of all sail-ors, they
are by all odds the most dir-ectly brought into con-tact with whatever is
ap-pallingly as-ton-ish-ing in the sea; face to face they not only eye its
greatest mar-vels, but, hand to jaw, give battle to them. Alone, in such
re-motest wa-ters, that though you sailed a thou-sand miles, and passed a
thou-sand shores, you would not come to any chiseled hearth-stone, or
aught hos-pit-able be-neath that part of the sun; in such lat-it-udes and
lon-git-udes, pur-su-ing too such a call-ing as he does, the whale-man is
wrapped by in-flu-ences all tend-ing to make his fancy preg-nant with many
a mighty birth.

No won-der, then, that ever gath-er-ing volume from the mere transit over
the widest wa-tery spaces, the out-blown ru-mors of the White Whale did in
the end in-cor-por-ate with them-selves all man-ner of mor-bid hints, and
half-formed fœtal sug-ges-tions of su-per-nat-ural agen-cies, which
even-tu-ally in-ves-ted Moby Dick with new ter-rors un-bor-rowed from any-thing
that vis-ibly ap-pears. So that in many cases such a panic did he fi-nally
strike, that few who by those ru-mors, at least, had heard of the White
Whale, few of those hunters were will-ing to en-counter the per-ils of his
jaw.

But there were still other and more vi-tal prac-tical in-flu-ences at work.
Not even at the present day has the ori-ginal prestige of the Sperm
Whale, as fear-fully dis-tin-guished from all other spe-cies of the
le-viathan, died out of the minds of the whale-men as a body. There are
those this day among them, who, though in-tel-li-gent and cour-ageous
enough in of-fer-ing battle to the Green-land or Right whale, would
per-haps—either from pro-fes-sional in-ex-per-i-ence, or in-com-pet-ency, or
timid-ity, de-cline a con-test with the Sperm Whale; at any rate, there
are plenty of whale-men, es-pe-cially among those whal-ing na-tions not
sail-ing un-der the Amer-ican flag, who have never hos-tilely en-countered
the Sperm Whale, but whose sole know-ledge of the le-viathan is
re-stric-ted to the ig-noble mon-ster prim-it-ively pur-sued in the North;
seated on their hatches, these men will hearken with a child-ish
fireside in-terest and awe, to the wild, strange tales of South-ern
whal-ing. Nor is the pre-em-in-ent tre-mend-ous-ness of the great Sperm Whale
any-where more feel-ingly com-pre-hen-ded, than on board of those prows
which stem him.

And as if the now tested real-ity of his might had in former le-gendary
times thrown its shadow be-fore it; we find some book
nat-ur-al-ists—Olassen and Povel-son—de-clar-ing the Sperm Whale not only to
be a con-sterna-tion to every other creature in the sea, but also to be
so in-cred-ibly fe-ro-cious as con-tinu-ally to be athirst for hu-man blood.
Nor even down to so late a time as Cuvier’s, were these or al-most
sim-ilar im-pres-sions ef-faced. For in his Nat-ural His-tory, the Baron
him-self af-firms that at sight of the Sperm Whale, all fish (sharks
in-cluded) are “struck with the most lively ter-rors,” and “of-ten in the
pre-cip-it-ancy of their flight dash them-selves against the rocks with
such vi-ol-ence as to cause in-stant-an-eous death.” And how-ever the gen-eral
ex-per-i-ences in the fish-ery may amend such re-ports as these; yet in
their full ter-rible-ness, even to the bloodthirsty item of Povel-son, the
su-per-sti-tious be-lief in them is, in some vi-cis-situdes of their
vo-ca-tion, re-vived in the minds of the hunters.

So that over-awed by the ru-mors and portents con-cern-ing him, not a few
of the fish-er-men re-called, in ref-er-ence to Moby Dick, the earlier days
of the Sperm Whale fish-ery, when it was of-ten-times hard to in-duce long
prac-tised Right whale-men to em-bark in the per-ils of this new and dar-ing
war-fare; such men protest-ing that al-though other le-viath-ans might be
hope-fully pur-sued, yet to chase and point lance at such an ap-par-i-tion
as the Sperm Whale was not for mor-tal man. That to at-tempt it, would be
in-ev-it-ably to be torn into a quick etern-ity. On this head, there are
some re-mark-able doc-u-ments that may be con-sul-ted.

Never-the-less, some there were, who even in the face of these things
were ready to give chase to Moby Dick; and a still greater num-ber who,
chan-cing only to hear of him dis-tantly and vaguely, without the
spe-cific de-tails of any cer-tain calam-ity, and without su-per-sti-tious
ac-com-pani-ments, were suf-fi-ciently hardy not to flee from the battle if
offered.

One of the wild sug-ges-tions re-ferred to, as at last com-ing to be linked
with the White Whale in the minds of the su-per-sti-tiously in-clined, was
the un-earthly con-ceit that Moby Dick was ubi-quit-ous; that he had
ac-tu-ally been en-countered in op-pos-ite lat-it-udes at one and the same
in-stant of time.

Nor, cred-u-lous as such minds must have been, was this con-ceit
al-to-gether without some faint show of su-per-sti-tious prob-ab-il-ity. For as
the secrets of the cur-rents in the seas have never yet been di-vulged,
even to the most eru-dite re-search; so the hid-den ways of the Sperm
Whale when be-neath the sur-face re-main, in great part, un-ac-count-able to
his pur-suers; and from time to time have ori-gin-ated the most curi-ous
and con-tra-dict-ory spec-u-la-tions re-gard-ing them, es-pe-cially con-cern-ing
the mys-tic modes whereby, after sound-ing to a great depth, he
trans-ports him-self with such vast swift-ness to the most widely dis-tant
points.

It is a thing well known to both Amer-ican and Eng-lish whale-ships, and
as well a thing placed upon au-thor-it-at-ive re-cord years ago by Scoresby,
that some whales have been cap-tured far north in the Pa-cific, in whose
bod-ies have been found the barbs of har-poons dar-ted in the Green-land
seas. Nor is it to be gain-said, that in some of these in-stances it has
been de-clared that the in-ter-val of time between the two as-saults could
not have ex-ceeded very many days. Hence, by in-fer-ence, it has been
be-lieved by some whale-men, that the Nor’ West Pas-sage, so long a
prob-lem to man, was never a prob-lem to the whale. So that here, in the
real liv-ing ex-per-i-ence of liv-ing men, the prodi-gies re-lated in old
times of the in-land Strello moun-tain in Por-tugal (near whose top there
was said to be a lake in which the wrecks of ships floated up to the
sur-face); and that still more won-der-ful story of the Areth-usa foun-tain
near Syra-cuse (whose wa-ters were be-lieved to have come from the Holy
Land by an un-der-ground pas-sage); these fab-ulous nar-ra-tions are al-most
fully equalled by the real-it-ies of the whale-men.

Forced into fa-mili-ar-ity, then, with such prodi-gies as these; and
know-ing that after re-peated, in-trepid as-saults, the White Whale had
es-caped alive; it can-not be much mat-ter of sur-prise that some whale-men
should go still fur-ther in their su-per-sti-tions; de-clar-ing Moby Dick not
only ubi-quit-ous, but im-mor-tal (for im-mor-tal-ity is but ubi-quity in
time); that though groves of spears should be planted in his flanks, he
would still swim away un-harmed; or if in-deed he should ever be made to
spout thick blood, such a sight would be but a ghastly de-cep-tion; for
again in un-ensan-guined bil-lows hun-dreds of leagues away, his un-sul-lied
jet would once more be seen.

But even stripped of these su-per-nat-ural sur-misings, there was enough in
the earthly make and in-con-test-able char-ac-ter of the mon-ster to strike
the ima-gin-a-tion with un-wonted power. For, it was not so much his
un-com-mon bulk that so much dis-tin-guished him from other sperm whales,
but, as was else-where thrown out—a pe-cu-liar snow-white wrinkled
fore-head, and a high, pyr-amidical white hump. These were his prom-in-ent
fea-tures; the tokens whereby, even in the lim-it-less, un-charted seas, he
re-vealed his iden-tity, at a long dis-tance, to those who knew him.

The rest of his body was so streaked, and spot-ted, and marbled with the
same shrouded hue, that, in the end, he had gained his dis-tinct-ive
ap-pel-la-tion of the White Whale; a name, in-deed, lit-er-ally jus-ti-fied by
his vivid as-pect, when seen glid-ing at high noon through a dark blue
sea, leav-ing a milky-way wake of creamy foam, all spangled with golden
gleam-ings.

Nor was it his un-wonted mag-nitude, nor his re-mark-able hue, nor yet his
de-formed lower jaw, that so much in-ves-ted the whale with nat-ural
ter-ror, as that un-exampled, in-tel-li-gent ma-lig-nity which, ac-cord-ing to
spe-cific ac-counts, he had over and over again evinced in his as-saults.
More than all, his treach-er-ous re-treats struck more of dis-may than
per-haps aught else. For, when swim-ming be-fore his ex-ult-ing pur-suers,
with every ap-par-ent symp-tom of alarm, he had sev-eral times been known
to turn round sud-denly, and, bear-ing down upon them, either stave their
boats to splin-ters, or drive them back in con-sterna-tion to their ship.

Already sev-eral fatal-it-ies had at-ten-ded his chase. But though sim-ilar
dis-asters, how-ever little bruited ashore, were by no means un-usual in
the fish-ery; yet, in most in-stances, such seemed the White Whale’s
in-fernal afore-thought of fe-ro-city, that every dis-mem-ber-ing or death
that he caused, was not wholly re-garded as hav-ing been in-flic-ted by an
un-in-tel-li-gent agent.

Judge, then, to what pitches of in-flamed, dis-trac-ted fury the minds of
his more des-per-ate hunters were im-pelled, when amid the chips of chewed
boats, and the sink-ing limbs of torn com-rades, they swam out of the
white curds of the whale’s dire-ful wrath into the se-rene, ex-as-per-at-ing
sun-light, that smiled on, as if at a birth or a bridal.

His three boats stove around him, and oars and men both whirl-ing in the
ed-dies; one cap-tain, seiz-ing the line-knife from his broken prow, had
dashed at the whale, as an Arkan-sas du-el-list at his foe, blindly
seek-ing with a six inch blade to reach the fathom-deep life of the
whale. That cap-tain was Ahab. And then it was, that sud-denly sweep-ing
his sickle-shaped lower jaw be-neath him, Moby Dick had reaped away
Ahab’s leg, as a mower a blade of grass in the field. No turbaned Turk,
no hired Vene-tian or Malay, could have smote him with more seem-ing
malice. Small reason was there to doubt, then, that ever since that
al-most fatal en-counter, Ahab had cher-ished a wild vin-dict-ive-ness
against the whale, all the more fell for that in his frantic mor-bid-ness
he at last came to identify with him, not only all his bod-ily woes, but
all his in-tel-lec-tual and spir-itual ex-as-per-a-tions. The White Whale swam
be-fore him as the mono-ma-niac in-carn-a-tion of all those ma-li-cious
agen-cies which some deep men feel eat-ing in them, till they are left
liv-ing on with half a heart and half a lung. That in-tan-gible ma-lig-nity
which has been from the be-gin-ning; to whose domin-ion even the mod-ern
Chris-ti-ans ascribe one-half of the worlds; which the an-cient Ophites of
the east rev-er-enced in their statue devil;—Ahab did not fall down and
wor-ship it like them; but de-li-ri-ously trans-fer-ring its idea to the
ab-horred white whale, he pit-ted him-self, all mu-til-ated, against it. All
that most mad-dens and tor-ments; all that stirs up the lees of things;
all truth with malice in it; all that cracks the sinews and cakes the
brain; all the subtle de-mon-isms of life and thought; all evil, to crazy
Ahab, were vis-ibly per-son-i-fied, and made prac-tic-ally as-sail-able in Moby
Dick. He piled upon the whale’s white hump the sum of all the gen-eral
rage and hate felt by his whole race from Adam down; and then, as if
his chest had been a mor-tar, he burst his hot heart’s shell upon it.

It is not prob-able that this mono-mania in him took its in-stant rise at
the pre-cise time of his bod-ily dis-mem-ber-ment. Then, in dart-ing at the
mon-ster, knife in hand, he had but given loose to a sud-den, pas-sion-ate,
cor-poral an-im-os-ity; and when he re-ceived the stroke that tore him, he
prob-ably but felt the ag-on-iz-ing bod-ily la-cer-a-tion, but noth-ing more.
Yet, when by this col-li-sion forced to turn to-wards home, and for long
months of days and weeks, Ahab and an-guish lay stretched to-gether in
one ham-mock, round-ing in mid winter that dreary, howl-ing Patago-nian
Cape; then it was, that his torn body and gashed soul bled into one
an-other; and so in-ter-fus-ing, made him mad. That it was only then, on
the home-ward voy-age, after the en-counter, that the fi-nal mono-mania
seized him, seems all but cer-tain from the fact that, at in-ter-vals
dur-ing the pas-sage, he was a rav-ing lun-atic; and, though un-limbed of a
leg, yet such vi-tal strength yet lurked in his Egyp-tian chest, and was
moreover in-tens-i-fied by his de-li-rium, that his mates were forced to
lace him fast, even there, as he sailed, rav-ing in his ham-mock. In a
strait-jacket, he swung to the mad rock-ings of the gales. And, when
run-ning into more suf-fer-able lat-it-udes, the ship, with mild stun’sails
spread, floated across the tran-quil trop-ics, and, to all ap-pear-ances,
the old man’s de-li-rium seemed left be-hind him with the Cape Horn
swells, and he came forth from his dark den into the blessed light and
air; even then, when he bore that firm, col-lec-ted front, how-ever pale,
and is-sued his calm or-ders once again; and his mates thanked God the
dire-ful mad-ness was now gone; even then, Ahab, in his hid-den self,
raved on. Hu-man mad-ness is of-ten-times a cun-ning and most fe-line thing.
When you think it fled, it may have but be-come trans-figured into some
still subtler form. Ahab’s full lun-acy sub-sided not, but deep-en-ingly
con-trac-ted; like the un-abated Hud-son, when that noble North-man flows
nar-rowly, but un-fathom-ably through the High-land gorge. But, as in his
nar-row-flow-ing mono-mania, not one jot of Ahab’s broad mad-ness had been
left be-hind; so in that broad mad-ness, not one jot of his great nat-ural
in-tel-lect had per-ished. That be-fore liv-ing agent, now be-came the liv-ing
in-stru-ment. If such a furi-ous trope may stand, his spe-cial lun-acy
stormed his gen-eral san-ity, and car-ried it, and turned all its
con-centred can-non upon its own mad mark; so that far from hav-ing lost
his strength, Ahab, to that one end, did now pos-sess a thou-sand fold
more po-tency than ever he had sanely brought to bear upon any one
reas-on-able ob-ject.

This is much; yet Ahab’s lar-ger, darker, deeper part re-mains un-hin-ted.
But vain to pop-ular-ize pro-fundit-ies, and all truth is pro-found. Wind-ing
far down from within the very heart of this spiked Hotel de Cluny where
we here stand—how-ever grand and won-der-ful, now quit it;—and take your
way, ye no-bler, sad-der souls, to those vast Ro-man halls of Ther-mes;
where far be-neath the fant-astic towers of man’s up-per earth, his root
of grandeur, his whole aw-ful es-sence sits in bearded state; an an-tique
bur-ied be-neath an-tiquit-ies, and throned on tor-soes! So with a broken
throne, the great gods mock that cap-tive king; so like a Cary-atid, he
pa-tient sits, up-hold-ing on his frozen brow the piled en-tab-la-tures of
ages. Wind ye down there, ye prouder, sad-der souls! ques-tion that
proud, sad king! A fam-ily like-ness! aye, he did be-get ye, ye young
ex-iled roy-al-ties; and from your grim sire only will the old
State-secret come.

Now, in his heart, Ahab had some glimpse of this, namely: all my means
are sane, my motive and my ob-ject mad. Yet without power to kill, or
change, or shun the fact; he like-wise knew that to man-kind he did long
dis-semble; in some sort, did still. But that thing of his dis-sem-bling
was only sub-ject to his per-cept-ib-il-ity, not to his will de-term-in-ate.
Never-the-less, so well did he suc-ceed in that dis-sem-bling, that when
with ivory leg he stepped ashore at last, no Nan-tuck-eter thought him
oth-er-wise than but nat-ur-ally grieved, and that to the quick, with the
ter-rible cas-u-alty which had over-taken him.

The re-port of his un-deni-able de-li-rium at sea was like-wise pop-ularly
ascribed to a kindred cause. And so too, all the ad-ded mood-i-ness which
al-ways af-ter-wards, to the very day of sail-ing in the Pequod on the
present voy-age, sat brood-ing on his brow. Nor is it so very un-likely,
that far from dis-trust-ing his fit-ness for an-other whal-ing voy-age, on
ac-count of such dark symp-toms, the cal-cu-lat-ing people of that prudent
isle were in-clined to har-bor the con-ceit, that for those very reas-ons
he was all the bet-ter qual-i-fied and set on edge, for a pur-suit so full
of rage and wild-ness as the bloody hunt of whales. Gn-awed within and
scorched without, with the in-fixed, un-re-lent-ing fangs of some in-cur-able
idea; such an one, could he be found, would seem the very man to dart
his iron and lift his lance against the most ap-palling of all brutes.
Or, if for any reason thought to be cor-por-eally in-ca-pa-cit-ated for that,
yet such an one would seem su-per-lat-ively com-pet-ent to cheer and howl on
his un-der-lings to the at-tack. But be all this as it may, cer-tain it is,
that with the mad secret of his un-abated rage bolted up and keyed in
him, Ahab had pur-posely sailed upon the present voy-age with the one
only and all-en-gross-ing ob-ject of hunt-ing the White Whale. Had any one
of his old ac-quaint-ances on shore but half dreamed of what was lurk-ing
in him then, how soon would their aghast and right-eous souls have
wrenched the ship from such a fiendish man! They were bent on
prof-it-able cruises, the profit to be coun-ted down in dol-lars from the
mint. He was in-tent on an au-da-cious, im-mit-ig-able, and su-per-nat-ural
re-venge.

Here, then, was this grey-headed, un-godly old man, chas-ing with curses
a Job’s whale round the world, at the head of a crew, too, chiefly made
up of mon-grel reneg-ades, and cast-aways, and can-ni-bals—mor-ally en-feebled
also, by the in-com-pet-ence of mere un-aided vir-tue or right-minded-ness in
Star-buck, the in-vul-ner-able jol-lity of in-dif-fer-ence and reck-less-ness in
Stubb, and the per-vad-ing me-diocrity in Flask. Such a crew, so
of-ficered, seemed spe-cially picked and packed by some in-fernal fatal-ity
to help him to his mono-ma-niac re-venge. How it was that they so
abound-ingly re-spon-ded to the old man’s ire—by what evil ma-gic their
souls were pos-sessed, that at times his hate seemed al-most theirs; the
White Whale as much their in-suf-fer-able foe as his; how all this came to
be—what the White Whale was to them, or how to their un-con-scious
un-der-stand-ings, also, in some dim, un-sus-pec-ted way, he might have
seemed the glid-ing great de-mon of the seas of life,—all this to
ex-plain, would be to dive deeper than Ish-mael can go. The sub-ter-ranean
miner that works in us all, how can one tell whither leads his shaft by
the ever shift-ing, muffled sound of his pick? Who does not feel the
ir-res-ist-ible arm drag? What skiff in tow of a sev-enty-four can stand
still? For one, I gave my-self up to the aban-don-ment of the time and the
place; but while yet all a-rush to en-counter the whale, could see
naught in that brute but the dead-li-est ill.


CHAPTER 42. The White-ness of the Whale.

What the white whale was to Ahab, has been hin-ted; what, at times, he
was to me, as yet re-mains un-said.

Aside from those more ob-vi-ous con-sid-er-a-tions touch-ing Moby Dick, which
could not but oc-ca-sion-ally awaken in any man’s soul some alarm, there
was an-other thought, or rather vague, name-less hor-ror con-cern-ing him,
which at times by its in-tens-ity com-pletely over-powered all the rest;
and yet so mys-tical and well nigh in-ef-fable was it, that I al-most
des-pair of put-ting it in a com-pre-hens-ible form. It was the white-ness of
the whale that above all things ap-palled me. But how can I hope to
ex-plain my-self here; and yet, in some dim, ran-dom way, ex-plain my-self I
must, else all these chapters might be naught.

Though in many nat-ural ob-jects, white-ness re-fin-ingly en-hances beauty,
as if im-part-ing some spe-cial vir-tue of its own, as in marbles,
ja-pon-icas, and pearls; and though vari-ous na-tions have in some way
re-cog-nised a cer-tain royal pree-m-in-ence in this hue; even the bar-baric,
grand old kings of Pegu pla-cing the title “Lord of the White Elephants”
above all their other mag-ni-lo-quent ascrip-tions of domin-ion; and the
mod-ern kings of Siam un-furl-ing the same snow-white quad-ruped in the
royal stand-ard; and the Han-overian flag bear-ing the one fig-ure of a
snow-white char-ger; and the great Aus-trian Em-pire, Cæsarian, heir to
over-lord-ing Rome, hav-ing for the im-per-ial col-our the same im-per-ial hue;
and though this pre-em-in-ence in it ap-plies to the hu-man race it-self,
giv-ing the white man ideal mas-ter-ship over every dusky tribe; and
though, be-sides, all this, white-ness has been even made sig-ni-fic-ant of
glad-ness, for among the Ro-mans a white stone marked a joy-ful day; and
though in other mor-tal sym-path-ies and sym-bol-iz-ings, this same hue is
made the em-blem of many touch-ing, noble things—the in-no-cence of brides,
the be-nig-nity of age; though among the Red Men of Amer-ica the giv-ing of
the white belt of wam-pum was the deep-est pledge of honor; though in
many climes, white-ness typ-i-fies the majesty of Justice in the er-mine of
the Judge, and con-trib-utes to the daily state of kings and queens drawn
by milk-white steeds; though even in the higher mys-ter-ies of the most
au-gust re-li-gions it has been made the sym-bol of the di-vine spot-less-ness
and power; by the Per-sian fire wor-ship-pers, the white forked flame
be-ing held the holi-est on the al-tar; and in the Greek myth-o-lo-gies,
Great Jove him-self be-ing made in-carn-ate in a snow-white bull; and
though to the noble Iroquois, the mid-winter sac-ri-fice of the sac-red
White Dog was by far the holi-est fest-ival of their theo-logy, that
spot-less, faith-ful creature be-ing held the purest en-voy they could send
to the Great Spirit with the an-nual tid-ings of their own fi-del-ity; and
though dir-ectly from the Latin word for white, all Chris-tian priests
de-rive the name of one part of their sac-red ves-ture, the alb or tu-nic,
worn be-neath the cas-sock; and though among the holy pomps of the Rom-ish
faith, white is spe-cially em-ployed in the cel-eb-ra-tion of the Pas-sion of
our Lord; though in the Vi-sion of St. John, white robes are given to
the re-deemed, and the four-and-twenty eld-ers stand clothed in white
be-fore the great white throne, and the Holy One that sit-teth there
white like wool; yet for all these ac-cu-mu-lated as-so-ci-ations, with
whatever is sweet, and hon-or-able, and sub-lime, there yet lurks an
elu-sive some-thing in the in-ner-most idea of this hue, which strikes more
of panic to the soul than that red-ness which af-frights in blood.

This elu-sive qual-ity it is, which causes the thought of white-ness, when
di-vorced from more kindly as-so-ci-ations, and coupled with any ob-ject
ter-rible in it-self, to heighten that ter-ror to the fur-thest bounds.
Wit-ness the white bear of the poles, and the white shark of the
trop-ics; what but their smooth, flaky white-ness makes them the
tran-scend-ent hor-rors they are? That ghastly white-ness it is which
im-parts such an ab-hor-rent mild-ness, even more loath-some than ter-rific,
to the dumb gloat-ing of their as-pect. So that not the fierce-fanged
ti-ger in his her-aldic coat can so stag-ger cour-age as the white-shrouded
bear or shark.*

*With ref-er-ence to the Polar bear, it may pos-sibly be urged by him who
would fain go still deeper into this mat-ter, that it is not the
white-ness, sep-ar-ately re-garded, which height-ens the in-tol-er-able
hideous-ness of that brute; for, ana-lysed, that heightened hideous-ness,
it might be said, only rises from the cir-cum-stance, that the
ir-re-spons-ible fe-ro-cious-ness of the creature stands in-ves-ted in the
fleece of ce-les-tial in-no-cence and love; and hence, by bring-ing to-gether
two such op-pos-ite emo-tions in our minds, the Polar bear fright-ens us
with so un-nat-ural a con-trast. But even as-sum-ing all this to be true;
yet, were it not for the white-ness, you would not have that in-tens-i-fied
ter-ror.

As for the white shark, the white glid-ing ghost-li-ness of re-pose in that
creature, when be-held in his or-din-ary moods, strangely tal-lies with the
same qual-ity in the Polar quad-ruped. This pe-cu-li-ar-ity is most vividly
hit by the French in the name they be-stow upon that fish. The Rom-ish
mass for the dead be-gins with “Requiem eternam” (eternal rest), whence
_Requiem_ de-nom-in-at-ing the mass it-self, and any other fu-neral mu-sic.
Now, in al-lu-sion to the white, si-lent still-ness of death in this shark,
and the mild dead-li-ness of his habits, the French call him _Requin_.

Be-think thee of the al-batross, whence come those clouds of spir-itual
won-der-ment and pale dread, in which that white phantom sails in all
ima-gin-a-tions? Not Col-eridge first threw that spell; but God’s great,
un-flat-ter-ing laur-eate, Nature.*

*I re-mem-ber the first al-batross I ever saw. It was dur-ing a pro-longed
gale, in wa-ters hard upon the Antarc-tic seas. From my forenoon watch
be-low, I as-cen-ded to the over-clouded deck; and there, dashed upon the
main hatches, I saw a regal, feath-ery thing of un-spot-ted white-ness, and
with a hooked, Ro-man bill sub-lime. At in-ter-vals, it arched forth its
vast archangel wings, as if to em-brace some holy ark. Won-drous
flut-ter-ings and throb-bings shook it. Though bod-ily un-harmed, it uttered
cries, as some king’s ghost in su-per-nat-ural dis-tress. Through its
in-ex-press-ible, strange eyes, me-thought I peeped to secrets which took
hold of God. As Abra-ham be-fore the an-gels, I bowed my-self; the white
thing was so white, its wings so wide, and in those for ever ex-iled
wa-ters, I had lost the miser-able warp-ing memor-ies of tra-di-tions and of
towns. Long I gazed at that prodigy of plumage. I can-not tell, can only
hint, the things that dar-ted through me then. But at last I awoke; and
turn-ing, asked a sailor what bird was this. A goney, he replied. Goney!
never had heard that name be-fore; is it con-ceiv-able that this glor-i-ous
thing is ut-terly un-known to men ashore! never! But some time after, I
learned that goney was some sea-man’s name for al-batross. So that by no
pos-sib-il-ity could Col-eridge’s wild Rhyme have had aught to do with
those mys-tical im-pres-sions which were mine, when I saw that bird upon
our deck. For neither had I then read the Rhyme, nor knew the bird to
be an al-batross. Yet, in say-ing this, I do but in-dir-ectly burn-ish a
little brighter the noble merit of the poem and the poet.

I as-sert, then, that in the won-drous bod-ily white-ness of the bird
chiefly lurks the secret of the spell; a truth the more evinced in
this, that by a sol-ecism of terms there are birds called grey
al-batrosses; and these I have fre-quently seen, but never with such
emo-tions as when I be-held the Antarc-tic fowl.

But how had the mys-tic thing been caught? Whis-per it not, and I will
tell; with a treach-er-ous hook and line, as the fowl floated on the sea.
At last the Cap-tain made a post-man of it; ty-ing a lettered, leath-ern
tally round its neck, with the ship’s time and place; and then let-ting
it es-cape. But I doubt not, that leath-ern tally, meant for man, was
taken off in Heaven, when the white fowl flew to join the wing-fold-ing,
the in-vok-ing, and ad-or-ing cher-ubim!

Most fam-ous in our Western an-nals and In-dian tra-di-tions is that of the
White Steed of the Prair-ies; a mag-ni-fi-cent milk-white char-ger,
large-eyed, small-headed, bluff-ches-ted, and with the dig-nity of a
thou-sand mon-archs in his lofty, over-s-corn-ing car-riage. He was the
elec-ted Xer-xes of vast herds of wild horses, whose pas-tures in those
days were only fenced by the Rocky Moun-tains and the Al-legh-anies. At
their flam-ing head he west-ward trooped it like that chosen star which
every even-ing leads on the hosts of light. The flash-ing cas-cade of his
mane, the curving comet of his tail, in-ves-ted him with hous-ings more
resplen-dent than gold and sil-ver-beat-ers could have fur-nished him. A
most im-per-ial and archangel-ical ap-par-i-tion of that un-fal-len, west-ern
world, which to the eyes of the old trap-pers and hunters re-vived the
glor-ies of those primeval times when Adam walked majestic as a god,
bluff-browed and fear-less as this mighty steed. Whether march-ing amid
his aides and mar-shals in the van of count-less co-horts that end-lessly
streamed it over the plains, like an Ohio; or whether with his
cir-cum-am-bi-ent sub-jects brows-ing all around at the ho-ri-zon, the White
Steed gal-lop-ingly re-viewed them with warm nos-trils red-den-ing through
his cool milk-i-ness; in whatever as-pect he presen-ted him-self, al-ways to
the bravest In-di-ans he was the ob-ject of trem-bling rev-er-ence and awe.
Nor can it be ques-tioned from what stands on le-gendary re-cord of this
noble horse, that it was his spir-itual white-ness chiefly, which so
clothed him with di-vine-ness; and that this di-vine-ness had that in it
which, though com-mand-ing wor-ship, at the same time en-forced a cer-tain
name-less ter-ror.

But there are other in-stances where this white-ness loses all that
ac-cess-ory and strange glory which in-vests it in the White Steed and
Al-batross.

What is it that in the Al-bino man so pe-cu-li-arly re-pels and of-ten shocks
the eye, as that some-times he is loathed by his own kith and kin! It is
that white-ness which in-vests him, a thing ex-pressed by the name he
bears. The Al-bino is as well made as other men—has no sub-stant-ive
de-form-ity—and yet this mere as-pect of all-per-vad-ing white-ness makes him
more strangely hideous than the ugli-est abor-tion. Why should this be
so?

Nor, in quite other as-pects, does Nature in her least palp-able but not
the less ma-li-cious agen-cies, fail to en-list among her forces this
crown-ing at-trib-ute of the ter-rible. From its snowy as-pect, the
gaunt-leted ghost of the South-ern Seas has been de-nom-in-ated the White
Squall. Nor, in some his-toric in-stances, has the art of hu-man malice
omit-ted so po-tent an aux-il-i-ary. How wildly it height-ens the ef-fect of
that pas-sage in Frois-sart, when, masked in the snowy sym-bol of their
fac-tion, the des-per-ate White Hoods of Ghent murder their bailiff in the
mar-ket-place!

Nor, in some things, does the com-mon, hered-it-ary ex-per-i-ence of all
man-kind fail to bear wit-ness to the su-per-nat-ur-al-ism of this hue. It
can-not well be doubted, that the one vis-ible qual-ity in the as-pect of
the dead which most ap-pals the gazer, is the marble pal-lor linger-ing
there; as if in-deed that pal-lor were as much like the badge of
con-sterna-tion in the other world, as of mor-tal trep-id-a-tion here. And
from that pal-lor of the dead, we bor-row the ex-press-ive hue of the
shroud in which we wrap them. Nor even in our su-per-sti-tions do we fail
to throw the same snowy mantle round our phantoms; all ghosts rising in
a milk-white fog—Yea, while these ter-rors seize us, let us add, that
even the king of ter-rors, when per-son-i-fied by the evan-gel-ist, rides on
his pal-lid horse.

There-fore, in his other moods, sym-bol-ize whatever grand or gra-cious
thing he will by white-ness, no man can deny that in its pro-found-est
ideal-ized sig-ni-fic-ance it calls up a pe-cu-liar ap-par-i-tion to the soul.

But though without dis-sent this point be fixed, how is mor-tal man to
ac-count for it? To ana-lyse it, would seem im-possible. Can we, then, by
the cita-tion of some of those in-stances wherein this thing of
white-ness—though for the time either wholly or in great part stripped
of all dir-ect as-so-ci-ations cal-cu-lated to im-part to it aught fear-ful,
but nev-er-the-less, is found to ex-ert over us the same sor-cery, how-ever
mod-i-fied;—can we thus hope to light upon some chance clue to con-duct us
to the hid-den cause we seek?

Let us try. But in a mat-ter like this, sub-tlety ap-peals to sub-tlety,
and without ima-gin-a-tion no man can fol-low an-other into these halls. And
though, doubt-less, some at least of the ima-gin-at-ive im-pres-sions about
to be presen-ted may have been shared by most men, yet few per-haps were
en-tirely con-scious of them at the time, and there-fore may not be able
to re-call them now.

Why to the man of un-tutored ideal-ity, who hap-pens to be but loosely
ac-quain-ted with the pe-cu-liar char-ac-ter of the day, does the bare
men-tion of Whit-sun-tide mar-shal in the fancy such long, dreary,
speech-less pro-ces-sions of slow-pa-cing pil-grims, down-cast and hooded
with new-fallen snow? Or, to the un-read, un-soph-ist-ic-ated Prot-est-ant of
the Middle Amer-ican States, why does the passing men-tion of a White
Friar or a White Nun, evoke such an eye-less statue in the soul?

Or what is there apart from the tra-di-tions of dun-geoned war-ri-ors and
kings (which will not wholly ac-count for it) that makes the White Tower
of Lon-don tell so much more strongly on the ima-gin-a-tion of an
un-trav-elled Amer-ican, than those other stor-ied struc-tures, its
neigh-bors—the By-ward Tower, or even the Bloody? And those sub-limer
towers, the White Moun-tains of New Hamp-shire, whence, in pe-cu-liar
moods, comes that gi-gantic ghost-li-ness over the soul at the bare
men-tion of that name, while the thought of Vir-ginia’s Blue Ridge is
full of a soft, dewy, dis-tant dream-i-ness? Or why, ir-re-spect-ive of all
lat-it-udes and lon-git-udes, does the name of the White Sea ex-ert such a
spec-tral-ness over the fancy, while that of the Yel-low Sea lulls us with
mor-tal thoughts of long lacquered mild af-ter-noons on the waves,
fol-lowed by the gaud-i-est and yet sleepi-est of sun-sets? Or, to choose a
wholly un-sub-stan-tial in-stance, purely ad-dressed to the fancy, why, in
read-ing the old fairy tales of Cen-t-ral Europe, does “the tall pale man”
of the Hartz forests, whose change-less pal-lor un-rust-lingly glides
through the green of the groves—why is this phantom more ter-rible than
all the whoop-ing imps of the Blocks-burg?

Nor is it, al-to-gether, the re-mem-brance of her cathed-ral-top-pling
earth-quakes; nor the stampe-does of her frantic seas; nor the
tear-less-ness of arid skies that never rain; nor the sight of her wide
field of lean-ing spires, wrenched cope-stones, and crosses all ad-roop
(like can-ted yards of anchored fleets); and her sub-urban av-en-ues of
house-walls ly-ing over upon each other, as a tossed pack of cards;—it
is not these things alone which make tear-less Lima, the strangest,
sad-dest city thou can’st see. For Lima has taken the white veil; and
there is a higher hor-ror in this white-ness of her woe. Old as Pizarro,
this white-ness keeps her ru-ins for ever new; ad-mits not the cheer-ful
green-ness of com-plete de-cay; spreads over her broken ram-parts the ri-gid
pal-lor of an apo-plexy that fixes its own dis-tor-tions.

I know that, to the com-mon ap-pre-hen-sion, this phe-nomenon of white-ness
is not con-fessed to be the prime agent in ex-ag-ger-at-ing the ter-ror of
ob-jects oth-er-wise ter-rible; nor to the un-ima-gin-at-ive mind is there
aught of ter-ror in those ap-pear-ances whose aw-ful-ness to an-other mind
al-most solely con-sists in this one phe-nomenon, es-pe-cially when
ex-hib-ited un-der any form at all ap-proach-ing to mute-ness or
uni-ver-sal-ity. What I mean by these two state-ments may per-haps be
re-spect-ively elu-cid-ated by the fol-low-ing ex-amples.

First: The mar-iner, when draw-ing nigh the coasts of for-eign lands, if
by night he hear the roar of break-ers, starts to vi-gil-ance, and feels
just enough of trep-id-a-tion to sharpen all his fac-ulties; but un-der
pre-cisely sim-ilar cir-cum-stances, let him be called from his ham-mock to
view his ship sail-ing through a mid-night sea of milky white-ness—as if
from en-circ-ling head-lands shoals of combed white bears were swim-ming
round him, then he feels a si-lent, su-per-sti-tious dread; the shrouded
phantom of the whitened wa-ters is hor-rible to him as a real ghost; in
vain the lead as-sures him he is still off sound-ings; heart and helm
they both go down; he never rests till blue wa-ter is un-der him again.
Yet where is the mar-iner who will tell thee, “Sir, it was not so much
the fear of strik-ing hid-den rocks, as the fear of that hideous
white-ness that so stirred me?”

Se-cond: To the nat-ive In-dian of Peru, the con-tinual sight of the
snow-howda-hed Andes con-veys naught of dread, ex-cept, per-haps, in the
mere fancy-ing of the eternal fros-ted des-ol-ate-ness reign-ing at such vast
alti-tudes, and the nat-ural con-ceit of what a fear-ful-ness it would be to
lose one-self in such in-hu-man solitudes. Much the same is it with the
back-woods-man of the West, who with com-par-at-ive in-dif-fer-ence views an
un-boun-ded prairie sheeted with driven snow, no shadow of tree or twig
to break the fixed trance of white-ness. Not so the sailor, be-hold-ing
the scenery of the Antarc-tic seas; where at times, by some in-fernal
trick of leger-de-main in the powers of frost and air, he, shiv-er-ing and
half ship-wrecked, in-stead of rain-bows speak-ing hope and solace to his
misery, views what seems a bound-less church-yard grin-ning upon him with
its lean ice monu-ments and splintered crosses.

But thou say-est, me-thinks that white-lead chapter about white-ness is
but a white flag hung out from a craven soul; thou sur-renderest to a
hypo, Ish-mael.

Tell me, why this strong young colt, foaled in some peace-ful val-ley of
Ver-mont, far re-moved from all beasts of prey—why is it that upon the
sun-ni-est day, if you but shake a fresh buf-falo robe be-hind him, so that
he can-not even see it, but only smells its wild an-imal musk-i-ness—why
will he start, snort, and with burst-ing eyes paw the ground in
phren-sies of af-fright? There is no re-mem-brance in him of any gor-ings of
wild creatures in his green north-ern home, so that the strange
musk-i-ness he smells can-not re-call to him any-thing as-so-ci-ated with the
ex-per-i-ence of former per-ils; for what knows he, this New Eng-land colt,
of the black bisons of dis-tant Ore-gon?

No: but here thou be-hold-est even in a dumb brute, the in-stinct of the
know-ledge of the de-mon-ism in the world. Though thou-sands of miles from
Ore-gon, still when he smells that sav-age musk, the rend-ing, gor-ing
bison herds are as present as to the deser-ted wild foal of the
prair-ies, which this in-stant they may be tramp-ling into dust.

Thus, then, the muffled rollings of a milky sea; the bleak rust-lings of
the fes-tooned frosts of moun-tains; the des-ol-ate shift-ings of the
win-drowed snows of prair-ies; all these, to Ish-mael, are as the shak-ing
of that buf-falo robe to the frightened colt!

Though neither knows where lie the name-less things of which the mys-tic
sign gives forth such hints; yet with me, as with the colt, some-where
those things must ex-ist. Though in many of its as-pects this vis-ible
world seems formed in love, the in-vis-ible spheres were formed in
fright.

But not yet have we solved the in-cant-a-tion of this white-ness, and
learned why it ap-peals with such power to the soul; and more strange
and far more portent-ous—why, as we have seen, it is at once the most
mean-ing sym-bol of spir-itual things, nay, the very veil of the
Chris-tian’s Deity; and yet should be as it is, the in-tensi-fy-ing agent
in things the most ap-palling to man-kind.

Is it that by its in-def-in-ite-ness it shad-ows forth the heart-less voids
and im-mens-it-ies of the uni-verse, and thus stabs us from be-hind with the
thought of an-ni-hil-a-tion, when be-hold-ing the white depths of the milky
way? Or is it, that as in es-sence white-ness is not so much a col-our as
the vis-ible ab-sence of col-our; and at the same time the con-crete of all
col-ours; is it for these reas-ons that there is such a dumb blank-ness,
full of mean-ing, in a wide land-scape of snows—a col-our-less, all-col-our
of athe-ism from which we shrink? And when we con-sider that other the-ory
of the nat-ural philo-soph-ers, that all other earthly hues—every stately
or lovely em-blazon-ing—the sweet tinges of sun-set skies and woods; yea,
and the gil-ded vel-vets of but-ter-flies, and the but-ter-fly cheeks of
young girls; all these are but sub-tile de-ceits, not ac-tu-ally in-her-ent
in sub-stances, but only laid on from without; so that all dei-fied
Nature ab-so-lutely paints like the har-lot, whose al-lure-ments cover
noth-ing but the char-nel-house within; and when we pro-ceed fur-ther, and
con-sider that the mys-tical cos-metic which pro-duces every one of her
hues, the great prin-ciple of light, for ever re-mains white or col-or-less
in it-self, and if op-er-at-ing without me-dium upon mat-ter, would touch all
ob-jects, even tulips and roses, with its own blank tinge—pon-der-ing all
this, the palsied uni-verse lies be-fore us a leper; and like wil-ful
trav-el-lers in La-p-land, who re-fuse to wear col-oured and col-our-ing
glasses upon their eyes, so the wretched in-fi-del gazes him-self blind at
the mo-nu-mental white shroud that wraps all the pro-spect around him. And
of all these things the Al-bino whale was the sym-bol. Won-der ye then at
the fiery hunt?


CHAPTER 43. Hark!

“HIST! Did you hear that noise, Cabaco?”

It was the middle-watch: a fair moon-light; the sea-men were stand-ing in
a cor-don, ex-tend-ing from one of the fresh-wa-ter butts in the waist, to
the scuttle-butt near the taffrail. In this man-ner, they passed the
buck-ets to fill the scuttle-butt. Stand-ing, for the most part, on the
hal-lowed pre-cincts of the quarter-deck, they were care-ful not to speak
or rustle their feet. From hand to hand, the buck-ets went in the
deep-est si-lence, only broken by the oc-ca-sional flap of a sail, and the
steady hum of the un-ceas-ingly ad-van-cing keel.

It was in the midst of this re-pose, that Archy, one of the cor-don,
whose post was near the after-hatches, whispered to his neigh-bor, a
Cholo, the words above.

“Hist! did you hear that noise, Cabaco?”

“Take the bucket, will ye, Archy? what noise d’ye mean?”

“There it is again—un-der the hatches—don’t you hear it—a cough—it
soun-ded like a cough.”

“Cough be damned! Pass along that re-turn bucket.”

“There again—there it is!—it sounds like two or three sleep-ers turn-ing
over, now!”

“Cara-mba! have done, ship-mate, will ye? It’s the three soaked bis-cuits
ye eat for sup-per turn-ing over in-side of ye—noth-ing else. Look to the
bucket!”

“Say what ye will, ship-mate; I’ve sharp ears.”

“Aye, you are the chap, ain’t ye, that heard the hum of the old
Quakeress’s knit-ting-needles fifty miles at sea from Nan-tucket; you’re
the chap.”

“Grin away; we’ll see what turns up. Hark ye, Cabaco, there is some-body
down in the after-hold that has not yet been seen on deck; and I
sus-pect our old Mogul knows some-thing of it too. I heard Stubb tell
Flask, one morn-ing watch, that there was some-thing of that sort in the
wind.”

“Tish! the bucket!”


CHAPTER 44. The Chart.

Had you fol-lowed Cap-tain Ahab down into his cabin after the squall that
took place on the night suc-ceed-ing that wild rat-i-fic-a-tion of his
pur-pose with his crew, you would have seen him go to a locker in the
transom, and bring-ing out a large wrinkled roll of yel-low-ish sea
charts, spread them be-fore him on his screwed-down table. Then seat-ing
him-self be-fore it, you would have seen him in-tently study the vari-ous
lines and shad-ings which there met his eye; and with slow but steady
pen-cil trace ad-di-tional courses over spaces that be-fore were blank. At
in-ter-vals, he would refer to piles of old log-books be-side him, wherein
were set down the sea-sons and places in which, on vari-ous former
voy-ages of vari-ous ships, sperm whales had been cap-tured or seen.

While thus em-ployed, the heavy pew-ter lamp sus-pen-ded in chains over his
head, con-tinu-ally rocked with the mo-tion of the ship, and for ever
threw shift-ing gleams and shad-ows of lines upon his wrinkled brow, till
it al-most seemed that while he him-self was mark-ing out lines and
courses on the wrinkled charts, some in-vis-ible pen-cil was also tra-cing
lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of his fore-head.

But it was not this night in par-tic-u-lar that, in the solitude of his
cabin, Ahab thus pondered over his charts. Al-most every night they were
brought out; al-most every night some pen-cil marks were ef-faced, and
oth-ers were sub-sti-tuted. For with the charts of all four oceans be-fore
him, Ahab was thread-ing a maze of cur-rents and ed-dies, with a view to
the more cer-tain ac-com-plish-ment of that mono-ma-niac thought of his soul.

Now, to any one not fully ac-quain-ted with the ways of the le-viath-ans,
it might seem an ab-surdly hope-less task thus to seek out one sol-it-ary
creature in the un-hooped oceans of this planet. But not so did it seem
to Ahab, who knew the sets of all tides and cur-rents; and thereby
cal-cu-lat-ing the drift-ings of the sperm whale’s food; and, also, call-ing
to mind the reg-u-lar, as-cer-tained sea-sons for hunt-ing him in par-tic-u-lar
lat-it-udes; could ar-rive at reas-on-able sur-mises, al-most ap-proach-ing to
cer-tain-ties, con-cern-ing the time-li-est day to be upon this or that
ground in search of his prey.

So as-sured, in-deed, is the fact con-cern-ing the peri-od-ic-al-ness of the
sperm whale’s re-sort-ing to given wa-ters, that many hunters be-lieve
that, could he be closely ob-served and stud-ied through-out the world;
were the logs for one voy-age of the en-tire whale fleet care-fully
col-lated, then the mi-gra-tions of the sperm whale would be found to
cor-res-pond in in-vari-ab-il-ity to those of the her-ring-shoals or the
flights of swal-lows. On this hint, at-tempts have been made to con-struct
elab-or-ate mi-grat-ory charts of the sperm whale.*


  *Since the above was writ-ten, the state-ment is hap-pily borne out by
  an of-fi-cial cir-cu-lar, is-sued by Lieu-ten-ant Maury, of the Na-tional
  Ob-ser-vat-ory, Wash-ing-ton, April 16th, 1851. By that cir-cu-lar, it
  ap-pears that pre-cisely such a chart is in course of com-ple-tion; and
  por-tions of it are presen-ted in the cir-cu-lar. “This chart di-vides the
  ocean into dis-tricts of five de-grees of lat-it-ude by five de-grees of
  lon-git-ude; per-pen-dic-u-larly through each of which dis-tricts are twelve
  columns for the twelve months; and ho-ri-zont-ally through each of which
  dis-tricts are three lines; one to show the num-ber of days that have
  been spent in each month in every dis-trict, and the two oth-ers to
  show the num-ber of days in which whales, sperm or right, have been
  seen.”




Besides, when mak-ing a pas-sage from one feed-ing-ground to an-other, the
sperm whales, guided by some in-fal-lible in-stinct—say, rather, secret
in-tel-li-gence from the Deity—mostly swim in _veins_, as they are called;
con-tinu-ing their way along a given ocean-line with such un-devi-at-ing
ex-actitude, that no ship ever sailed her course, by any chart, with one
tithe of such mar-vel-lous pre-ci-sion. Though, in these cases, the
dir-ec-tion taken by any one whale be straight as a sur-veyor’s par-al-lel,
and though the line of ad-vance be strictly con-fined to its own
un-avoid-able, straight wake, yet the ar-bit-rary _vein_ in which at these
times he is said to swim, gen-er-ally em-braces some few miles in width
(more or less, as the vein is pre-sumed to ex-pand or con-tract); but
never ex-ceeds the visual sweep from the whale-ship’s mast-heads, when
cir-cum-spectly glid-ing along this ma-gic zone. The sum is, that at
par-tic-u-lar sea-sons within that breadth and along that path, mi-grat-ing
whales may with great con-fid-ence be looked for.

And hence not only at sub-stan-ti-ated times, upon well known sep-ar-ate
feed-ing-grounds, could Ahab hope to en-counter his prey; but in cross-ing
the widest ex-panses of wa-ter between those grounds he could, by his
art, so place and time him-self on his way, as even then not to be
wholly without pro-spect of a meet-ing.

There was a cir-cum-stance which at first sight seemed to en-tangle his
de-li-ri-ous but still meth-od-ical scheme. But not so in the real-ity,
per-haps. Though the gregari-ous sperm whales have their reg-u-lar sea-sons
for par-tic-u-lar grounds, yet in gen-eral you can-not con-clude that the
herds which haunted such and such a lat-it-ude or lon-git-ude this year,
say, will turn out to be identic-ally the same with those that were
found there the pre-ced-ing sea-son; though there are pe-cu-liar and
un-ques-tion-able in-stances where the con-trary of this has proved true. In
gen-eral, the same re-mark, only within a less wide limit, ap-plies to the
sol-it-ar-ies and her-mits among the ma-tured, aged sperm whales. So that
though Moby Dick had in a former year been seen, for ex-ample, on what
is called the Seychelle ground in the In-dian ocean, or Vol-cano Bay on
the Japan-ese Coast; yet it did not fol-low, that were the Pequod to
visit either of those spots at any sub-sequent cor-res-pond-ing sea-son, she
would in-fal-libly en-counter him there. So, too, with some other feed-ing
grounds, where he had at times re-vealed him-self. But all these seemed
only his cas-ual stop-ping-places and ocean-inns, so to speak, not his
places of pro-longed abode. And where Ahab’s chances of ac-com-plish-ing
his ob-ject have hitherto been spoken of, al-lu-sion has only been made to
whatever way-side, ante-cedent, ex-tra pro-spects were his, ere a
par-tic-u-lar set time or place were at-tained, when all pos-sib-il-it-ies
would be-come prob-ab-il-it-ies, and, as Ahab fondly thought, every
pos-sib-il-ity the next thing to a cer-tainty. That par-tic-u-lar set time and
place were con-joined in the one tech-nical phrase—the
Season-on-the-Line. For there and then, for sev-eral con-sec-ut-ive years,
Moby Dick had been peri-od-ic-ally descried, linger-ing in those wa-ters for
awhile, as the sun, in its an-nual round, loiters for a pre-dicted
in-ter-val in any one sign of the Zo-diac. There it was, too, that most of
the deadly en-coun-ters with the white whale had taken place; there the
waves were stor-ied with his deeds; there also was that tra-gic spot
where the mono-ma-niac old man had found the aw-ful motive to his
ven-geance. But in the cau-tious com-pre-hens-ive-ness and un-loiter-ing
vi-gil-ance with which Ahab threw his brood-ing soul into this un-fal-ter-ing
hunt, he would not per-mit him-self to rest all his hopes upon the one
crown-ing fact above men-tioned, how-ever flat-ter-ing it might be to those
hopes; nor in the sleep-less-ness of his vow could he so tran-quil-lize his
un-quiet heart as to post-pone all in-ter-ven-ing quest.

Now, the Pequod had sailed from Nan-tucket at the very be-gin-ning of the
Season-on-the-Line. No pos-sible en-deavor then could en-able her
com-mander to make the great pas-sage south-wards, double Cape Horn, and
then run-ning down sixty de-grees of lat-it-ude ar-rive in the equat-orial
Pa-cific in time to cruise there. There-fore, he must wait for the next
en-su-ing sea-son. Yet the pre-ma-ture hour of the Pequod’s sail-ing had,
per-haps, been cor-rectly se-lec-ted by Ahab, with a view to this very
com-plex-ion of things. Be-cause, an in-ter-val of three hun-dred and
sixty-five days and nights was be-fore him; an in-ter-val which, in-stead
of im-pa-tiently en-dur-ing ashore, he would spend in a mis-cel-laneous hunt;
if by chance the White Whale, spend-ing his va-ca-tion in seas far re-mote
from his peri-od-ical feed-ing-grounds, should turn up his wrinkled brow
off the Per-sian Gulf, or in the Bengal Bay, or Ch-ina Seas, or in any
other wa-ters haunted by his race. So that Mon-soons, Pam-pas,
Nor’-Westers, Har-mat-tans, Trades; any wind but the Levanter and Sim-oon,
might blow Moby Dick into the de-vi-ous zig-zag world-circle of the
Pequod’s cir-cum-nav-ig-at-ing wake.

But grant-ing all this; yet, re-garded dis-creetly and coolly, seems it
not but a mad idea, this; that in the broad bound-less ocean, one
sol-it-ary whale, even if en-countered, should be thought cap-able of
in-di-vidual re-cog-ni-tion from his hunter, even as a white-bearded Mufti
in the thronged thor-ough-fares of Con-stantinople? Yes. For the pe-cu-liar
snow-white brow of Moby Dick, and his snow-white hump, could not but be
un-mis-tak-able. And have I not tal-lied the whale, Ahab would mut-ter to
him-self, as after por-ing over his charts till long after mid-night he
would throw him-self back in rev-er-ies—tal-lied him, and shall he es-cape?
His broad fins are bored, and scal-loped out like a lost sheep’s ear!
And here, his mad mind would run on in a breath-less race; till a
wear-i-ness and faint-ness of pon-der-ing came over him; and in the open air
of the deck he would seek to re-cover his strength. Ah, God! what
trances of tor-ments does that man en-dure who is con-sumed with one
un-achieved re-venge-ful de-sire. He sleeps with clenched hands; and wakes
with his own bloody nails in his palms.

Often, when forced from his ham-mock by ex-haust-ing and in-tol-er-ably vivid
dreams of the night, which, re-sum-ing his own in-tense thoughts through
the day, car-ried them on amid a clash-ing of phren-sies, and whirled them
round and round and round in his blaz-ing brain, till the very throb-bing
of his life-spot be-came in-suf-fer-able an-guish; and when, as was
some-times the case, these spir-itual throes in him heaved his be-ing up
from its base, and a chasm seemed open-ing in him, from which forked
flames and light-nings shot up, and ac-cursed fiends beckoned him to leap
down among them; when this hell in him-self yawned be-neath him, a wild
cry would be heard through the ship; and with glar-ing eyes Ahab would
burst from his state room, as though es-cap-ing from a bed that was on
fire. Yet these, per-haps, in-stead of be-ing the un-sup-press-able symp-toms
of some lat-ent weak-ness, or fright at his own re-solve, were but the
plain-est tokens of its in-tens-ity. For, at such times, crazy Ahab, the
schem-ing, un-ap-peasedly stead-fast hunter of the white whale; this Ahab
that had gone to his ham-mock, was not the agent that so caused him to
burst from it in hor-ror again. The lat-ter was the eternal, liv-ing
prin-ciple or soul in him; and in sleep, be-ing for the time dis-so-ci-ated
from the char-ac-ter-iz-ing mind, which at other times em-ployed it for its
outer vehicle or agent, it spon-tan-eously sought es-cape from the
scorch-ing con-ti-gu-ity of the frantic thing, of which, for the time, it
was no longer an in-teg-ral. But as the mind does not ex-ist un-less
leagued with the soul, there-fore it must have been that, in Ahab’s
case, yield-ing up all his thoughts and fan-cies to his one su-preme
pur-pose; that pur-pose, by its own sheer in-vet-er-acy of will, forced
it-self against gods and dev-ils into a kind of self-as-sumed, in-de-pend-ent
be-ing of its own. Nay, could grimly live and burn, while the com-mon
vi-tal-ity to which it was con-joined, fled hor-ror-stricken from the
un-bid-den and un-fathered birth. There-fore, the tor-men-ted spirit that
glared out of bod-ily eyes, when what seemed Ahab rushed from his room,
was for the time but a va-cated thing, a form-less somn-am-bu-listic be-ing,
a ray of liv-ing light, to be sure, but without an ob-ject to col-our, and
there-fore a blank-ness in it-self. God help thee, old man, thy thoughts
have cre-ated a creature in thee; and he whose in-tense think-ing thus
makes him a Pro-meth-eus; a vul-ture feeds upon that heart for ever; that
vul-ture the very creature he cre-ates.


CHAPTER 45. The Af-fi-davit.

So far as what there may be of a nar-rat-ive in this book; and, in-deed,
as in-dir-ectly touch-ing one or two very in-ter-est-ing and curi-ous
par-tic-u-lars in the habits of sperm whales, the fore-go-ing chapter, in
its earlier part, is as im-port-ant a one as will be found in this
volume; but the lead-ing mat-ter of it re-quires to be still fur-ther and
more fa-mil-iarly en-larged upon, in or-der to be ad-equately un-der-stood,
and moreover to take away any in-credu-lity which a pro-found ig-nor-ance of
the en-tire sub-ject may in-duce in some minds, as to the nat-ural ver-ity
of the main points of this af-fair.

I care not to per-form this part of my task meth-od-ic-ally; but shall be
con-tent to pro-duce the de-sired im-pres-sion by sep-ar-ate cita-tions of
items, prac-tic-ally or re-li-ably known to me as a whale-man; and from
these cita-tions, I take it—the con-clu-sion aimed at will nat-ur-ally
fol-low of it-self.

First: I have per-son-ally known three in-stances where a whale, after
re-ceiv-ing a har-poon, has ef-fected a com-plete es-cape; and, after an
in-ter-val (in one in-stance of three years), has been again struck by the
same hand, and slain; when the two irons, both marked by the same
private cypher, have been taken from the body. In the in-stance where
three years in-ter-vened between the fling-ing of the two har-poons; and I
think it may have been some-thing more than that; the man who dar-ted
them hap-pen-ing, in the in-ter-val, to go in a trad-ing ship on a voy-age to
Africa, went ashore there, joined a dis-cov-ery party, and pen-et-rated far
into the in-terior, where he trav-elled for a period of nearly two years,
of-ten en-dangered by ser-pents, sav-ages, ti-gers, pois-on-ous mi-as-mas, with
all the other com-mon per-ils in-cid-ent to wan-der-ing in the heart of
un-known re-gions. Mean-while, the whale he had struck must also have been
on its travels; no doubt it had thrice cir-cum-nav-ig-ated the globe,
brush-ing with its flanks all the coasts of Africa; but to no pur-pose.
This man and this whale again came to-gether, and the one van-quished the
other. I say I, my-self, have known three in-stances sim-ilar to this;
that is in two of them I saw the whales struck; and, upon the second
at-tack, saw the two irons with the re-spect-ive marks cut in them,
af-ter-wards taken from the dead fish. In the three-year in-stance, it so
fell out that I was in the boat both times, first and last, and the
last time dis-tinctly re-cog-nised a pe-cu-liar sort of huge mole un-der the
whale’s eye, which I had ob-served there three years pre-vi-ous. I say
three years, but I am pretty sure it was more than that. Here are three
in-stances, then, which I per-son-ally know the truth of; but I have heard
of many other in-stances from per-sons whose vera-city in the mat-ter there
is no good ground to im-peach.

Se-condly: It is well known in the Sperm Whale Fish-ery, how-ever ig-nor-ant
the world ashore may be of it, that there have been sev-eral mem-or-able
his-tor-ical in-stances where a par-tic-u-lar whale in the ocean has been at
dis-tant times and places pop-ularly cog-nis-able. Why such a whale be-came
thus marked was not al-to-gether and ori-gin-ally ow-ing to his bod-ily
pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies as dis-tin-guished from other whales; for how-ever pe-cu-liar
in that re-spect any chance whale may be, they soon put an end to his
pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies by killing him, and boil-ing him down into a pe-cu-li-arly
valu-able oil. No: the reason was this: that from the fatal ex-per-i-ences
of the fish-ery there hung a ter-rible prestige of per-il-ous-ness about
such a whale as there did about Rin-aldo Rin-aldini, in-somuch that most
fish-er-men were con-tent to re-cog-nise him by merely touch-ing their
tar-paul-ins when he would be dis-covered loun-ging by them on the sea,
without seek-ing to cul-tiv-ate a more in-tim-ate ac-quaint-ance. Like some
poor dev-ils ashore that hap-pen to know an iras-cible great man, they
make dis-tant un-ob-trus-ive sa-luta-tions to him in the street, lest if they
pur-sued the ac-quaint-ance fur-ther, they might re-ceive a sum-mary thump
for their pre-sump-tion.

But not only did each of these fam-ous whales en-joy great in-di-vidual
celebrity—Nay, you may call it an ocean-wide renown; not only was he
fam-ous in life and now is im-mor-tal in fore-castle stor-ies after death,
but he was ad-mit-ted into all the rights, priv-ileges, and dis-tinc-tions
of a name; had as much a name in-deed as Cambyses or Cæsar. Was it not
so, O Timor Tom! thou famed le-viathan, scarred like an ice-berg, who so
long did’st lurk in the Ori-ental straits of that name, whose spout was
oft seen from the palmy beach of Om-bay? Was it not so, O New Zea-l-and
Jack! thou ter-ror of all cruis-ers that crossed their wakes in the
vi-cin-ity of the Tat-too Land? Was it not so, O Mor-quan! King of Japan,
whose lofty jet they say at times as-sumed the semb-lance of a snow-white
cross against the sky? Was it not so, O Don Miguel! thou Chilian whale,
marked like an old tor-toise with mys-tic hiero-glyph-ics upon the back! In
plain prose, here are four whales as well known to the stu-dents of
Ceta-cean His-tory as Marius or Sylla to the clas-sic scholar.

But this is not all. New Zea-l-and Tom and Don Miguel, after at vari-ous
times cre-at-ing great havoc among the boats of dif-fer-ent ves-sels, were
fi-nally gone in quest of, sys-tem-at-ic-ally hunted out, chased and killed
by vali-ant whal-ing cap-tains, who heaved up their an-chors with that
ex-press ob-ject as much in view, as in set-ting out through the
Nar-ragansett Woods, Cap-tain But-ler of old had it in his mind to cap-ture
that no-tori-ous mur-der-ous sav-age An-na-won, the head-most war-rior of the
In-dian King Philip.

I do not know where I can find a bet-ter place than just here, to make
men-tion of one or two other things, which to me seem im-port-ant, as in
prin-ted form es-tab-lish-ing in all re-spects the reas-on-able-ness of the
whole story of the White Whale, more es-pe-cially the cata-strophe. For
this is one of those dis-heart-en-ing in-stances where truth re-quires full
as much bol-ster-ing as er-ror. So ig-nor-ant are most lands-men of some of
the plain-est and most palp-able won-ders of the world, that without some
hints touch-ing the plain facts, his-tor-ical and oth-er-wise, of the
fish-ery, they might scout at Moby Dick as a mon-strous fable, or still
worse and more de-test-able, a hideous and in-tol-er-able al-legory.

First: Though most men have some vague flit-ting ideas of the gen-eral
per-ils of the grand fish-ery, yet they have noth-ing like a fixed, vivid
con-cep-tion of those per-ils, and the fre-quency with which they re-cur.
One reason per-haps is, that not one in fifty of the ac-tual dis-asters
and deaths by cas-u-al-ties in the fish-ery, ever finds a pub-lic re-cord at
home, how-ever tran-si-ent and im-me-di-ately for-got-ten that re-cord. Do you
sup-pose that that poor fel-low there, who this mo-ment per-haps caught by
the whale-line off the coast of New Guinea, is be-ing car-ried down to
the bot-tom of the sea by the sound-ing le-viathan—do you sup-pose that
that poor fel-low’s name will ap-pear in the news-pa-per ob-it-u-ary you will
read to-mor-row at your break-fast? No: be-cause the mails are very
ir-reg-u-lar between here and New Guinea. In fact, did you ever hear what
might be called reg-u-lar news dir-ect or in-dir-ect from New Guinea? Yet I
tell you that upon one par-tic-u-lar voy-age which I made to the Pa-cific,
among many oth-ers we spoke thirty dif-fer-ent ships, every one of which
had had a death by a whale, some of them more than one, and three that
had each lost a boat’s crew. For God’s sake, be eco-nom-ical with your
lamps and candles! not a gal-lon you burn, but at least one drop of
man’s blood was spilled for it.

Se-condly: People ashore have in-deed some in-def-in-ite idea that a whale
is an enorm-ous creature of enorm-ous power; but I have ever found that
when nar-rat-ing to them some spe-cific ex-ample of this two-fold
enorm-ous-ness, they have sig-ni-fic-antly com-pli-men-ted me upon my
fa-cetious-ness; when, I de-clare upon my soul, I had no more idea of
be-ing fa-cetious than Moses, when he wrote the his-tory of the plagues of
Egypt.

But for-tu-nately the spe-cial point I here seek can be es-tab-lished upon
testi-mony en-tirely in-de-pend-ent of my own. That point is this: The Sperm
Whale is in some cases suf-fi-ciently power-ful, know-ing, and ju-di-ciously
ma-li-cious, as with dir-ect afore-thought to stave in, ut-terly des-troy,
and sink a large ship; and what is more, the Sperm Whale _has_ done it.

First: In the year 1820 the ship Es-sex, Cap-tain Pol-lard, of Nan-tucket,
was cruis-ing in the Pa-cific Ocean. One day she saw spouts, lowered her
boats, and gave chase to a shoal of sperm whales. Ere long, sev-eral of
the whales were wounded; when, sud-denly, a very large whale es-cap-ing
from the boats, is-sued from the shoal, and bore dir-ectly down upon the
ship. Dash-ing his fore-head against her hull, he so stove her in, that
in less than “ten minutes” she settled down and fell over. Not a
sur-viv-ing plank of her has been seen since. After the severest
ex-pos-ure, part of the crew reached the land in their boats. Be-ing
re-turned home at last, Cap-tain Pol-lard once more sailed for the Pa-cific
in com-mand of an-other ship, but the gods ship-wrecked him again upon
un-known rocks and break-ers; for the second time his ship was ut-terly
lost, and forth-with for-swearing the sea, he has never temp-ted it since.
At this day Cap-tain Pol-lard is a res-id-ent of Nan-tucket. I have seen
Owen Chace, who was chief mate of the Es-sex at the time of the tragedy;
I have read his plain and faith-ful nar-rat-ive; I have con-versed with his
son; and all this within a few miles of the scene of the cata-strophe.*

*The fol-low-ing are ex-tracts from Chace’s nar-rat-ive: “Every fact seemed
to war-rant me in con-clud-ing that it was any-thing but chance which
dir-ec-ted his op-er-a-tions; he made two sev-eral at-tacks upon the ship, at
a short in-ter-val between them, both of which, ac-cord-ing to their
dir-ec-tion, were cal-cu-lated to do us the most in-jury, by be-ing made
ahead, and thereby com-bin-ing the speed of the two ob-jects for the
shock; to ef-fect which, the ex-act manœuvres which he made were
ne-ces-sary. His as-pect was most hor-rible, and such as in-dic-ated
re-sent-ment and fury. He came dir-ectly from the shoal which we had just
be-fore entered, and in which we had struck three of his com-pan-ions, as
if fired with re-venge for their suf-fer-ings.” Again: “At all events, the
whole cir-cum-stances taken to-gether, all hap-pen-ing be-fore my own eyes,
and pro-du-cing, at the time, im-pres-sions in my mind of de-cided,
cal-cu-lat-ing mis-chief, on the part of the whale (many of which
im-pres-sions I can-not now re-call), in-duce me to be sat-is-fied that I am
cor-rect in my opin-ion.”

Here are his re-flec-tions some time after quit-ting the ship, dur-ing a
black night in an open boat, when al-most des-pair-ing of reach-ing any
hos-pit-able shore. “The dark ocean and swell-ing wa-ters were noth-ing; the
fears of be-ing swal-lowed up by some dread-ful tem-pest, or dashed upon
hid-den rocks, with all the other or-din-ary sub-jects of fear-ful
con-tem-pla-tion, seemed scarcely en-titled to a mo-ment’s thought; the
dis-mal look-ing wreck, and _the hor-rid as-pect and re-venge of the whale_,
wholly en-grossed my re-flec-tions, un-til day again made its ap-pear-ance.”

In an-other place—p. 45,—he speaks of “_the mys-ter-i-ous and mor-tal at-tack
of the an-im-al_.”

Se-condly: The ship Union, also of Nan-tucket, was in the year 1807
totally lost off the Azores by a sim-ilar on-set, but the au-then-tic
par-tic-u-lars of this cata-strophe I have never chanced to en-counter,
though from the whale hunters I have now and then heard cas-ual
al-lu-sions to it.

Thirdly: Some eight-een or twenty years ago Com-modore J——, then
com-mand-ing an Amer-ican sloop-of-war of the first class, happened to be
din-ing with a party of whal-ing cap-tains, on board a Nan-tucket ship in
the har-bor of Oahu, Sand-wich Is-lands. Con-ver-sa-tion turn-ing upon whales,
the Com-modore was pleased to be scep-tical touch-ing the amaz-ing strength
ascribed to them by the pro-fes-sional gen-tle-men present. He per-emp-tor-ily
denied for ex-ample, that any whale could so smite his stout
sloop-of-war as to cause her to leak so much as a thimble-ful. Very
good; but there is more com-ing. Some weeks after, the Com-modore set
sail in this im-preg-nable craft for Val-paraiso. But he was stopped on
the way by a portly sperm whale, that begged a few mo-ments’
con-fid-en-tial busi-ness with him. That busi-ness con-sisted in fetch-ing the
Com-modore’s craft such a thwack, that with all his pumps go-ing he made
straight for the nearest port to heave down and re-pair. I am not
su-per-sti-tious, but I con-sider the Com-modore’s in-ter-view with that whale
as provid-en-tial. Was not Saul of Tarsus con-ver-ted from un-be-lief by a
sim-ilar fright? I tell you, the sperm whale will stand no non-sense.

I will now refer you to Langs-dorff’s Voy-ages for a little cir-cum-stance
in point, pe-cu-li-arly in-ter-est-ing to the writer hereof. Langs-dorff, you
must know by the way, was at-tached to the Rus-sian Ad-miral Kru-sen-stern’s
fam-ous Dis-cov-ery Ex-ped-i-tion in the be-gin-ning of the present cen-tury.
Cap-tain Langs-dorff thus be-gins his sev-en-teenth chapter:

“By the thir-teenth of May our ship was ready to sail, and the next day
we were out in the open sea, on our way to Ochotsh. The weather was
very clear and fine, but so in-tol-er-ably cold that we were ob-liged to
keep on our fur cloth-ing. For some days we had very little wind; it was
not till the nine-teenth that a brisk gale from the north-w-est sprang up.
An un-com-mon large whale, the body of which was lar-ger than the ship
it-self, lay al-most at the sur-face of the wa-ter, but was not per-ceived
by any one on board till the mo-ment when the ship, which was in full
sail, was al-most upon him, so that it was im-possible to pre-vent its
strik-ing against him. We were thus placed in the most im-min-ent danger,
as this gi-gantic creature, set-ting up its back, raised the ship three
feet at least out of the wa-ter. The masts reeled, and the sails fell
al-to-gether, while we who were be-low all sprang in-stantly upon the deck,
con-clud-ing that we had struck upon some rock; in-stead of this we saw
the mon-ster sail-ing off with the ut-most grav-ity and solem-nity. Cap-tain
D’Wolf ap-plied im-me-di-ately to the pumps to ex-am-ine whether or not the
ves-sel had re-ceived any dam-age from the shock, but we found that very
hap-pily it had es-caped en-tirely un-injured.”

Now, the Cap-tain D’Wolf here al-luded to as com-mand-ing the ship in
ques-tion, is a New Englander, who, after a long life of un-usual
ad-ven-tures as a sea-cap-tain, this day resides in the vil-lage of
Dorchester near Bo-ston. I have the honor of be-ing a nephew of his. I
have par-tic-u-larly ques-tioned him con-cern-ing this pas-sage in Langs-dorff.
He sub-stan-ti-ates every word. The ship, how-ever, was by no means a large
one: a Rus-sian craft built on the Siberian coast, and pur-chased by my
uncle after bar-ter-ing away the ves-sel in which he sailed from home.

In that up and down manly book of old-fash-ioned ad-ven-ture, so full,
too, of hon-est won-ders—the voy-age of Lionel Wafer, one of an-cient
Dampier’s old chums—I found a little mat-ter set down so like that just
quoted from Langs-dorff, that I can-not for-bear in-sert-ing it here for a
cor-rob-or-at-ive ex-ample, if such be needed.

Lionel, it seems, was on his way to “John Ferdin-ando,” as he calls the
mod-ern Juan Fernandes. “In our way thither,” he says, “about four
o’clock in the morn-ing, when we were about one hun-dred and fifty
leagues from the Main of Amer-ica, our ship felt a ter-rible shock, which
put our men in such con-sterna-tion that they could hardly tell where
they were or what to think; but every one began to pre-pare for death.
And, in-deed, the shock was so sud-den and vi-ol-ent, that we took it for
gran-ted the ship had struck against a rock; but when the amazement was
a little over, we cast the lead, and soun-ded, but found no ground. * *
* * * The sud-den-ness of the shock made the guns leap in their
car-riages, and sev-eral of the men were shaken out of their ham-mocks.
Cap-tain Davis, who lay with his head on a gun, was thrown out of his
cabin!” Lionel then goes on to im-pute the shock to an earth-quake, and
seems to sub-stan-ti-ate the im-puta-tion by stat-ing that a great
earth-quake, some-where about that time, did ac-tu-ally do great mis-chief
along the Span-ish land. But I should not much won-der if, in the
dark-ness of that early hour of the morn-ing, the shock was after all
caused by an un-seen whale ver-tic-ally bump-ing the hull from be-neath.

I might pro-ceed with sev-eral more ex-amples, one way or an-other known to
me, of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale. In more
than one in-stance, he has been known, not only to chase the as-sail-ing
boats back to their ships, but to pur-sue the ship it-self, and long
with-stand all the lances hurled at him from its decks. The Eng-lish ship
Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head; and, as for his strength, let
me say, that there have been ex-amples where the lines at-tached to a
run-ning sperm whale have, in a calm, been trans-ferred to the ship, and
se-cured there; the whale tow-ing her great hull through the wa-ter, as a
horse walks off with a cart. Again, it is very of-ten ob-served that, if
the sperm whale, once struck, is al-lowed time to rally, he then acts,
not so of-ten with blind rage, as with wil-ful, de-lib-er-ate designs of
de-struc-tion to his pur-suers; nor is it without con-vey-ing some elo-quent
in-dic-a-tion of his char-ac-ter, that upon be-ing at-tacked he will
fre-quently open his mouth, and re-tain it in that dread ex-pan-sion for
sev-eral con-sec-ut-ive minutes. But I must be con-tent with only one more
and a con-clud-ing il-lus-tra-tion; a re-mark-able and most sig-ni-fic-ant one,
by which you will not fail to see, that not only is the most mar-vel-lous
event in this book cor-rob-or-ated by plain facts of the present day, but
that these mar-vels (like all mar-vels) are mere re-pe-ti-tions of the ages;
so that for the mil-lionth time we say amen with So-lomon—Ver-ily there is
noth-ing new un-der the sun.

In the sixth Chris-tian cen-tury lived Pro-copius, a Chris-tian ma-gis-trate
of Con-stantinople, in the days when Justinian was Em-peror and
Bel-is-arius gen-eral. As many know, he wrote the his-tory of his own
times, a work every way of un-com-mon value. By the best au-thor-it-ies, he
has al-ways been con-sidered a most trust-worthy and un-ex-ag-ger-at-ing
his-tor-ian, ex-cept in some one or two par-tic-u-lars, not at all af-fect-ing
the mat-ter presently to be men-tioned.

Now, in this his-tory of his, Pro-copius men-tions that, dur-ing the term
of his pre-fec-ture at Con-stantinople, a great sea-mon-ster was cap-tured
in the neigh-bor-ing Pro-pontis, or Sea of Mar-mora, after hav-ing des-troyed
ves-sels at in-ter-vals in those wa-ters for a period of more than fifty
years. A fact thus set down in sub-stan-tial his-tory can-not eas-ily be
gain-said. Nor is there any reason it should be. Of what pre-cise spe-cies
this sea-mon-ster was, is not men-tioned. But as he des-troyed ships, as
well as for other reas-ons, he must have been a whale; and I am strongly
in-clined to think a sperm whale. And I will tell you why. For a long
time I fan-cied that the sperm whale had been al-ways un-known in the
Medi-ter-ranean and the deep wa-ters con-nect-ing with it. Even now I am
cer-tain that those seas are not, and per-haps never can be, in the
present con-sti-tu-tion of things, a place for his ha-bitual gregari-ous
re-sort. But fur-ther in-vest-ig-a-tions have re-cently proved to me, that in
mod-ern times there have been isol-ated in-stances of the pres-ence of the
sperm whale in the Medi-ter-ranean. I am told, on good au-thor-ity, that on
the Bar-bary coast, a Com-modore Davis of the Brit-ish navy found the
skel-eton of a sperm whale. Now, as a ves-sel of war read-ily passes
through the Dard-anelles, hence a sperm whale could, by the same route,
pass out of the Medi-ter-ranean into the Pro-pontis.

In the Pro-pontis, as far as I can learn, none of that pe-cu-liar
sub-stance called _brit_ is to be found, the al-i-ment of the right whale.
But I have every reason to be-lieve that the food of the sperm
whale—squid or cuttle-fish—lurks at the bot-tom of that sea, be-cause
large creatures, but by no means the largest of that sort, have been
found at its sur-face. If, then, you prop-erly put these state-ments
to-gether, and reason upon them a bit, you will clearly per-ceive that,
ac-cord-ing to all hu-man reas-on-ing, Pro-copius’s sea-mon-ster, that for
half a cen-tury stove the ships of a Ro-man Em-peror, must in all
prob-ab-il-ity have been a sperm whale.


CHAPTER 46. Sur-mises.

Though, con-sumed with the hot fire of his pur-pose, Ahab in all his
thoughts and ac-tions ever had in view the ul-ti-mate cap-ture of Moby
Dick; though he seemed ready to sac-ri-fice all mor-tal in-terests to that
one pas-sion; nev-er-the-less it may have been that he was by nature and
long ha-bitu-ation far too wed-ded to a fiery whale-man’s ways, al-to-gether
to aban-don the col-lat-eral pro-sec-u-tion of the voy-age. Or at least if
this were oth-er-wise, there were not want-ing other motives much more
in-flu-en-tial with him. It would be re-fin-ing too much, per-haps, even
con-sid-er-ing his mono-mania, to hint that his vin-dict-ive-ness to-wards the
White Whale might have pos-sibly ex-ten-ded it-self in some de-gree to all
sperm whales, and that the more mon-sters he slew by so much the more he
mul-ti-plied the chances that each sub-sequently en-countered whale would
prove to be the hated one he hunted. But if such an hy-po-thesis be
in-deed ex-cep-tion-able, there were still ad-di-tional con-sid-er-a-tions which,
though not so strictly ac-cord-ing with the wild-ness of his rul-ing
pas-sion, yet were by no means in-cap-able of sway-ing him.

To ac-com-plish his ob-ject Ahab must use tools; and of all tools used in
the shadow of the moon, men are most apt to get out of or-der. He knew,
for ex-ample, that how-ever mag-netic his as-cend-ency in some re-spects was
over Star-buck, yet that as-cend-ency did not cover the com-plete spir-itual
man any more than mere cor-por-eal su-peri-or-ity in-volves in-tel-lec-tual
mas-ter-ship; for to the purely spir-itual, the in-tel-lec-tual but stand in
a sort of cor-por-eal re-la-tion. Star-buck’s body and Star-buck’s co-erced
will were Ahab’s, so long as Ahab kept his mag-net at Star-buck’s brain;
still he knew that for all this the chief mate, in his soul, ab-horred
his cap-tain’s quest, and could he, would joy-fully dis-in-teg-rate him-self
from it, or even frus-trate it. It might be that a long in-ter-val would
elapse ere the White Whale was seen. Dur-ing that long in-ter-val Star-buck
would ever be apt to fall into open re-lapses of re-bel-lion against his
cap-tain’s lead-er-ship, un-less some or-din-ary, pruden-tial, cir-cum-stan-tial
in-flu-ences were brought to bear upon him. Not only that, but the subtle
in-san-ity of Ahab re-spect-ing Moby Dick was no-ways more sig-ni-fic-antly
mani-fes-ted than in his su-per-lat-ive sense and shrewd-ness in fore-see-ing
that, for the present, the hunt should in some way be stripped of that
strange ima-gin-at-ive im-pi-ous-ness which nat-ur-ally in-ves-ted it; that the
full ter-ror of the voy-age must be kept with-drawn into the ob-scure
back-ground (for few men’s cour-age is proof against pro-trac-ted
med-it-a-tion un-re-lieved by ac-tion); that when they stood their long night
watches, his of-ficers and men must have some nearer things to think of
than Moby Dick. For how-ever eagerly and im-petu-ously the sav-age crew had
hailed the an-nounce-ment of his quest; yet all sail-ors of all sorts are
more or less ca-pri-cious and un-re-li-able—they live in the vary-ing outer
weather, and they in-hale its fickle-ness—and when re-tained for any
ob-ject re-mote and blank in the pur-suit, how-ever promis-sory of life and
pas-sion in the end, it is above all things re-quis-ite that tem-por-ary
in-terests and em-ploy-ments should in-ter-vene and hold them health-ily
sus-pen-ded for the fi-nal dash.

Nor was Ahab un-mind-ful of an-other thing. In times of strong emo-tion
man-kind dis-dain all base con-sid-er-a-tions; but such times are evan-es-cent.
The per-man-ent con-sti-tu-tional con-di-tion of the man-u-fac-tured man, thought
Ahab, is sor-did-ness. Grant-ing that the White Whale fully in-cites the
hearts of this my sav-age crew, and play-ing round their sav-age-ness even
breeds a cer-tain gen-er-ous knight-er-rant-ism in them, still, while for
the love of it they give chase to Moby Dick, they must also have food
for their more com-mon, daily ap-pet-ites. For even the high lif-ted and
chiv-al-ric Cru-saders of old times were not con-tent to tra-verse two
thou-sand miles of land to fight for their holy sep-ulchre, without
com-mit-ting burg-lar-ies, pick-ing pock-ets, and gain-ing other pi-ous
per-quis-ites by the way. Had they been strictly held to their one fi-nal
and ro-mantic ob-ject—that fi-nal and ro-mantic ob-ject, too many would have
turned from in dis-gust. I will not strip these men, thought Ahab, of
all hopes of cash—aye, cash. They may scorn cash now; but let some
months go by, and no per-spect-ive prom-ise of it to them, and then this
same qui-es-cent cash all at once mutiny-ing in them, this same cash would
soon cash-ier Ahab.

Nor was there want-ing still an-other pre-cau-tion-ary motive more re-lated
to Ahab per-son-ally. Hav-ing im-puls-ively, it is prob-able, and per-haps
some-what pre-ma-turely re-vealed the prime but private pur-pose of the
Pequod’s voy-age, Ahab was now en-tirely con-scious that, in so do-ing, he
had in-dir-ectly laid him-self open to the un-answer-able charge of
usurp-a-tion; and with per-fect im-pun-ity, both moral and legal, his crew
if so dis-posed, and to that end com-pet-ent, could re-fuse all fur-ther
obed-i-ence to him, and even vi-ol-ently wrest from him the com-mand. From
even the barely hin-ted im-puta-tion of usurp-a-tion, and the pos-sible
con-sequences of such a sup-pressed im-pres-sion gain-ing ground, Ahab must
of course have been most anxious to pro-tect him-self. That pro-tec-tion
could only con-sist in his own pre-dom-in-at-ing brain and heart and hand,
backed by a heed-ful, closely cal-cu-lat-ing at-ten-tion to every minute
at-mo-spheric in-flu-ence which it was pos-sible for his crew to be
sub-jec-ted to.

For all these reas-ons then, and oth-ers per-haps too ana-lytic to be
verbally de-veloped here, Ahab plainly saw that he must still in a good
de-gree con-tinue true to the nat-ural, nom-inal pur-pose of the Pequod’s
voy-age; ob-serve all cus-tom-ary us-ages; and not only that, but force
him-self to evince all his well known pas-sion-ate in-terest in the gen-eral
pur-suit of his pro-fes-sion.

Be all this as it may, his voice was now of-ten heard hail-ing the three
mast-heads and ad-mon-ish-ing them to keep a bright look-out, and not omit
re-port-ing even a por-poise. This vi-gil-ance was not long without re-ward.


CHAPTER 47. The Mat-Maker.

It was a cloudy, sul-try af-ter-noon; the sea-men were lazily loun-ging
about the decks, or va-cantly gaz-ing over into the lead-col-oured wa-ters.
Queequeg and I were mildly em-ployed weav-ing what is called a sword-mat,
for an ad-di-tional lash-ing to our boat. So still and sub-dued and yet
some-how pre-lud-ing was all the scene, and such an in-cant-a-tion of rev-erie
lurked in the air, that each si-lent sailor seemed re-solved into his own
in-vis-ible self.

I was the at-tend-ant or page of Queequeg, while busy at the mat. As I
kept passing and re-passing the filling or woof of mar-line between the
long yarns of the warp, us-ing my own hand for the shuttle, and as
Queequeg, stand-ing side-ways, ever and anon slid his heavy oaken sword
between the threads, and idly look-ing off upon the wa-ter, care-lessly
and un-think-ingly drove home every yarn: I say so strange a dream-i-ness
did there then reign all over the ship and all over the sea, only
broken by the in-ter-mit-ting dull sound of the sword, that it seemed as
if this were the Loom of Time, and I my-self were a shuttle mech-an-ic-ally
weav-ing and weav-ing away at the Fates. There lay the fixed threads of
the warp sub-ject to but one single, ever re-turn-ing, un-chan-ging
vi-bra-tion, and that vi-bra-tion merely enough to ad-mit of the cross-wise
in-ter-blend-ing of other threads with its own. This warp seemed
ne-ces-sity; and here, thought I, with my own hand I ply my own shuttle
and weave my own des-tiny into these un-al-ter-able threads. Mean-time,
Queequeg’s im-puls-ive, in-dif-fer-ent sword, some-times hit-ting the woof
slant-ingly, or crookedly, or strongly, or weakly, as the case might be;
and by this dif-fer-ence in the con-clud-ing blow pro-du-cing a cor-res-pond-ing
con-trast in the fi-nal as-pect of the com-pleted fab-ric; this sav-age’s
sword, thought I, which thus fi-nally shapes and fash-ions both warp and
woof; this easy, in-dif-fer-ent sword must be chance—aye, chance, free
will, and ne-ces-sity—no-wise in-com-pat-ible—all in-ter-weav-ingly work-ing
to-gether. The straight warp of ne-ces-sity, not to be swerved from its
ul-ti-mate course—its every al-tern-at-ing vi-bra-tion, in-deed, only tend-ing
to that; free will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads;
and chance, though re-strained in its play within the right lines of
ne-ces-sity, and side-ways in its mo-tions dir-ec-ted by free will, though
thus pre-scribed to by both, chance by turns rules either, and has the
last fea-tur-ing blow at events.

Thus we were weav-ing and weav-ing away when I star-ted at a sound so
strange, long drawn, and mu-sic-ally wild and un-earthly, that the ball of
free will dropped from my hand, and I stood gaz-ing up at the clouds
whence that voice dropped like a wing. High aloft in the cross-trees
was that mad Gay-Header, Tasht-ego. His body was reach-ing eagerly
for-ward, his hand stretched out like a wand, and at brief sud-den
in-ter-vals he con-tin-ued his cries. To be sure the same sound was that
very mo-ment per-haps be-ing heard all over the seas, from hun-dreds of
whale-men’s look-outs perched as high in the air; but from few of those
lungs could that ac-cus-tomed old cry have de-rived such a mar-vel-lous
ca-dence as from Tasht-ego the In-dian’s.

As he stood hov-er-ing over you half sus-pen-ded in air, so wildly and
eagerly peer-ing to-wards the ho-ri-zon, you would have thought him some
prophet or seer be-hold-ing the shad-ows of Fate, and by those wild cries
an-noun-cing their com-ing.

“There she blows! there! there! there! she blows! she blows!”

“Where-away?”

“On the lee-beam, about two miles off! a school of them!”

In-stantly all was com-mo-tion.

The Sperm Whale blows as a clock ticks, with the same un-devi-at-ing and
re-li-able uni-form-ity. And thereby whale-men dis-tin-guish this fish from
other tribes of his genus.

“There go flukes!” was now the cry from Tasht-ego; and the whales
dis-ap-peared.

“Quick, stew-ard!” cried Ahab. “Time! time!”

Dough-Boy hur-ried be-low, glanced at the watch, and re-por-ted the ex-act
minute to Ahab.

The ship was now kept away from the wind, and she went gently rolling
be-fore it. Tasht-ego re-port-ing that the whales had gone down head-ing to
lee-ward, we con-fid-ently looked to see them again dir-ectly in ad-vance of
our bows. For that sin-gu-lar craft at times evinced by the Sperm Whale
when, sound-ing with his head in one dir-ec-tion, he nev-er-the-less, while
con-cealed be-neath the sur-face, mills round, and swiftly swims off in
the op-pos-ite quarter—this de-ceit-ful-ness of his could not now be in
ac-tion; for there was no reason to sup-pose that the fish seen by
Tasht-ego had been in any way alarmed, or in-deed knew at all of our
vi-cin-ity. One of the men se-lec-ted for ship-keep-ers—that is, those not
ap-poin-ted to the boats, by this time re-lieved the In-dian at the
main-mast head. The sail-ors at the fore and mizzen had come down; the
line tubs were fixed in their places; the cranes were thrust out; the
main-yard was backed, and the three boats swung over the sea like three
samphire bas-kets over high cliffs. Out-side of the bul-warks their eager
crews with one hand clung to the rail, while one foot was ex-pect-antly
poised on the gun-wale. So look the long line of man-of-war’s men about
to throw them-selves on board an en-emy’s ship.

But at this crit-ical in-stant a sud-den ex-clam-a-tion was heard that took
every eye from the whale. With a start all glared at dark Ahab, who was
sur-roun-ded by five dusky phantoms that seemed fresh formed out of air.


CHAPTER 48. The First Lower-ing.

The phantoms, for so they then seemed, were flit-ting on the other side
of the deck, and, with a noise-less celer-ity, were cast-ing loose the
tackles and bands of the boat which swung there. This boat had al-ways
been deemed one of the spare boats, though tech-nic-ally called the
cap-tain’s, on ac-count of its hanging from the star-board quarter. The
fig-ure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart, with one white
tooth evilly pro-trud-ing from its steel-like lips. A rumpled Chinese
jacket of black cot-ton fu-ner-eally in-ves-ted him, with wide black
trowsers of the same dark stuff. But strangely crown-ing this ebon-ness
was a glisten-ing white plaited turban, the liv-ing hair braided and
coiled round and round upon his head. Less swart in as-pect, the
com-pan-ions of this fig-ure were of that vivid, ti-ger-yel-low com-plex-ion
pe-cu-liar to some of the ab-ori-ginal nat-ives of the Manil-las;—a race
no-tori-ous for a cer-tain di-ab-ol-ism of sub-tilty, and by some hon-est white
mar-iners sup-posed to be the paid spies and secret con-fid-en-tial agents
on the wa-ter of the devil, their lord, whose count-ing-room they sup-pose
to be else-where.

While yet the won-der-ing ship’s com-pany were gaz-ing upon these
strangers, Ahab cried out to the white-turbaned old man at their head,
“All ready there, Fedal-lah?”

“Ready,” was the half-hissed reply.

“Lower away then; d’ye hear?” shout-ing across the deck. “Lower away
there, I say.”

Such was the thun-der of his voice, that spite of their amazement the
men sprang over the rail; the sheaves whirled round in the blocks; with
a wal-low, the three boats dropped into the sea; while, with a
dex-ter-ous, off-handed dar-ing, un-known in any other vo-ca-tion, the
sail-ors, goat-like, leaped down the rolling ship’s side into the tossed
boats be-low.

Hardly had they pulled out from un-der the ship’s lee, when a fourth
keel, com-ing from the wind-ward side, pulled round un-der the stern, and
showed the five strangers row-ing Ahab, who, stand-ing erect in the
stern, loudly hailed Star-buck, Stubb, and Flask, to spread them-selves
widely, so as to cover a large ex-panse of wa-ter. But with all their
eyes again riv-eted upon the swart Fedal-lah and his crew, the in-mates of
the other boats obeyed not the com-mand.

“Cap-tain Ahab?—” said Star-buck.

“Spread yourselves,” cried Ahab; “give way, all four boats. Thou,
Flask, pull out more to lee-ward!”

“Aye, aye, sir,” cheer-ily cried little King-Post, sweep-ing round his
great steer-ing oar. “Lay back!” ad-dress-ing his crew.
“There!—there!—there again! There she blows right ahead, boys!—lay
back!”

“Never heed yon-der yel-low boys, Archy.”

“Oh, I don’t mind ’em, sir,” said Archy; “I knew it all be-fore now.
Didn’t I hear ’em in the hold? And didn’t I tell Cabaco here of it?
What say ye, Cabaco? They are stowaways, Mr. Flask.”

“Pull, pull, my fine hearts-alive; pull, my chil-dren; pull, my little
ones,” drawl-ingly and sooth-ingly sighed Stubb to his crew, some of whom
still showed signs of un-eas-i-ness. “Why don’t you break your back-bones,
my boys? What is it you stare at? Those chaps in yon-der boat? Tut! They
are only five more hands come to help us—never mind from where—the more
the mer-rier. Pull, then, do pull; never mind the brim-stone—dev-ils are
good fel-lows enough. So, so; there you are now; that’s the stroke for a
thou-sand pounds; that’s the stroke to sweep the stakes! Hur-rah for the
gold cup of sperm oil, my her-oes! Three cheers, men—all hearts alive!
Easy, easy; don’t be in a hurry—don’t be in a hurry. Why don’t you snap
your oars, you ras-cals? Bite some-thing, you dogs! So, so, so,
then:—softly, softly! That’s it—that’s it! long and strong. Give way
there, give way! The devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin rapscal-lions; ye are
all asleep. Stop snor-ing, ye sleep-ers, and pull. Pull, will ye? pull,
can’t ye? pull, won’t ye? Why in the name of gudgeons and ginger-cakes
don’t ye pull?—pull and break some-thing! pull, and start your eyes out!
Here!” whip-ping out the sharp knife from his girdle; “every mother’s
son of ye draw his knife, and pull with the blade between his teeth.
That’s it—that’s it. Now ye do some-thing; that looks like it, my
steel-bits. Start her—start her, my sil-ver-spoons! Start her,
marling-spikes!”

Stubb’s ex-or-dium to his crew is given here at large, be-cause he had
rather a pe-cu-liar way of talk-ing to them in gen-eral, and es-pe-cially in
in-cul-cat-ing the re-li-gion of row-ing. But you must not sup-pose from this
spe-ci-men of his ser-mon-iz-ings that he ever flew into down-right pas-sions
with his con-greg-a-tion. Not at all; and therein con-sisted his chief
pe-cu-li-ar-ity. He would say the most ter-rific things to his crew, in a
tone so strangely com-poun-ded of fun and fury, and the fury seemed so
cal-cu-lated merely as a spice to the fun, that no oars-man could hear
such queer in-voc-a-tions without pulling for dear life, and yet pulling
for the mere joke of the thing. Besides he all the time looked so easy
and in-dol-ent him-self, so loun-gingly man-aged his steer-ing-oar, and so
broadly gaped—open-mouthed at times—that the mere sight of such a
yawn-ing com-mander, by sheer force of con-trast, ac-ted like a charm upon
the crew. Then again, Stubb was one of those odd sort of hu-mor-ists,
whose jol-lity is some-times so curi-ously am-bigu-ous, as to put all
in-feri-ors on their guard in the mat-ter of obey-ing them.

In obed-i-ence to a sign from Ahab, Star-buck was now pulling ob-liquely
across Stubb’s bow; and when for a minute or so the two boats were
pretty near to each other, Stubb hailed the mate.

“Mr. Star-buck! lar-board boat there, ahoy! a word with ye, sir, if ye
please!”

“Hal-loa!” re-turned Star-buck, turn-ing round not a single inch as he
spoke; still earn-estly but whis-per-ingly ur-ging his crew; his face set
like a flint from Stubb’s.

“What think ye of those yel-low boys, sir!”

“Smuggled on board, some-how, be-fore the ship sailed. (Strong, strong,
boys!)” in a whis-per to his crew, then speak-ing out loud again: “A sad
busi-ness, Mr. Stubb! (seethe her, seethe her, my lads!) but never mind,
Mr. Stubb, all for the best. Let all your crew pull strong, come what
will. (Spring, my men, spring!) There’s hogsheads of sperm ahead, Mr.
Stubb, and that’s what ye came for. (Pull, my boys!) Sperm, sperm’s the
play! This at least is duty; duty and profit hand in hand.”

“Aye, aye, I thought as much,” so-li-lo-quized Stubb, when the boats
di-verged, “as soon as I clapt eye on ’em, I thought so. Aye, and that’s
what he went into the after hold for, so of-ten, as Dough-Boy long
sus-pec-ted. They were hid-den down there. The White Whale’s at the bot-tom
of it. Well, well, so be it! Can’t be helped! All right! Give way, men!
It ain’t the White Whale to-day! Give way!”

Now the ad-vent of these out-land-ish strangers at such a crit-ical in-stant
as the lower-ing of the boats from the deck, this had not un-reas-on-ably
awakened a sort of su-per-sti-tious amazement in some of the ship’s
com-pany; but Archy’s fan-cied dis-cov-ery hav-ing some time pre-vi-ous got
abroad among them, though in-deed not cred-ited then, this had in some
small meas-ure pre-pared them for the event. It took off the ex-treme edge
of their won-der; and so what with all this and Stubb’s con-fid-ent way of
ac-count-ing for their ap-pear-ance, they were for the time freed from
su-per-sti-tious sur-misings; though the af-fair still left abund-ant room
for all man-ner of wild con-jec-tures as to dark Ahab’s pre-cise agency in
the mat-ter from the be-gin-ning. For me, I si-lently re-called the
mys-ter-i-ous shad-ows I had seen creep-ing on board the Pequod dur-ing the
dim Nan-tucket dawn, as well as the en-ig-mat-ical hint-ings of the
un-ac-count-able Eli-jah.

Mean-time, Ahab, out of hear-ing of his of-ficers, hav-ing sided the
fur-thest to wind-ward, was still ran-ging ahead of the other boats; a
cir-cum-stance be-speak-ing how po-tent a crew was pulling him. Those ti-ger
yel-low creatures of his seemed all steel and whale-bone; like five
trip-ham-mers they rose and fell with reg-u-lar strokes of strength, which
peri-od-ic-ally star-ted the boat along the wa-ter like a ho-ri-zontal burst
boiler out of a Mis-sis-sippi steamer. As for Fedal-lah, who was seen
pulling the har-poon-eer oar, he had thrown aside his black jacket, and
dis-played his na-ked chest with the whole part of his body above the
gun-wale, clearly cut against the al-tern-at-ing de-pres-sions of the wa-tery
ho-ri-zon; while at the other end of the boat Ahab, with one arm, like a
fen-cer’s, thrown half back-ward into the air, as if to coun-ter-bal-ance
any tend-ency to trip; Ahab was seen stead-ily man-aging his steer-ing oar
as in a thou-sand boat lower-ings ere the White Whale had torn him. All
at once the out-stretched arm gave a pe-cu-liar mo-tion and then re-mained
fixed, while the boat’s five oars were seen sim-ul-tan-eously peaked. Boat
and crew sat mo-tion-less on the sea. In-stantly the three spread boats in
the rear paused on their way. The whales had ir-reg-u-larly settled bod-ily
down into the blue, thus giv-ing no dis-tantly dis-cern-ible token of the
move-ment, though from his closer vi-cin-ity Ahab had ob-served it.

“Every man look out along his oars!” cried Star-buck. “Thou, Queequeg,
stand up!”

Nimbly spring-ing up on the tri-an-gu-lar raised box in the bow, the sav-age
stood erect there, and with in-tensely eager eyes gazed off to-wards the
spot where the chase had last been descried. Like-wise upon the ex-treme
stern of the boat where it was also tri-an-gu-larly plat-formed level with
the gun-wale, Star-buck him-self was seen coolly and adroitly bal-an-cing
him-self to the jerking toss-ings of his chip of a craft, and si-lently
eye-ing the vast blue eye of the sea.

Not very far dis-tant Flask’s boat was also ly-ing breath-lessly still;
its com-mander reck-lessly stand-ing upon the top of the log-ger-head, a
stout sort of post rooted in the keel, and rising some two feet above
the level of the stern plat-form. It is used for catch-ing turns with the
whale line. Its top is not more spa-cious than the palm of a man’s hand,
and stand-ing upon such a base as that, Flask seemed perched at the
mast-head of some ship which had sunk to all but her trucks. But little
King-Post was small and short, and at the same time little King-Post
was full of a large and tall am-bi-tion, so that this log-ger-head
stand-point of his did by no means sat-isfy King-Post.

“I can’t see three seas off; tip us up an oar there, and let me on to
that.”

Upon this, Dag-goo, with either hand upon the gun-wale to steady his way,
swiftly slid aft, and then erect-ing him-self vo-lun-teered his lofty
shoulders for a ped-es-tal.

“Good a mast-head as any, sir. Will you mount?”

“That I will, and thank ye very much, my fine fel-low; only I wish you
fifty feet taller.”

Whereupon plant-ing his feet firmly against two op-pos-ite planks of the
boat, the gi-gantic negro, stoop-ing a little, presen-ted his flat palm to
Flask’s foot, and then put-ting Flask’s hand on his hearse-plumed head
and bid-ding him spring as he him-self should toss, with one dex-ter-ous
fling landed the little man high and dry on his shoulders. And here was
Flask now stand-ing, Dag-goo with one lif-ted arm fur-nish-ing him with a
breast-band to lean against and steady him-self by.

At any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with what won-drous
habitude of un-con-scious skill the whale-man will main-tain an erect
pos-ture in his boat, even when pitched about by the most ri-ot-ously
per-verse and cross-run-ning seas. Still more strange to see him gid-dily
perched upon the log-ger-head it-self, un-der such cir-cum-stances. But the
sight of little Flask moun-ted upon gi-gantic Dag-goo was yet more
curi-ous; for sus-tain-ing him-self with a cool, in-dif-fer-ent, easy,
un-thought of, bar-baric majesty, the noble negro to every roll of the
sea har-mo-ni-ously rolled his fine form. On his broad back, flaxen-haired
Flask seemed a snow-flake. The bearer looked no-bler than the rider.
Though truly vi-va-cious, tu-mul-tu-ous, os-ten-ta-tious little Flask would now
and then stamp with im-pa-tience; but not one ad-ded heave did he thereby
give to the negro’s lordly chest. So have I seen Pas-sion and Van-ity
stamp-ing the liv-ing mag-nan-im-ous earth, but the earth did not al-ter her
tides and her sea-sons for that.

Mean-while Stubb, the third mate, be-trayed no such far-gaz-ing
so-li-citudes. The whales might have made one of their reg-u-lar sound-ings,
not a tem-por-ary dive from mere fright; and if that were the case,
Stubb, as his wont in such cases, it seems, was re-solved to solace the
lan-guish-ing in-ter-val with his pipe. He with-drew it from his hat-band,
where he al-ways wore it aslant like a feather. He loaded it, and rammed
home the load-ing with his thumb-end; but hardly had he ig-nited his
match across the rough sand-pa-per of his hand, when Tasht-ego, his
har-poon-eer, whose eyes had been set-ting to wind-ward like two fixed
stars, sud-denly dropped like light from his erect at-ti-tude to his seat,
cry-ing out in a quick phrensy of hurry, “Down, down all, and give
way!—there they are!”

To a lands-man, no whale, nor any sign of a her-ring, would have been
vis-ible at that mo-ment; noth-ing but a troubled bit of green-ish white
wa-ter, and thin scattered puffs of va-por hov-er-ing over it, and
suf-fus-ingly blow-ing off to lee-ward, like the con-fused scud from white
rolling bil-lows. The air around sud-denly vi-brated and tingled, as it
were, like the air over in-tensely heated plates of iron. Beneath this
at-mo-spheric wav-ing and curl-ing, and par-tially be-neath a thin layer of
wa-ter, also, the whales were swim-ming. Seen in ad-vance of all the other
in-dic-a-tions, the puffs of va-por they spouted, seemed their fore-run-ning
cour-i-ers and de-tached fly-ing out-riders.

All four boats were now in keen pur-suit of that one spot of troubled
wa-ter and air. But it bade fair to out-strip them; it flew on and on, as
a mass of in-ter-blend-ing bubbles borne down a rapid stream from the
hills.

“Pull, pull, my good boys,” said Star-buck, in the low-est pos-sible but
in-tensest con-cen-trated whis-per to his men; while the sharp fixed glance
from his eyes dar-ted straight ahead of the bow, al-most seemed as two
vis-ible needles in two un-err-ing bin-nacle com-passes. He did not say much
to his crew, though, nor did his crew say any-thing to him. Only the
si-lence of the boat was at in-ter-vals start-lingly pierced by one of his
pe-cu-liar whis-pers, now harsh with com-mand, now soft with en-treaty.

How dif-fer-ent the loud little King-Post. “Sing out and say some-thing,
my hearties. Roar and pull, my thun-der-bolts! Beach me, beach me on
their black backs, boys; only do that for me, and I’ll sign over to you
my Martha’s Vine-yard plant-a-tion, boys; in-clud-ing wife and chil-dren,
boys. Lay me on—lay me on! O Lord, Lord! but I shall go stark, star-ing
mad! See! see that white wa-ter!” And so shout-ing, he pulled his hat
from his head, and stamped up and down on it; then pick-ing it up,
flir-ted it far off upon the sea; and fi-nally fell to rear-ing and
plunging in the boat’s stern like a crazed colt from the prairie.

“Look at that chap now,” philo-soph-ic-ally drawled Stubb, who, with his
un-lighted short pipe, mech-an-ic-ally re-tained between his teeth, at a
short dis-tance, fol-lowed after—“He’s got fits, that Flask has. Fits?
yes, give him fits—that’s the very word—pitch fits into ’em. Mer-rily,
mer-rily, hearts-alive. Pud-ding for sup-per, you know;—merry’s the word.
Pull, babes—pull, suck-lings—pull, all. But what the devil are you
hur-ry-ing about? Softly, softly, and stead-ily, my men. Only pull, and
keep pulling; noth-ing more. Crack all your back-bones, and bite your
knives in two—that’s all. Take it easy—why don’t ye take it easy, I
say, and burst all your liv-ers and lungs!”

But what it was that in-scrut-able Ahab said to that ti-ger-yel-low crew of
his—these were words best omit-ted here; for you live un-der the blessed
light of the evan-gel-ical land. Only the in-fi-del sharks in the au-da-cious
seas may give ear to such words, when, with tor-nado brow, and eyes of
red murder, and foam-glued lips, Ahab leaped after his prey.

Mean-while, all the boats tore on. The re-peated spe-cific al-lu-sions of
Flask to “that whale,” as he called the fic-ti-tious mon-ster which he
de-clared to be in-cess-antly tan-tal-iz-ing his boat’s bow with its
tail—these al-lu-sions of his were at times so vivid and life-like, that
they would cause some one or two of his men to snatch a fear-ful look
over the shoulder. But this was against all rule; for the oars-men must
put out their eyes, and ram a skewer through their necks; us-age
pro-noun-cing that they must have no or-gans but ears, and no limbs but
arms, in these crit-ical mo-ments.

It was a sight full of quick won-der and awe! The vast swells of the
om-ni-po-tent sea; the sur-ging, hol-low roar they made, as they rolled
along the eight gun-wales, like gi-gantic bowls in a bound-less
bowl-ing-green; the brief sus-pen-ded agony of the boat, as it would tip
for an in-stant on the knife-like edge of the sharper waves, that al-most
seemed threat-en-ing to cut it in two; the sud-den pro-found dip into the
wa-tery glens and hol-lows; the keen spur-rings and goad-ings to gain the
top of the op-pos-ite hill; the head-long, sled-like slide down its other
side;—all these, with the cries of the heads-men and har-poon-eers, and
the shud-der-ing gasps of the oars-men, with the won-drous sight of the
ivory Pequod bear-ing down upon her boats with out-stretched sails, like
a wild hen after her scream-ing brood;—all this was thrill-ing.

Not the raw re-cruit, march-ing from the bosom of his wife into the fever
heat of his first battle; not the dead man’s ghost en-coun-ter-ing the
first un-known phantom in the other world;—neither of these can feel
stranger and stronger emo-tions than that man does, who for the first
time finds him-self pulling into the charmed, churned circle of the
hunted sperm whale.

The dan-cing white wa-ter made by the chase was now be-com-ing more and
more vis-ible, ow-ing to the in-creas-ing dark-ness of the dun cloud-shad-ows
flung upon the sea. The jets of va-por no longer blen-ded, but tilted
every-where to right and left; the whales seemed sep-ar-at-ing their wakes.
The boats were pulled more apart; Star-buck giv-ing chase to three whales
run-ning dead to lee-ward. Our sail was now set, and, with the still
rising wind, we rushed along; the boat go-ing with such mad-ness through
the wa-ter, that the lee oars could scarcely be worked rap-idly enough to
es-cape be-ing torn from the row-locks.

Soon we were run-ning through a suf-fus-ing wide veil of mist; neither
ship nor boat to be seen.

“Give way, men,” whispered Star-buck, draw-ing still fur-ther aft the
sheet of his sail; “there is time to kill a fish yet be-fore the squall
comes. There’s white wa-ter again!—close to! Spring!”

Soon after, two cries in quick suc-ces-sion on each side of us de-noted
that the other boats had got fast; but hardly were they over-heard, when
with a light-ning-like hurt-ling whis-per Star-buck said: “Stand up!” and
Queequeg, har-poon in hand, sprang to his feet.

Though not one of the oars-men was then fa-cing the life and death peril
so close to them ahead, yet with their eyes on the in-tense coun-ten-ance
of the mate in the stern of the boat, they knew that the im-min-ent
in-stant had come; they heard, too, an enorm-ous wal-low-ing sound as of
fifty ele-phants stir-ring in their lit-ter. Mean-while the boat was still
boom-ing through the mist, the waves curl-ing and hiss-ing around us like
the erec-ted crests of en-raged ser-pents.

“That’s his hump. _There_, _there_, give it to him!” whispered
Star-buck.

A short rush-ing sound leaped out of the boat; it was the dar-ted iron of
Queequeg. Then all in one wel-ded com-mo-tion came an in-vis-ible push from
astern, while for-ward the boat seemed strik-ing on a ledge; the sail
col-lapsed and ex-ploded; a gush of scald-ing va-por shot up near by;
some-thing rolled and tumbled like an earth-quake be-neath us. The whole
crew were half suf-foc-ated as they were tossed hel-ter-skel-ter into the
white curd-ling cream of the squall. Squall, whale, and har-poon had all
blen-ded to-gether; and the whale, merely grazed by the iron, es-caped.

Though com-pletely swamped, the boat was nearly un-harmed. Swim-ming round
it we picked up the float-ing oars, and lash-ing them across the gun-wale,
tumbled back to our places. There we sat up to our knees in the sea,
the wa-ter cov-er-ing every rib and plank, so that to our down-ward gaz-ing
eyes the sus-pen-ded craft seemed a coral boat grown up to us from the
bot-tom of the ocean.

The wind in-creased to a howl; the waves dashed their buck-lers to-gether;
the whole squall roared, forked, and crackled around us like a white
fire upon the prairie, in which, un-con-sumed, we were burn-ing; im-mor-tal
in these jaws of death! In vain we hailed the other boats; as well roar
to the live coals down the chim-ney of a flam-ing fur-nace as hail those
boats in that storm. Mean-while the driv-ing scud, rack, and mist, grew
darker with the shad-ows of night; no sign of the ship could be seen.
The rising sea for-bade all at-tempts to bale out the boat. The oars were
use-less as pro-pellers, per-form-ing now the of-fice of life-pre-serv-ers.
So, cut-ting the lash-ing of the wa-ter-proof match keg, after many
fail-ures Star-buck con-trived to ig-nite the lamp in the lan-tern; then
stretch-ing it on a waif pole, handed it to Queequeg as the
stand-ard-bearer of this for-lorn hope. There, then, he sat, hold-ing up
that im-be-cile candle in the heart of that almighty for-lorn-ness. There,
then, he sat, the sign and sym-bol of a man without faith, hope-lessly
hold-ing up hope in the midst of des-pair.

Wet, drenched through, and shiv-er-ing cold, des-pair-ing of ship or boat,
we lif-ted up our eyes as the dawn came on. The mist still spread over
the sea, the empty lan-tern lay crushed in the bot-tom of the boat.
Sud-denly Queequeg star-ted to his feet, hol-low-ing his hand to his ear.
We all heard a faint creak-ing, as of ropes and yards hitherto muffled
by the storm. The sound came nearer and nearer; the thick mists were
dimly par-ted by a huge, vague form. Af-frighted, we all sprang into the
sea as the ship at last loomed into view, bear-ing right down upon us
within a dis-tance of not much more than its length.

Float-ing on the waves we saw the aban-doned boat, as for one in-stant it
tossed and gaped be-neath the ship’s bows like a chip at the base of a
catar-act; and then the vast hull rolled over it, and it was seen no
more till it came up wel-ter-ing astern. Again we swam for it, were
dashed against it by the seas, and were at last taken up and safely
landed on board. Ere the squall came close to, the other boats had cut
loose from their fish and re-turned to the ship in good time. The ship
had given us up, but was still cruis-ing, if haply it might light upon
some token of our per-ish-ing,—an oar or a lance pole.


CHAPTER 49. The Hy-ena.

There are cer-tain queer times and oc-ca-sions in this strange mixed
af-fair we call life when a man takes this whole uni-verse for a vast
prac-tical joke, though the wit thereof he but dimly dis-cerns, and more
than sus-pects that the joke is at nobody’s ex-pense but his own.
However, noth-ing dis-pir-its, and noth-ing seems worth while dis-put-ing. He
bolts down all events, all creeds, and be-liefs, and per-sua-sions, all
hard things vis-ible and in-vis-ible, never mind how knobby; as an os-trich
of po-tent di-ges-tion gobbles down bul-lets and gun flints. And as for
small dif-fi-culties and wor-ry-ings, pro-spects of sud-den dis-aster, peril
of life and limb; all these, and death it-self, seem to him only sly,
good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side be-stowed by the un-seen
and un-ac-count-able old joker. That odd sort of way-ward mood I am
speak-ing of, comes over a man only in some time of ex-treme tribu-la-tion;
it comes in the very midst of his earn-est-ness, so that what just be-fore
might have seemed to him a thing most mo-ment-ous, now seems but a part
of the gen-eral joke. There is noth-ing like the per-ils of whal-ing to
breed this free and easy sort of gen-ial, des-per-ado philo-sophy; and with
it I now re-garded this whole voy-age of the Pequod, and the great White
Whale its ob-ject.

“Queequeg,” said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the
deck, and I was still shak-ing my-self in my jacket to fling off the
wa-ter; “Queequeg, my fine friend, does this sort of thing of-ten
hap-pen?” Without much emo-tion, though soaked through just like me, he
gave me to un-der-stand that such things did of-ten hap-pen.

“Mr. Stubb,” said I, turn-ing to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his
oil-jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; “Mr. Stubb, I
think I have heard you say that of all whale-men you ever met, our chief
mate, Mr. Star-buck, is by far the most care-ful and prudent. I sup-pose
then, that go-ing plump on a fly-ing whale with your sail set in a foggy
squall is the height of a whale-man’s dis-cre-tion?”

“Cer-tain. I’ve lowered for whales from a leak-ing ship in a gale off
Cape Horn.”

“Mr. Flask,” said I, turn-ing to little King-Post, who was stand-ing
close by; “you are ex-per-i-enced in these things, and I am not. Will you
tell me whether it is an un-al-ter-able law in this fish-ery, Mr. Flask,
for an oars-man to break his own back pulling him-self back-fore-most into
death’s jaws?”

“Can’t you twist that smal-ler?” said Flask. “Yes, that’s the law. I
should like to see a boat’s crew back-ing wa-ter up to a whale face
fore-most. Ha, ha! the whale would give them squint for squint, mind
that!”

Here then, from three im-par-tial wit-nesses, I had a de-lib-er-ate state-ment
of the en-tire case. Con-sid-er-ing, there-fore, that squalls and cap-siz-ings
in the wa-ter and con-sequent biv-ou-acks on the deep, were mat-ters of
com-mon oc-cur-rence in this kind of life; con-sid-er-ing that at the
su-per-lat-ively crit-ical in-stant of go-ing on to the whale I must resign
my life into the hands of him who steered the boat—of-ten-times a fel-low
who at that very mo-ment is in his im-petu-ous-ness upon the point of
scut-tling the craft with his own frantic stamp-ings; con-sid-er-ing that
the par-tic-u-lar dis-aster to our own par-tic-u-lar boat was chiefly to be
im-puted to Star-buck’s driv-ing on to his whale al-most in the teeth of a
squall, and con-sid-er-ing that Star-buck, not-with-stand-ing, was fam-ous for
his great heed-ful-ness in the fish-ery; con-sid-er-ing that I be-longed to
this un-com-monly prudent Star-buck’s boat; and fi-nally con-sid-er-ing in
what a devil’s chase I was im-plic-ated, touch-ing the White Whale: tak-ing
all things to-gether, I say, I thought I might as well go be-low and make
a rough draft of my will. “Queequeg,” said I, “come along, you shall be
my law-yer, ex-ecutor, and leg-atee.”

It may seem strange that of all men sail-ors should be tinker-ing at
their last wills and test-a-ments, but there are no people in the world
more fond of that di-ver-sion. This was the fourth time in my naut-ical
life that I had done the same thing. After the ce-re-mony was con-cluded
upon the present oc-ca-sion, I felt all the easier; a stone was rolled
away from my heart. Besides, all the days I should now live would be as
good as the days that Laz-arus lived after his re-sur-rec-tion; a
sup-ple-ment-ary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the case might
be. I sur-vived my-self; my death and burial were locked up in my chest.
I looked round me tran-quilly and con-ten-tedly, like a quiet ghost with a
clean con-science sit-ting in-side the bars of a snug fam-ily vault.

Now then, thought I, un-con-sciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock,
here goes for a cool, col-lec-ted dive at death and de-struc-tion, and the
devil fetch the hind-most.


CHAPTER 50. Ahab’s Boat and Crew. Fedal-lah.

“Who would have thought it, Flask!” cried Stubb; “if I had but one leg
you would not catch me in a boat, un-less maybe to stop the plug-hole
with my tim-ber toe. Oh! he’s a won-der-ful old man!”

“I don’t think it so strange, after all, on that ac-count,” said Flask.
“If his leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a dif-fer-ent thing.
That would dis-able him; but he has one knee, and good part of the other
left, you know.”

“I don’t know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.”

Among whale-wise people it has of-ten been ar-gued whether, con-sid-er-ing
the para-mount im-port-ance of his life to the suc-cess of the voy-age, it
is right for a whal-ing cap-tain to jeop-ard-ize that life in the act-ive
per-ils of the chase. So Tam-er-lane’s sol-diers of-ten ar-gued with tears in
their eyes, whether that in-valu-able life of his ought to be car-ried
into the thick-est of the fight.

But with Ahab the ques-tion as-sumed a mod-i-fied as-pect. Con-sid-er-ing that
with two legs man is but a hob-bling wight in all times of danger;
con-sid-er-ing that the pur-suit of whales is al-ways un-der great and
ex-traordin-ary dif-fi-culties; that every in-di-vidual mo-ment, in-deed, then
com-prises a peril; un-der these cir-cum-stances is it wise for any maimed
man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt? As a gen-eral thing, the
joint-own-ers of the Pequod must have plainly thought not.

Ahab well knew that al-though his friends at home would think little of
his en-ter-ing a boat in cer-tain com-par-at-ively harm-less vi-cis-situdes of
the chase, for the sake of be-ing near the scene of ac-tion and giv-ing
his or-ders in per-son, yet for Cap-tain Ahab to have a boat ac-tu-ally
ap-por-tioned to him as a reg-u-lar heads-man in the hunt—above all for
Cap-tain Ahab to be sup-plied with five ex-tra men, as that same boat’s
crew, he well knew that such gen-er-ous con-ceits never entered the heads
of the own-ers of the Pequod. There-fore he had not so-li-cited a boat’s
crew from them, nor had he in any way hin-ted his de-sires on that head.
Never-the-less he had taken private meas-ures of his own touch-ing all that
mat-ter. Until Cabaco’s pub-lished dis-cov-ery, the sail-ors had little
fore-seen it, though to be sure when, after be-ing a little while out of
port, all hands had con-cluded the cus-tom-ary busi-ness of fit-ting the
whale-boats for ser-vice; when some time after this Ahab was now and then
found be-stir-ring him-self in the mat-ter of mak-ing thole-pins with his
own hands for what was thought to be one of the spare boats, and even
so-li-cit-ously cut-ting the small wooden skew-ers, which when the line is
run-ning out are pinned over the groove in the bow: when all this was
ob-served in him, and par-tic-u-larly his so-li-citude in hav-ing an ex-tra
coat of sheath-ing in the bot-tom of the boat, as if to make it bet-ter
with-stand the poin-ted pres-sure of his ivory limb; and also the anxi-ety
he evinced in ex-actly shap-ing the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it
is some-times called, the ho-ri-zontal piece in the boat’s bow for bra-cing
the knee against in dart-ing or stabbing at the whale; when it was
ob-served how of-ten he stood up in that boat with his sol-it-ary knee
fixed in the semi-cir-cu-lar de-pres-sion in the cleat, and with the
car-penter’s chisel gouged out a little here and straightened it a
little there; all these things, I say, had awakened much in-terest and
curi-os-ity at the time. But al-most every-body sup-posed that this
par-tic-u-lar pre-par-at-ive heed-ful-ness in Ahab must only be with a view to
the ul-ti-mate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already re-vealed his
in-ten-tion to hunt that mor-tal mon-ster in per-son. But such a sup-pos-i-tion
did by no means in-volve the re-motest sus-pi-cion as to any boat’s crew
be-ing as-signed to that boat.

Now, with the sub-or-din-ate phantoms, what won-der re-mained soon waned
away; for in a whaler won-ders soon wane. Besides, now and then such
un-ac-count-able odds and ends of strange na-tions come up from the un-known
nooks and ash-holes of the earth to man these float-ing out-laws of
whalers; and the ships them-selves of-ten pick up such queer cast-away
creatures found toss-ing about the open sea on planks, bits of wreck,
oars, whale-boats, ca-noes, blown-off Japan-ese junks, and what not; that
Beelze-bub him-self might climb up the side and step down into the cabin
to chat with the cap-tain, and it would not cre-ate any un-sub-du-able
ex-cite-ment in the fore-castle.

But be all this as it may, cer-tain it is that while the sub-or-din-ate
phantoms soon found their place among the crew, though still as it were
some-how dis-tinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedal-lah re-mained a
muffled mys-tery to the last. Whence he came in a man-nerly world like
this, by what sort of un-ac-count-able tie he soon evinced him-self to be
linked with Ahab’s pe-cu-liar for-tunes; nay, so far as to have some sort
of a half-hin-ted in-flu-ence; Heaven knows, but it might have been even
au-thor-ity over him; all this none knew. But one can-not sus-tain an
in-dif-fer-ent air con-cern-ing Fedal-lah. He was such a creature as
civ-il-ized, do-mestic people in the tem-per-ate zone only see in their
dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and then glide
among the un-chan-ging Asi-atic com-munit-ies, es-pe-cially the Ori-ental isles
to the east of the con-tin-ent—those in-su-lated, im-me-morial, un-al-ter-able
coun-tries, which even in these mod-ern days still pre-serve much of the
ghostly ab-ori-gin-al-ness of earth’s primal gen-er-a-tions, when the memory
of the first man was a dis-tinct re-col-lec-tion, and all men his
des-cend-ants, un-know-ing whence he came, eyed each other as real
phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were cre-ated and
to what end; when though, ac-cord-ing to Gen-esis, the an-gels in-deed
con-sor-ted with the daugh-ters of men, the dev-ils also, add the
un-ca-non-ical Rab-bins, in-dulged in mundane amours.


CHAPTER 51. The Spirit-Spout.

Days, weeks passed, and un-der easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly
swept across four sev-eral cruis-ing-grounds; that off the Azores; off
the Cape de Verdes; on the Plate (so called), be-ing off the mouth of
the Rio de la Plata; and the Car-rol Ground, an un-staked, wa-tery
loc-al-ity, south-erly from St. Helena.

It was while glid-ing through these lat-ter wa-ters that one se-rene and
moon-light night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of sil-ver;
and, by their soft, suf-fus-ing seeth-ings, made what seemed a sil-very
si-lence, not a solitude; on such a si-lent night a sil-very jet was seen
far in ad-vance of the white bubbles at the bow. Lit up by the moon, it
looked ce-les-tial; seemed some plumed and glit-ter-ing god up-ris-ing from
the sea. Fedal-lah first descried this jet. For of these moon-light
nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast head, and stand a
look-out there, with the same pre-ci-sion as if it had been day. And yet,
though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whale-man in a
hun-dred would ven-ture a lower-ing for them. You may think with what
emo-tions, then, the sea-men be-held this old Ori-ental perched aloft at
such un-usual hours; his turban and the moon, com-pan-ions in one sky. But
when, after spend-ing his uni-form in-ter-val there for sev-eral suc-cess-ive
nights without ut-ter-ing a single sound; when, after all this si-lence,
his un-earthly voice was heard an-noun-cing that sil-very, moon-lit jet,
every re-clin-ing mar-iner star-ted to his feet as if some winged spirit
had lighted in the rig-ging, and hailed the mor-tal crew. “There she
blows!” Had the trump of judg-ment blown, they could not have quivered
more; yet still they felt no ter-ror; rather pleas-ure. For though it was
a most un-wonted hour, yet so im-press-ive was the cry, and so de-li-ri-ously
ex-cit-ing, that al-most every soul on board in-stinct-ively de-sired a
lower-ing.

Walk-ing the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab com-manded the
t’gal-lant sails and roy-als to be set, and every stun-sail spread. The
best man in the ship must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head
manned, the piled-up craft rolled down be-fore the wind. The strange,
up-heav-ing, lift-ing tend-ency of the taffrail breeze filling the hol-lows
of so many sails, made the buoy-ant, hov-er-ing deck to feel like air
be-neath the feet; while still she rushed along, as if two ant-ag-on-istic
in-flu-ences were strug-gling in her—one to mount dir-ect to heaven, the
other to drive yaw-ingly to some ho-ri-zontal goal. And had you watched
Ahab’s face that night, you would have thought that in him also two
dif-fer-ent things were war-ring. While his one live leg made lively
echoes along the deck, every stroke of his dead limb soun-ded like a
coffin-tap. On life and death this old man walked. But though the ship
so swiftly sped, and though from every eye, like ar-rows, the eager
glances shot, yet the sil-very jet was no more seen that night. Every
sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second time.

This mid-night-spout had al-most grown a for-got-ten thing, when, some days
after, lo! at the same si-lent hour, it was again an-nounced: again it
was descried by all; but upon mak-ing sail to over-take it, once more it
dis-ap-peared as if it had never been. And so it served us night after
night, till no one heeded it but to won-der at it. Mys-ter-i-ously jet-ted
into the clear moon-light, or star-light, as the case might be;
dis-ap-pear-ing again for one whole day, or two days, or three; and
some-how seem-ing at every dis-tinct re-pe-ti-tion to be ad-van-cing still
fur-ther and fur-ther in our van, this sol-it-ary jet seemed for ever
al-lur-ing us on.

Nor with the im-me-morial su-per-sti-tion of their race, and in ac-cord-ance
with the preter-nat-ur-al-ness, as it seemed, which in many things in-ves-ted
the Pequod, were there want-ing some of the sea-men who swore that
whenever and wherever descried; at how-ever re-mote times, or in how-ever
far apart lat-it-udes and lon-git-udes, that un-near-able spout was cast by
one self-same whale; and that whale, Moby Dick. For a time, there
reigned, too, a sense of pe-cu-liar dread at this flit-ting ap-par-i-tion, as
if it were treach-er-ously beck-on-ing us on and on, in or-der that the
mon-ster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the re-motest
and most sav-age seas.

These tem-por-ary ap-pre-hen-sions, so vague but so aw-ful, de-rived a
won-drous po-tency from the con-trast-ing serenity of the weather, in
which, be-neath all its blue bland-ness, some thought there lurked a
dev-il-ish charm, as for days and days we voy-aged along, through seas so
wear-ily, lone-somely mild, that all space, in re-pug-nance to our venge-ful
er-rand, seemed va-cat-ing it-self of life be-fore our urn-like prow.

But, at last, when turn-ing to the east-ward, the Cape winds began
howl-ing around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas
that are there; when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the
blast, and gored the dark waves in her mad-ness, till, like showers of
sil-ver chips, the foam-flakes flew over her bul-warks; then all this
des-ol-ate vacu-ity of life went away, but gave place to sights more
dis-mal than be-fore.

Close to our bows, strange forms in the wa-ter dar-ted hither and thither
be-fore us; while thick in our rear flew the in-scrut-able sea-ravens. And
every morn-ing, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; and
spite of our hoot-ings, for a long time ob-stin-ately clung to the hemp,
as though they deemed our ship some drift-ing, un-in-hab-ited craft; a
thing ap-poin-ted to des-ol-a-tion, and there-fore fit roost-ing-place for
their home-less selves. And heaved and heaved, still un-rest-ingly heaved
the black sea, as if its vast tides were a con-science; and the great
mundane soul were in an-guish and re-morse for the long sin and suf-fer-ing
it had bred.

Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye? Rather Cape Tor-mentoso, as called
of yore; for long al-lured by the per-fi-di-ous si-lences that be-fore had
at-ten-ded us, we found ourselves launched into this tor-men-ted sea, where
guilty be-ings trans-formed into those fowls and these fish, seemed
con-demned to swim on ever-last-ingly without any haven in store, or beat
that black air without any ho-ri-zon. But calm, snow-white, and
un-vary-ing; still dir-ect-ing its foun-tain of feath-ers to the sky; still
beck-on-ing us on from be-fore, the sol-it-ary jet would at times be
descried.

Dur-ing all this black-ness of the ele-ments, Ahab, though as-sum-ing for
the time the al-most con-tinual com-mand of the drenched and dan-ger-ous
deck, mani-fes-ted the gloom-i-est re-serve; and more sel-dom than ever
ad-dressed his mates. In tem-pes-tu-ous times like these, after everything
above and aloft has been se-cured, noth-ing more can be done but
pass-ively to await the is-sue of the gale. Then Cap-tain and crew be-come
prac-tical fa-tal-ists. So, with his ivory leg in-ser-ted into its
ac-cus-tomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasp-ing a shroud, Ahab for
hours and hours would stand gaz-ing dead to wind-ward, while an
oc-ca-sional squall of sleet or snow would all but con-geal his very
eye-lashes to-gether. Mean-time, the crew driven from the for-ward part of
the ship by the per-il-ous seas that burst-ingly broke over its bows,
stood in a line along the bul-warks in the waist; and the bet-ter to
guard against the leap-ing waves, each man had slipped him-self into a
sort of bowline se-cured to the rail, in which he swung as in a loosened
belt. Few or no words were spoken; and the si-lent ship, as if manned by
painted sail-ors in wax, day after day tore on through all the swift
mad-ness and glad-ness of the de-moniac waves. By night the same mute-ness
of hu-man-ity be-fore the shrieks of the ocean pre-vailed; still in si-lence
the men swung in the bowlines; still word-less Ahab stood up to the
blast. Even when wear-ied nature seemed de-mand-ing re-pose he would not
seek that re-pose in his ham-mock. Never could Star-buck for-get the old
man’s as-pect, when one night go-ing down into the cabin to mark how the
ba-ro-meter stood, he saw him with closed eyes sit-ting straight in his
floor-screwed chair; the rain and half-melted sleet of the storm from
which he had some time be-fore emerged, still slowly drip-ping from the
un-re-moved hat and coat. On the table be-side him lay un-rolled one of
those charts of tides and cur-rents which have pre-vi-ously been spoken
of. His lan-tern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though the body
was erect, the head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were
poin-ted to-wards the needle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in
the ceil-ing.*

*The cabin-com-pass is called the tell-tale, be-cause without go-ing to
the com-pass at the helm, the Cap-tain, while be-low, can in-form him-self
of the course of the ship.

Ter-rible old man! thought Star-buck with a shud-der, sleep-ing in this
gale, still thou stead-fastly ey-est thy pur-pose.


CHAPTER 52. The Al-batross.

South-east-ward from the Cape, off the dis-tant Croz-etts, a good cruis-ing
ground for Right Whale-men, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney (Al-batross)
by name. As she slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the
fore-mast-head, I had a good view of that sight so re-mark-able to a tyro
in the far ocean fish-er-ies—a whaler at sea, and long ab-sent from home.

As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the
skel-eton of a stran-ded wal-rus. All down her sides, this spec-tral
ap-pear-ance was traced with long chan-nels of reddened rust, while all
her spars and her rig-ging were like the thick branches of trees furred
over with hoar-frost. Only her lower sails were set. A wild sight it
was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those three mast-heads. They
seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and be-patched the raiment
that had sur-vived nearly four years of cruis-ing. Stand-ing in iron hoops
nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a fathom-less sea; and
though, when the ship slowly glided close un-der our stern, we six men
in the air came so nigh to each other that we might al-most have leaped
from the mast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those
for-lorn-look-ing fish-er-men, mildly eye-ing us as they passed, said not
one word to our own look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was be-ing
heard from be-low.

“Ship ahoy! Have ye seen the White Whale?”

But as the strange cap-tain, lean-ing over the pal-lid bul-warks, was in
the act of put-ting his trum-pet to his mouth, it some-how fell from his
hand into the sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to
make him-self heard without it. Mean-time his ship was still in-creas-ing
the dis-tance between. While in vari-ous si-lent ways the sea-men of the
Pequod were evin-cing their ob-serv-ance of this omin-ous in-cid-ent at the
first mere men-tion of the White Whale’s name to an-other ship, Ahab for
a mo-ment paused; it al-most seemed as though he would have lowered a
boat to board the stranger, had not the threat-en-ing wind for-bade. But
tak-ing ad-vant-age of his wind-ward po-s-i-tion, he again seized his trum-pet,
and know-ing by her as-pect that the stranger ves-sel was a Nan-tuck-eter
and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed—“Ahoy there! This is the
Pequod, bound round the world! Tell them to ad-dress all fu-ture let-ters
to the Pa-cific ocean! and this time three years, if I am not at home,
tell them to ad-dress them to ——”

At that mo-ment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and in-stantly, then,
in ac-cord-ance with their sin-gu-lar ways, shoals of small harm-less fish,
that for some days be-fore had been pla-cidly swim-ming by our side,
dar-ted away with what seemed shud-der-ing fins, and ranged them-selves
fore and aft with the stranger’s flanks. Though in the course of his
con-tinual voy-agings Ahab must of-ten be-fore have no-ticed a sim-ilar
sight, yet, to any mono-ma-niac man, the veri-est trifles ca-pri-ciously
carry mean-ings.

“Swim away from me, do ye?” mur-mured Ahab, gaz-ing over into the wa-ter.
There seemed but little in the words, but the tone con-veyed more of
deep help-less sad-ness than the in-sane old man had ever be-fore evinced.
But turn-ing to the steers-man, who thus far had been hold-ing the ship in
the wind to di-min-ish her head-way, he cried out in his old lion
voice,—“Up helm! Keep her off round the world!”

Round the world! There is much in that sound to in-spire proud feel-ings;
but whereto does all that cir-cum-nav-ig-a-tion con-duct? Only through
num-ber-less per-ils to the very point whence we star-ted, where those that
we left be-hind se-cure, were all the time be-fore us.

Were this world an end-less plain, and by sail-ing east-ward we could for
ever reach new dis-tances, and dis-cover sights more sweet and strange
than any Cyc-lades or Is-lands of King So-lomon, then there were prom-ise
in the voy-age. But in pur-suit of those far mys-ter-ies we dream of, or in
tor-men-ted chase of that de-mon phantom that, some time or other, swims
be-fore all hu-man hearts; while chas-ing such over this round globe, they
either lead us on in bar-ren mazes or mid-way leave us whelmed.


CHAPTER 53. The Gam.

The os-tens-ible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had
spoken was this: the wind and sea be-tokened storms. But even had this
not been the case, he would not after all, per-haps, have boarded
her—judging by his sub-sequent con-duct on sim-ilar oc-ca-sions—if so it had
been that, by the pro-cess of hail-ing, he had ob-tained a neg-at-ive an-swer
to the ques-tion he put. For, as it even-tu-ally turned out, he cared not
to con-sort, even for five minutes, with any stranger cap-tain, ex-cept he
could con-trib-ute some of that in-form-a-tion he so ab-sorb-ingly sought. But
all this might re-main in-ad-equately es-tim-ated, were not some-thing said
here of the pe-cu-liar us-ages of whal-ing-ves-sels when meet-ing each other
in for-eign seas, and es-pe-cially on a com-mon cruis-ing-ground.

If two strangers cross-ing the Pine Bar-rens in New York State, or the
equally des-ol-ate Salis-bury Plain in Eng-land; if cas-u-ally en-coun-ter-ing
each other in such in-hos-pit-able wilds, these twain, for the life of
them, can-not well avoid a mu-tual sa-luta-tion; and stop-ping for a mo-ment
to in-ter-change the news; and, per-haps, sit-ting down for a while and
rest-ing in con-cert: then, how much more nat-ural that upon the
il-lim-it-able Pine Bar-rens and Salis-bury Plains of the sea, two whal-ing
ves-sels descry-ing each other at the ends of the earth—off lone
Fan-ning’s Is-land, or the far away King’s Mills; how much more nat-ural,
I say, that un-der such cir-cum-stances these ships should not only
in-ter-change hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and
so-ci-able con-tact. And es-pe-cially would this seem to be a mat-ter of
course, in the case of ves-sels owned in one sea-port, and whose
cap-tains, of-ficers, and not a few of the men are per-son-ally known to
each other; and con-sequently, have all sorts of dear do-mestic things to
talk about.

For the long ab-sent ship, the out-ward-bounder, per-haps, has let-ters on
board; at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some pa-pers of a
date a year or two later than the last one on her blurred and
thumb-worn files. And in re-turn for that cour-tesy, the out-ward-bound
ship would re-ceive the latest whal-ing in-tel-li-gence from the
cruis-ing-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of the ut-most
im-port-ance to her. And in de-gree, all this will hold true con-cern-ing
whal-ing ves-sels cross-ing each other’s track on the cruis-ing-ground
it-self, even though they are equally long ab-sent from home. For one of
them may have re-ceived a trans-fer of let-ters from some third, and now
far re-mote ves-sel; and some of those let-ters may be for the people of
the ship she now meets. Besides, they would ex-change the whal-ing news,
and have an agree-able chat. For not only would they meet with all the
sym-path-ies of sail-ors, but like-wise with all the pe-cu-liar
con-geni-al-it-ies arising from a com-mon pur-suit and mu-tu-ally shared
priva-tions and per-ils.

Nor would dif-fer-ence of coun-try make any very es-sen-tial dif-fer-ence;
that is, so long as both parties speak one lan-guage, as is the case
with Amer-ic-ans and Eng-lish. Though, to be sure, from the small num-ber
of Eng-lish whalers, such meet-ings do not very of-ten oc-cur, and when
they do oc-cur there is too apt to be a sort of shy-ness between them;
for your Eng-lish-man is rather re-served, and your Yan-kee, he does not
fancy that sort of thing in any-body but him-self. Besides, the Eng-lish
whalers some-times af-fect a kind of met-ro-pol-itan su-peri-or-ity over the
Amer-ican whalers; re-gard-ing the long, lean Nan-tuck-eter, with his
non-des-cript pro-vin-cial-isms, as a sort of sea-peas-ant. But where this
su-peri-or-ity in the Eng-lish whale-men does really con-sist, it would be
hard to say, see-ing that the Yan-kees in one day, col-lect-ively, kill
more whales than all the Eng-lish, col-lect-ively, in ten years. But this
is a harm-less little foible in the Eng-lish whale-hunters, which the
Nan-tuck-eter does not take much to heart; prob-ably, be-cause he knows
that he has a few foibles him-self.

So, then, we see that of all ships sep-ar-ately sail-ing the sea, the
whalers have most reason to be so-ci-able—and they are so. Whereas, some
mer-chant ships cross-ing each other’s wake in the mid-At-lantic, will
of-ten-times pass on without so much as a single word of re-cog-ni-tion,
mu-tu-ally cut-ting each other on the high seas, like a brace of dan-dies
in Broad-way; and all the time in-dul-ging, per-haps, in fin-ical cri-ti-cism
upon each other’s rig. As for Men-of-War, when they chance to meet at
sea, they first go through such a string of silly bow-ings and
scrap-ings, such a duck-ing of en-signs, that there does not seem to be
much right-down hearty good-will and broth-erly love about it at all. As
touch-ing Slave-ships meet-ing, why, they are in such a prodi-gious hurry,
they run away from each other as soon as pos-sible. And as for Pir-ates,
when they chance to cross each other’s cross-bones, the first hail
is—“How many skulls?”—the same way that whalers hail—“How many
bar-rels?” And that ques-tion once answered, pir-ates straight-way steer
apart, for they are in-fernal vil-lains on both sides, and don’t like to
see over-much of each other’s vil-lan-ous like-nesses.

But look at the godly, hon-est, un-os-ten-ta-tious, hos-pit-able, so-ci-able,
free-and-easy whaler! What does the whaler do when she meets an-other
whaler in any sort of de-cent weather? She has a “_Gam_,” a thing so
ut-terly un-known to all other ships that they never heard of the name
even; and if by chance they should hear of it, they only grin at it,
and re-peat game-some stuff about “spout-ers” and “blub-ber-boil-ers,” and
such like pretty ex-clam-a-tions. Why it is that all Mer-chant-sea-men, and
also all Pir-ates and Man-of-War’s men, and Slave-ship sail-ors, cher-ish
such a scorn-ful feel-ing to-wards Whale-ships; this is a ques-tion it
would be hard to an-swer. Be-cause, in the case of pir-ates, say, I should
like to know whether that pro-fes-sion of theirs has any pe-cu-liar glory
about it. It some-times ends in un-com-mon el-ev-a-tion, in-deed; but only at
the gal-lows. And be-sides, when a man is el-ev-ated in that odd fash-ion,
he has no proper found-a-tion for his su-per-ior alti-tude. Hence, I
con-clude, that in boast-ing him-self to be high lif-ted above a whale-man,
in that as-ser-tion the pir-ate has no solid basis to stand on.

But what is a _Gam?_ You might wear out your in-dex-fin-ger run-ning up
and down the columns of dic-tion-ar-ies, and never find the word. Dr.
John-son never at-tained to that eru-di-tion; Noah Web-ster’s ark does not
hold it. Never-the-less, this same ex-press-ive word has now for many years
been in con-stant use among some fif-teen thou-sand true born Yan-kees.
Cer-tainly, it needs a defin-i-tion, and should be in-cor-por-ated into the
Lex-icon. With that view, let me learn-edly define it.

GAM. NOUN—_A so-cial meet-ing of two_ (_or more_) _Whale-ships, gen-er-ally
on a cruis-ing-ground; when, after ex-chan-ging hails, they ex-change
vis-its by boats’ crews: the two cap-tains re-main-ing, for the time, on
board of one ship, and the two chief mates on the other._

There is an-other little item about Gam-ming which must not be for-got-ten
here. All pro-fes-sions have their own little pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies of de-tail; so
has the whale fish-ery. In a pir-ate, man-of-war, or slave ship, when the
cap-tain is rowed any-where in his boat, he al-ways sits in the stern
sheets on a com-fort-able, some-times cush-ioned seat there, and of-ten
steers him-self with a pretty little mil-liner’s tiller dec-or-ated with
gay cords and rib-bons. But the whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa
of that sort whatever, and no tiller at all. High times in-deed, if
whal-ing cap-tains were wheeled about the wa-ter on castors like gouty old
al-der-men in pat-ent chairs. And as for a tiller, the whale-boat never
ad-mits of any such ef-fem-in-acy; and there-fore as in gam-ming a com-plete
boat’s crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or
har-poon-eer is of the num-ber, that sub-or-din-ate is the steers-man upon the
oc-ca-sion, and the cap-tain, hav-ing no place to sit in, is pulled off to
his visit all stand-ing like a pine tree. And of-ten you will no-tice that
be-ing con-scious of the eyes of the whole vis-ible world rest-ing on him
from the sides of the two ships, this stand-ing cap-tain is all alive to
the im-port-ance of sus-tain-ing his dig-nity by main-tain-ing his legs. Nor
is this any very easy mat-ter; for in his rear is the im-mense pro-ject-ing
steer-ing oar hit-ting him now and then in the small of his back, the
after-oar re-cip-roc-at-ing by rap-ping his knees in front. He is thus
com-pletely wedged be-fore and be-hind, and can only ex-pand him-self
side-ways by set-tling down on his stretched legs; but a sud-den, vi-ol-ent
pitch of the boat will of-ten go far to topple him, be-cause length of
found-a-tion is noth-ing without cor-res-pond-ing breadth. Merely make a
spread angle of two poles, and you can-not stand them up. Then, again,
it would never do in plain sight of the world’s riv-eted eyes, it would
never do, I say, for this strad-dling cap-tain to be seen steady-ing
him-self the slight-est particle by catch-ing hold of any-thing with his
hands; in-deed, as token of his en-tire, buoy-ant self-com-mand, he
gen-er-ally car-ries his hands in his trowsers’ pock-ets; but per-haps be-ing
gen-er-ally very large, heavy hands, he car-ries them there for bal-last.
Never-the-less there have oc-curred in-stances, well au-then-tic-ated ones
too, where the cap-tain has been known for an un-com-monly crit-ical mo-ment
or two, in a sud-den squall say—to seize hold of the nearest oars-man’s
hair, and hold on there like grim death.


CHAPTER 54. The Town-Ho’s St-ory.

(_As told at the Golden Inn._)

The Cape of Good Hope, and all the wa-tery re-gion round about there, is
much like some noted four corners of a great high-way, where you meet
more trav-el-lers than in any other part.

It was not very long after speak-ing the Goney that an-other
home-ward-bound whale-man, the Town-Ho,* was en-countered. She was manned
al-most wholly by Polyne-sians. In the short gam that en-sued she gave us
strong news of Moby Dick. To some the gen-eral in-terest in the White
Whale was now wildly heightened by a cir-cum-stance of the Town-Ho’s
story, which seemed ob-scurely to in-volve with the whale a cer-tain
won-drous, in-ver-ted vis-it-a-tion of one of those so called judg-ments of
God which at times are said to over-take some men. This lat-ter
cir-cum-stance, with its own par-tic-u-lar ac-com-pani-ments, form-ing what may
be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be nar-rated, never
reached the ears of Cap-tain Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of
the story was un-known to the cap-tain of the Town-Ho him-self. It was the
private prop-erty of three con-fed-er-ate white sea-men of that ship, one of
whom, it seems, com-mu-nic-ated it to Tasht-ego with Rom-ish in-junc-tions of
secrecy, but the fol-low-ing night Tasht-ego rambled in his sleep, and
re-vealed so much of it in that way, that when he was wakened he could
not well with-hold the rest. Never-the-less, so po-tent an in-flu-ence did
this thing have on those sea-men in the Pequod who came to the full
know-ledge of it, and by such a strange del-ic-acy, to call it so, were
they gov-erned in this mat-ter, that they kept the secret among
them-selves so that it never tran-spired abaft the Pequod’s main-mast.
In-ter-weav-ing in its proper place this darker thread with the story as
pub-licly nar-rated on the ship, the whole of this strange af-fair I now
pro-ceed to put on last-ing re-cord.

*The an-cient whale-cry upon first sight-ing a whale from the mast-head,
still used by whale-men in hunt-ing the fam-ous Gal-lipa-gos ter-rapin.

For my hu-mor’s sake, I shall pre-serve the style in which I once
nar-rated it at Lima, to a loun-ging circle of my Span-ish friends, one
saint’s eve, smoking upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden
Inn. Of those fine cava-liers, the young Dons, Pedro and Se-bastian, were
on the closer terms with me; and hence the in-ter-lud-ing ques-tions they
oc-ca-sion-ally put, and which are duly answered at the time.

“Some two years prior to my first learn-ing the events which I am about
re-hears-ing to you, gen-tle-men, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of Nan-tucket,
was cruis-ing in your Pa-cific here, not very many days’ sail east-ward
from the eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was some-where to the
north-ward of the Line. One morn-ing upon hand-ling the pumps, ac-cord-ing
to daily us-age, it was ob-served that she made more wa-ter in her hold
than com-mon. They sup-posed a sword-fish had stabbed her, gen-tle-men. But
the cap-tain, hav-ing some un-usual reason for be-liev-ing that rare good
luck awaited him in those lat-it-udes; and there-fore be-ing very averse to
quit them, and the leak not be-ing then con-sidered at all dan-ger-ous,
though, in-deed, they could not find it after search-ing the hold as low
down as was pos-sible in rather heavy weather, the ship still con-tin-ued
her cruis-ings, the mar-iners work-ing at the pumps at wide and easy
in-ter-vals; but no good luck came; more days went by, and not only was
the leak yet un-dis-covered, but it sens-ibly in-creased. So much so, that
now tak-ing some alarm, the cap-tain, mak-ing all sail, stood away for the
nearest har-bor among the is-lands, there to have his hull hove out and
re-paired.

“Though no small pas-sage was be-fore her, yet, if the com-mon-est chance
fa-voured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the
way, be-cause his pumps were of the best, and be-ing peri-od-ic-ally
re-lieved at them, those six-and-thirty men of his could eas-ily keep the
ship free; never mind if the leak should double on her. In truth, well
nigh the whole of this pas-sage be-ing at-ten-ded by very pros-per-ous
breezes, the Town-Ho had all but cer-tainly ar-rived in per-fect safety at
her port without the oc-cur-rence of the least fatal-ity, had it not been
for the bru-tal over-bear-ing of Rad-ney, the mate, a Vine-yarder, and the
bit-terly pro-voked ven-geance of Steelkilt, a Lake-man and des-per-ado from
Buf-falo.

“‘Lake-man!—Buf-falo! Pray, what is a Lake-man, and where is Buf-falo?’
said Don Se-bastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.

“On the east-ern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but—I crave your
cour-tesy—may be, you shall soon hear fur-ther of all that. Now,
gen-tle-men, in square-sail brigs and three-masted ships, well-nigh as
large and stout as any that ever sailed out of your old Cal-lao to far
Manilla; this Lake-man, in the land-locked heart of our Amer-ica, had yet
been nur-tured by all those agrarian free-boot-ing im-pres-sions pop-ularly
con-nec-ted with the open ocean. For in their in-ter-flow-ing ag-greg-ate,
those grand fresh-wa-ter seas of ours,—Erie, and Ontario, and Huron, and
Su-per-ior, and Michigan,—pos-sess an ocean-like ex-pans-ive-ness, with many
of the ocean’s noblest traits; with many of its rimmed vari-et-ies of
races and of climes. They con-tain round ar-chipela-goes of ro-mantic
isles, even as the Polyne-sian wa-ters do; in large part, are shored by
two great con-trast-ing na-tions, as the At-lantic is; they fur-nish long
mari-time ap-proaches to our nu-mer-ous ter-rit-orial colon-ies from the East,
dot-ted all round their banks; here and there are frowned upon by
bat-ter-ies, and by the goat-like craggy guns of lofty Mack-inaw; they
have heard the fleet thun-der-ings of naval vic-tor-ies; at in-ter-vals, they
yield their beaches to wild bar-bar-i-ans, whose red painted faces flash
from out their peltry wig-wams; for leagues and leagues are flanked by
an-cient and un-entered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like ser-ried
lines of kings in Gothic gene-a-lo-gies; those same woods har-bor-ing wild
Afric beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose ex-por-ted furs give
robes to Tar-tar Em-per-ors; they mir-ror the paved cap-it-als of Buf-falo and
Cleve-land, as well as Win-nebago vil-lages; they float alike the
full-rigged mer-chant ship, the armed cruiser of the State, the steamer,
and the beech ca-noe; they are swept by Borean and dis-mast-ing blasts as
dire-ful as any that lash the salted wave; they know what ship-wrecks
are, for out of sight of land, how-ever in-land, they have drowned full
many a mid-night ship with all its shriek-ing crew. Thus, gen-tle-men,
though an in-lander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean
nur-tured; as much of an au-da-cious mar-iner as any. And for Rad-ney,
though in his in-fancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nan-tucket
beach, to nurse at his ma-ter-nal sea; though in after life he had long
fol-lowed our aus-tere At-lantic and your con-tem-plat-ive Pa-cific; yet was
he quite as venge-ful and full of so-cial quar-rel as the back-woods
sea-man, fresh from the lat-it-udes of buck-horn handled Bowie-knives. Yet
was this Nan-tuck-eter a man with some good-hearted traits; and this
Lake-man, a mar-iner, who though a sort of devil in-deed, might yet by
in-flex-ible firm-ness, only tempered by that com-mon de-cency of hu-man
re-cog-ni-tion which is the mean-est slave’s right; thus treated, this
Steelkilt had long been re-tained harm-less and do-cile. At all events, he
had proved so thus far; but Rad-ney was doomed and made mad, and
Steelkilt—but, gen-tle-men, you shall hear.

“It was not more than a day or two at the fur-thest after point-ing her
prow for her is-land haven, that the Town-Ho’s leak seemed again
in-creas-ing, but only so as to re-quire an hour or more at the pumps
every day. You must know that in a settled and civ-il-ized ocean like our
At-lantic, for ex-ample, some skip-pers think little of pump-ing their
whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy night, should the
of-ficer of the deck hap-pen to for-get his duty in that re-spect, the
prob-ab-il-ity would be that he and his ship-mates would never again
re-mem-ber it, on ac-count of all hands gently sub-sid-ing to the bot-tom.
Nor in the sol-it-ary and sav-age seas far from you to the west-ward,
gen-tle-men, is it al-to-gether un-usual for ships to keep clanging at their
pump-handles in full chorus even for a voy-age of con-sid-er-able length;
that is, if it lie along a tol-er-ably ac-cess-ible coast, or if any other
reas-on-able re-treat is af-forded them. It is only when a leaky ves-sel is
in some very out of the way part of those wa-ters, some really land-less
lat-it-ude, that her cap-tain be-gins to feel a little anxious.

“Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was found
gain-ing once more, there was in truth some small con-cern mani-fes-ted by
sev-eral of her com-pany; es-pe-cially by Rad-ney the mate. He com-manded the
up-per sails to be well hois-ted, sheeted home anew, and every way
ex-pan-ded to the breeze. Now this Rad-ney, I sup-pose, was as little of a
cow-ard, and as little in-clined to any sort of nervous ap-pre-hens-ive-ness
touch-ing his own per-son as any fear-less, un-think-ing creature on land or
on sea that you can con-veni-ently ima-gine, gen-tle-men. There-fore when he
be-trayed this so-li-citude about the safety of the ship, some of the
sea-men de-clared that it was only on ac-count of his be-ing a part owner
in her. So when they were work-ing that even-ing at the pumps, there was
on this head no small gamesome-ness slily go-ing on among them, as they
stood with their feet con-tinu-ally over-flowed by the rip-pling clear
wa-ter; clear as any moun-tain spring, gen-tle-men—that bub-bling from the
pumps ran across the deck, and poured it-self out in steady spouts at
the lee scup-per-holes.

“Now, as you well know, it is not sel-dom the case in this con-ven-tional
world of ours—wa-tery or oth-er-wise; that when a per-son placed in com-mand
over his fel-low-men finds one of them to be very sig-ni-fic-antly his
su-per-ior in gen-eral pride of man-hood, straight-way against that man he
con-ceives an un-con-quer-able dis-like and bit-ter-ness; and if he have a
chance he will pull down and pul-ver-ize that sub-al-tern’s tower, and make
a little heap of dust of it. Be this con-ceit of mine as it may,
gen-tle-men, at all events Steelkilt was a tall and noble an-imal with a
head like a Ro-man, and a flow-ing golden beard like the tasseled
hous-ings of your last vice-roy’s snort-ing char-ger; and a brain, and a
heart, and a soul in him, gen-tle-men, which had made Steelkilt
Char-le-magne, had he been born son to Char-le-magne’s father. But Rad-ney,
the mate, was ugly as a mule; yet as hardy, as stub-born, as ma-li-cious.
He did not love Steelkilt, and Steelkilt knew it.

“Espy-ing the mate draw-ing near as he was toil-ing at the pump with the
rest, the Lake-man af-fected not to no-tice him, but un-awed, went on with
his gay ban-ter-ings.

“‘Aye, aye, my merry lads, it’s a lively leak this; hold a can-ni-kin,
one of ye, and let’s have a taste. By the Lord, it’s worth bot-tling! I
tell ye what, men, old Rad’s in-vest-ment must go for it! he had best cut
away his part of the hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that
sword-fish only began the job; he’s come back again with a gang of
ship-car-penters, saw-fish, and file-fish, and what not; and the whole
posse of ’em are now hard at work cut-ting and slash-ing at the bot-tom;
mak-ing im-prove-ments, I sup-pose. If old Rad were here now, I’d tell him
to jump over-board and scat-ter ’em. They’re play-ing the devil with his
es-tate, I can tell him. But he’s a simple old soul,—Rad, and a beauty
too. Boys, they say the rest of his prop-erty is in-ves-ted in
look-ing-glasses. I won-der if he’d give a poor devil like me the model
of his nose.’

“‘Damn your eyes! what’s that pump stop-ping for?’ roared Rad-ney,
pre-tend-ing not to have heard the sail-ors’ talk. ‘Thun-der away at it!’

“‘Aye, aye, sir,’ said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. ‘Lively, boys,
lively, now!’ And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-en-gines;
the men tossed their hats off to it, and ere long that pe-cu-liar gasp-ing
of the lungs was heard which de-notes the fullest ten-sion of life’s
ut-most en-er-gies.

“Quit-ting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lake-man went
for-ward all pant-ing, and sat him-self down on the wind-lass; his face
fiery red, his eyes blood-shot, and wip-ing the pro-fuse sweat from his
brow. Now what cozen-ing fiend it was, gen-tle-men, that pos-sessed Rad-ney
to meddle with such a man in that cor-por-eally ex-as-per-ated state, I know
not; but so it happened. In-tol-er-ably strid-ing along the deck, the mate
com-manded him to get a broom and sweep down the planks, and also a
shovel, and re-move some of-fens-ive mat-ters con-sequent upon al-low-ing a
pig to run at large.

“Now, gen-tle-men, sweep-ing a ship’s deck at sea is a piece of house-hold
work which in all times but ra-ging gales is reg-u-larly at-ten-ded to every
even-ing; it has been known to be done in the case of ships ac-tu-ally
founder-ing at the time. Such, gen-tle-men, is the in-flex-ib-il-ity of
sea-us-ages and the in-stinct-ive love of neat-ness in sea-men; some of whom
would not will-ingly drown without first wash-ing their faces. But in all
ves-sels this broom busi-ness is the pre-script-ive province of the boys,
if boys there be aboard. Besides, it was the stronger men in the
Town-Ho that had been di-vided into gangs, tak-ing turns at the pumps;
and be-ing the most ath-letic sea-man of them all, Steelkilt had been
reg-u-larly as-signed cap-tain of one of the gangs; con-sequently he should
have been freed from any trivial busi-ness not con-nec-ted with truly
naut-ical du-ties, such be-ing the case with his com-rades. I men-tion all
these par-tic-u-lars so that you may un-der-stand ex-actly how this af-fair
stood between the two men.

“But there was more than this: the or-der about the shovel was al-most as
plainly meant to sting and in-sult Steelkilt, as though Rad-ney had spat
in his face. Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will
un-der-stand this; and all this and doubt-less much more, the Lake-man
fully com-pre-hen-ded when the mate uttered his com-mand. But as he sat
still for a mo-ment, and as he stead-fastly looked into the mate’s
ma-lig-nant eye and per-ceived the stacks of powder-casks heaped up in him
and the slow-match si-lently burn-ing along to-wards them; as he
in-stinct-ively saw all this, that strange for-bear-ance and un-will-ing-ness
to stir up the deeper pas-sion-ate-ness in any already ire-ful be-ing—a
re-pug-nance most felt, when felt at all, by really vali-ant men even when
ag-grieved—this name-less phantom feel-ing, gen-tle-men, stole over
Steelkilt.

“There-fore, in his or-din-ary tone, only a little broken by the bod-ily
ex-haus-tion he was tem-por-ar-ily in, he answered him say-ing that sweep-ing
the deck was not his busi-ness, and he would not do it. And then,
without at all al-lud-ing to the shovel, he poin-ted to three lads as the
cus-tom-ary sweep-ers; who, not be-ing bil-leted at the pumps, had done
little or noth-ing all day. To this, Rad-ney replied with an oath, in a
most dom-in-eer-ing and out-rageous man-ner un-con-di-tion-ally re-it-er-at-ing his
com-mand; mean-while ad-van-cing upon the still seated Lake-man, with an
up-lif-ted cooper’s club ham-mer which he had snatched from a cask near
by.

“Heated and ir-rit-ated as he was by his spas-modic toil at the pumps, for
all his first name-less feel-ing of for-bear-ance the sweat-ing Steelkilt
could but ill brook this bear-ing in the mate; but some-how still
smoth-er-ing the con-flag-ra-tion within him, without speak-ing he re-mained
dog-gedly rooted to his seat, till at last the in-censed Rad-ney shook the
ham-mer within a few inches of his face, furi-ously com-mand-ing him to do
his bid-ding.

“Steelkilt rose, and slowly re-treat-ing round the wind-lass, stead-ily
fol-lowed by the mate with his men-acing ham-mer, de-lib-er-ately re-peated
his in-ten-tion not to obey. See-ing, how-ever, that his for-bear-ance had
not the slight-est ef-fect, by an aw-ful and un-speak-able in-tim-a-tion with
his twis-ted hand he warned off the fool-ish and in-fatu-ated man; but it
was to no pur-pose. And in this way the two went once slowly round the
wind-lass; when, re-solved at last no longer to re-treat, be-think-ing him
that he had now for-borne as much as com-por-ted with his hu-mor, the
Lake-man paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the of-ficer:

“‘Mr. Rad-ney, I will not obey you. Take that ham-mer away, or look to
your-self.’ But the pre-des-tin-ated mate com-ing still closer to him, where
the Lake-man stood fixed, now shook the heavy ham-mer within an inch of
his teeth; mean-while re-peat-ing a string of in-suf-fer-able mal-edic-tions.
Retreat-ing not the thou-sandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eye
with the un-flinch-ing pon-iard of his glance, Steelkilt, clench-ing his
right hand be-hind him and creep-ingly draw-ing it back, told his
per-se-cutor that if the ham-mer but grazed his cheek he (Steelkilt) would
murder him. But, gen-tle-men, the fool had been branded for the slaughter
by the gods. Im-me-di-ately the ham-mer touched the cheek; the next in-stant
the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he fell on the hatch
spout-ing blood like a whale.

“Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shak-ing one of the back-stays
lead-ing far aloft to where two of his com-rades were stand-ing their
mastheads. They were both Canallers.

“‘Canallers!’ cried Don Pedro. ‘We have seen many whale-ships in our
har-bours, but never heard of your Canallers. Par-don: who and what are
they?’

“‘Canallers, Don, are the boat-men be-long-ing to our grand Erie Canal.
You must have heard of it.’

“‘Nay, Senor; here-abouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hered-it-ary
land, we know but little of your vig-or-ous North.’

“‘Aye? Well then, Don, re-fill my cup. Your chicha’s very fine; and ere
pro-ceed-ing fur-ther I will tell ye what our Canallers are; for such
in-form-a-tion may throw side-light upon my story.’

“For three hun-dred and sixty miles, gen-tle-men, through the en-tire
breadth of the state of New York; through nu-mer-ous pop-u-lous cit-ies and
most thriv-ing vil-lages; through long, dis-mal, un-in-hab-ited swamps, and
af-flu-ent, cul-tiv-ated fields, un-ri-valled for fer-til-ity; by bil-liard-room
and bar-room; through the holy-of-hol-ies of great forests; on Ro-man
arches over In-dian rivers; through sun and shade; by happy hearts or
broken; through all the wide con-trast-ing scenery of those noble Mo-hawk
counties; and es-pe-cially, by rows of snow-white chapels, whose spires
stand al-most like mile-stones, flows one con-tinual stream of Vene-tianly
cor-rupt and of-ten law-less life. There’s your true Ashantee, gen-tle-men;
there howl your pa-gans; where you ever find them, next door to you;
un-der the long-flung shadow, and the snug pat-ron-ising lee of churches.
For by some curi-ous fatal-ity, as it is of-ten noted of your met-ro-pol-itan
free-boot-ers that they ever en-camp around the halls of justice, so
sin-ners, gen-tle-men, most abound in holi-est vi-cin-it-ies.

“‘Is that a friar passing?’ said Don Pedro, look-ing down-wards into the
crowded plazza, with hu-mor-ous con-cern.

“‘Well for our north-ern friend, Dame Isa-bella’s In-quis-i-tion wanes in
Lima,’ laughed Don Se-bastian. ‘Pro-ceed, Senor.’

“‘A mo-ment! Par-don!’ cried an-other of the com-pany. ‘In the name of all
us Limeese, I but de-sire to ex-press to you, sir sailor, that we have by
no means over-looked your del-ic-acy in not sub-sti-tut-ing present Lima for
dis-tant Venice in your cor-rupt com-par-ison. Oh! do not bow and look
sur-prised; you know the pro-verb all along this coast—“Cor-rupt as Lima.”
It but bears out your say-ing, too; churches more plen-ti-ful than
bil-liard-tables, and for ever open—and “Cor-rupt as Lima.” So, too,
Venice; I have been there; the holy city of the blessed evan-gel-ist, St.
Mark!—St. Dominic, purge it! Your cup! Thanks: here I re-fill; now, you
pour out again.’

“Freely de-pic-ted in his own vo-ca-tion, gen-tle-men, the Canaller would
make a fine dra-matic hero, so abund-antly and pic-tur-esquely wicked is
he. Like Mark An-tony, for days and days along his green-turfed, flowery
Nile, he in-dol-ently floats, openly toy-ing with his red-cheeked
Cleo-patra, ripen-ing his apricot thigh upon the sunny deck. But ashore,
all this ef-fem-in-acy is dashed. The brig-andish guise which the Canaller
so proudly sports; his slouched and gaily-ribboned hat be-token his
grand fea-tures. A ter-ror to the smil-ing in-no-cence of the vil-lages
through which he floats; his swart vis-age and bold swag-ger are not
un-shunned in cit-ies. Once a vag-a-bond on his own canal, I have re-ceived
good turns from one of these Canallers; I thank him heart-ily; would
fain be not un-grate-ful; but it is of-ten one of the prime re-deem-ing
qual-it-ies of your man of vi-ol-ence, that at times he has as stiff an arm
to back a poor stranger in a strait, as to plun-der a wealthy one. In
sum, gen-tle-men, what the wild-ness of this canal life is, is
em-phat-ic-ally evinced by this; that our wild whale-fish-ery con-tains so
many of its most fin-ished gradu-ates, and that scarce any race of
man-kind, ex-cept Sydney men, are so much dis-trus-ted by our whal-ing
cap-tains. Nor does it at all di-min-ish the curi-ous-ness of this mat-ter,
that to many thou-sands of our rural boys and young men born along its
line, the pro-ba-tion-ary life of the Grand Canal fur-nishes the sole
trans-ition between quietly reap-ing in a Chris-tian corn-field, and
reck-lessly plough-ing the wa-ters of the most bar-baric seas.

“‘I see! I see!’ im-petu-ously ex-claimed Don Pedro, spill-ing his chicha
upon his sil-very ruffles. ‘No need to travel! The world’s one Lima. I
had thought, now, that at your tem-per-ate North the gen-er-a-tions were
cold and holy as the hills.—But the story.’

“I left off, gen-tle-men, where the Lake-man shook the back-stay. Hardly
had he done so, when he was sur-roun-ded by the three ju-nior mates and
the four har-poon-eers, who all crowded him to the deck. But slid-ing down
the ropes like bale-ful comets, the two Canallers rushed into the
up-roar, and sought to drag their man out of it to-wards the fore-castle.
Oth-ers of the sail-ors joined with them in this at-tempt, and a twis-ted
tur-moil en-sued; while stand-ing out of harm’s way, the vali-ant cap-tain
danced up and down with a whale-pike, call-ing upon his of-ficers to
man-handle that at-ro-cious scoun-drel, and smoke him along to the
quarter-deck. At in-ter-vals, he ran close up to the re-volving bor-der of
the con-fu-sion, and pry-ing into the heart of it with his pike, sought to
prick out the ob-ject of his re-sent-ment. But Steelkilt and his
des-peradoes were too much for them all; they suc-ceeded in gain-ing the
fore-castle deck, where, hast-ily slew-ing about three or four large casks
in a line with the wind-lass, these sea-Parisi-ans en-trenched them-selves
be-hind the bar-ri-cade.

“‘Come out of that, ye pir-ates!’ roared the cap-tain, now men-acing them
with a pis-tol in each hand, just brought to him by the stew-ard. ‘Come
out of that, ye cut-throats!’

“Steelkilt leaped on the bar-ri-cade, and strid-ing up and down there,
de-fied the worst the pis-tols could do; but gave the cap-tain to
un-der-stand dis-tinctly, that his (Steelkilt’s) death would be the sig-nal
for a mur-der-ous mutiny on the part of all hands. Fear-ing in his heart
lest this might prove but too true, the cap-tain a little de-sisted, but
still com-manded the in-sur-gents in-stantly to re-turn to their duty.

“‘Will you prom-ise not to touch us, if we do?’ de-man-ded their
ringleader.

“‘Turn to! turn to!—I make no prom-ise;—to your duty! Do you want to
sink the ship, by knock-ing off at a time like this? Turn to!’ and he
once more raised a pis-tol.

“‘Sink the ship?’ cried Steelkilt. ‘Aye, let her sink. Not a man of us
turns to, un-less you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us. What
say ye, men?’ turn-ing to his com-rades. A fierce cheer was their
re-sponse.

“The Lake-man now patrolled the bar-ri-cade, all the while keep-ing his eye
on the Cap-tain, and jerking out such sen-tences as these:—‘It’s not our
fault; we didn’t want it; I told him to take his ham-mer away; it was
boy’s busi-ness; he might have known me be-fore this; I told him not to
prick the buf-falo; I be-lieve I have broken a fin-ger here against his
cursed jaw; ain’t those min-cing knives down in the fore-castle there,
men? look to those hand-spikes, my hearties. Cap-tain, by God, look to
your-self; say the word; don’t be a fool; for-get it all; we are ready to
turn to; treat us de-cently, and we’re your men; but we won’t be
flogged.’

“‘Turn to! I make no prom-ises, turn to, I say!’

“‘Look ye, now,’ cried the Lake-man, fling-ing out his arm to-wards him,
‘there are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped for
the cruise, d’ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our
dis-charge as soon as the an-chor is down; so we don’t want a row; it’s
not our in-terest; we want to be peace-able; we are ready to work, but we
won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to!’ roared the Cap-tain.

“Steelkilt glanced round him a mo-ment, and then said:—‘I tell you what
it is now, Cap-tain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby
ras-cal, we won’t lift a hand against ye un-less ye at-tack us; but till
you say the word about not flog-ging us, we don’t do a hand’s turn.’

“‘Down into the fore-castle then, down with ye, I’ll keep ye there till
ye’re sick of it. Down ye go.’

“‘Shall we?’ cried the ringleader to his men. Most of them were against
it; but at length, in obed-i-ence to Steelkilt, they pre-ceded him down
into their dark den, growl-ingly dis-ap-pear-ing, like bears into a cave.

“As the Lake-man’s bare head was just level with the planks, the Cap-tain
and his posse leaped the bar-ri-cade, and rap-idly draw-ing over the slide
of the scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly called
for the stew-ard to bring the heavy brass pad-lock be-long-ing to the
com-pan-ion-way. Then open-ing the slide a little, the Cap-tain whispered
some-thing down the crack, closed it, and turned the key upon them—ten
in num-ber—leav-ing on deck some twenty or more, who thus far had
re-mained neut-ral.

“All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the of-ficers, for-ward and
aft, es-pe-cially about the fore-castle scuttle and fore hatch-way; at
which last place it was feared the in-sur-gents might emerge, after
break-ing through the bulk-head be-low. But the hours of dark-ness passed
in peace; the men who still re-mained at their duty toil-ing hard at the
pumps, whose clink-ing and clank-ing at in-ter-vals through the dreary
night dis-mally re-soun-ded through the ship.

“At sun-rise the Cap-tain went for-ward, and knock-ing on the deck,
summoned the pris-on-ers to work; but with a yell they re-fused. Water was
then lowered down to them, and a couple of hand-fuls of bis-cuit were
tossed after it; when again turn-ing the key upon them and pock-et-ing it,
the Cap-tain re-turned to the quarter-deck. Twice every day for three
days this was re-peated; but on the fourth morn-ing a con-fused wrangling,
and then a scuff-ling was heard, as the cus-tom-ary sum-mons was de-livered;
and sud-denly four men burst up from the fore-castle, say-ing they were
ready to turn to. The fetid close-ness of the air, and a fam-ish-ing diet,
united per-haps to some fears of ul-ti-mate re-tri-bu-tion, had con-strained
them to sur-render at dis-cre-tion. Em-boldened by this, the Cap-tain
re-it-er-ated his de-mand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a
ter-rific hint to stop his bab-bling and be-take him-self where he
be-longed. On the fifth morn-ing three oth-ers of the mutin-eers bolted up
into the air from the des-per-ate arms be-low that sought to re-strain
them. Only three were left.

“‘Bet-ter turn to, now?’ said the Cap-tain with a heart-less jeer.

“‘Shut us up again, will ye!’ cried Steelkilt.

“‘Oh cer-tainly,’ said the Cap-tain, and the key clicked.

“It was at this point, gen-tle-men, that en-raged by the de-fec-tion of
seven of his former as-so-ci-ates, and stung by the mock-ing voice that had
last hailed him, and maddened by his long en-tomb-ment in a place as
black as the bowels of des-pair; it was then that Steelkilt pro-posed to
the two Canallers, thus far ap-par-ently of one mind with him, to burst
out of their hole at the next sum-mon-ing of the gar-rison; and armed with
their keen min-cing knives (long, cres-centic, heavy im-ple-ments with a
handle at each end) run amuck from the bow-sprit to the taffrail; and if
by any dev-il-ish-ness of des-per-a-tion pos-sible, seize the ship. For
him-self, he would do this, he said, whether they joined him or not.
That was the last night he should spend in that den. But the scheme met
with no op-pos-i-tion on the part of the other two; they swore they were
ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for any-thing in short but a
sur-render. And what was more, they each in-sisted upon be-ing the first
man on deck, when the time to make the rush should come. But to this
their leader as fiercely ob-jec-ted, re-serving that pri-or-ity for him-self;
par-tic-u-larly as his two com-rades would not yield, the one to the other,
in the mat-ter; and both of them could not be first, for the lad-der
would but ad-mit one man at a time. And here, gen-tle-men, the foul play
of these miscre-ants must come out.

“Upon hear-ing the frantic pro-ject of their leader, each in his own
sep-ar-ate soul had sud-denly lighted, it would seem, upon the same piece
of treach-ery, namely: to be fore-most in break-ing out, in or-der to be
the first of the three, though the last of the ten, to sur-render; and
thereby se-cure whatever small chance of par-don such con-duct might
merit. But when Steelkilt made known his de-term-in-a-tion still to lead
them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle chem-istry of
vil-lany, mixed their be-fore secret treacher-ies to-gether; and when their
leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in
three sen-tences; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with
cords; and shrieked out for the Cap-tain at mid-night.

“Think-ing murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he
and all his armed mates and har-poon-eers rushed for the fore-castle. In a
few minutes the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still
strug-gling ringleader was shoved up into the air by his per-fi-di-ous
al-lies, who at once claimed the honor of se-cur-ing a man who had been
fully ripe for murder. But all these were collared, and dragged along
the deck like dead cattle; and, side by side, were seized up into the
mizzen rig-ging, like three quar-ters of meat, and there they hung till
morn-ing. ‘Damn ye,’ cried the Cap-tain, pa-cing to and fro be-fore them,
‘the vul-tures would not touch ye, ye vil-lains!’

“At sun-rise he summoned all hands; and sep-ar-at-ing those who had
re-belled from those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the
former that he had a good mind to flog them all round—thought, upon the
whole, he would do so—he ought to—justice de-man-ded it; but for the
present, con-sid-er-ing their timely sur-render, he would let them go with
a rep-rim-and, which he ac-cord-ingly ad-min-istered in the ver-nacu-lar.

“‘But as for you, ye car-rion rogues,’ turn-ing to the three men in the
rig-ging—‘for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;’ and, seiz-ing
a rope, he ap-plied it with all his might to the backs of the two
trait-ors, till they yelled no more, but life-lessly hung their heads
side-ways, as the two cru-ci-fied thieves are drawn.

“‘My wrist is sprained with ye!’ he cried, at last; ‘but there is still
rope enough left for you, my fine ban-tam, that wouldn’t give up. Take
that gag from his mouth, and let us hear what he can say for him-self.’

“For a mo-ment the ex-hausted mutin-eer made a trem-u-lous mo-tion of his
cramped jaws, and then pain-fully twist-ing round his head, said in a
sort of hiss, ‘What I say is this—and mind it well—if you flog me, I
murder you!’

“‘Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me’—and the Cap-tain drew off with
the rope to strike.

“‘Best not,’ hissed the Lake-man.

“‘But I must,’—and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.

“Steelkilt here hissed out some-thing, in-aud-ible to all but the Cap-tain;
who, to the amazement of all hands, star-ted back, paced the deck
rap-idly two or three times, and then sud-denly throw-ing down his rope,
said, ‘I won’t do it—let him go—cut him down: d’ye hear?’

“But as the ju-nior mates were hur-ry-ing to ex-ecute the or-der, a pale
man, with a band-aged head, ar-res-ted them—Rad-ney the chief mate. Ever
since the blow, he had lain in his berth; but that morn-ing, hear-ing the
tu-mult on the deck, he had crept out, and thus far had watched the
whole scene. Such was the state of his mouth, that he could hardly
speak; but mum-bling some-thing about _his_ be-ing will-ing and able to do
what the cap-tain dared not at-tempt, he snatched the rope and ad-vanced
to his pin-ioned foe.

“‘You are a cow-ard!’ hissed the Lake-man.

“‘So I am, but take that.’ The mate was in the very act of strik-ing,
when an-other hiss stayed his up-lif-ted arm. He paused: and then paus-ing
no more, made good his word, spite of Steelkilt’s threat, whatever that
might have been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were
turned to, and, sul-lenly worked by the moody sea-men, the iron pumps
clanged as be-fore.

“Just after dark that day, when one watch had re-tired be-low, a clamor
was heard in the fore-castle; and the two trem-bling trait-ors run-ning up,
be-sieged the cabin door, say-ing they durst not con-sort with the crew.
En-treat-ies, cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their own
in-stance they were put down in the ship’s run for sal-va-tion. Still, no
sign of mutiny re-appeared among the rest. On the con-trary, it seemed,
that mainly at Steelkilt’s in-stig-a-tion, they had re-solved to main-tain
the strict-est peace-ful-ness, obey all or-ders to the last, and, when the
ship reached port, desert her in a body. But in or-der to in-sure the
speedi-est end to the voy-age, they all agreed to an-other thing—namely,
not to sing out for whales, in case any should be dis-covered. For,
spite of her leak, and spite of all her other per-ils, the Town-Ho still
main-tained her mast-heads, and her cap-tain was just as will-ing to lower
for a fish that mo-ment, as on the day his craft first struck the
cruis-ing ground; and Rad-ney the mate was quite as ready to change his
berth for a boat, and with his band-aged mouth seek to gag in death the
vi-tal jaw of the whale.

“But though the Lake-man had in-duced the sea-men to ad-opt this sort of
pass-ive-ness in their con-duct, he kept his own coun-sel (at least till
all was over) con-cern-ing his own proper and private re-venge upon the
man who had stung him in the vent-ricles of his heart. He was in Rad-ney
the chief mate’s watch; and as if the in-fatu-ated man sought to run more
than half way to meet his doom, after the scene at the rig-ging, he
in-sisted, against the ex-press coun-sel of the cap-tain, upon re-sum-ing the
head of his watch at night. Upon this, and one or two other
cir-cum-stances, Steelkilt sys-tem-at-ic-ally built the plan of his re-venge.

“Dur-ing the night, Rad-ney had an un-seaman-like way of sit-ting on the
bul-warks of the quarter-deck, and lean-ing his arm upon the gun-wale of
the boat which was hois-ted up there, a little above the ship’s side. In
this at-ti-tude, it was well known, he some-times dozed. There was a
con-sid-er-able va-cancy between the boat and the ship, and down between
this was the sea. Steelkilt cal-cu-lated his time, and found that his
next trick at the helm would come round at two o’clock, in the morn-ing
of the third day from that in which he had been be-trayed. At his
leis-ure, he em-ployed the in-ter-val in braid-ing some-thing very care-fully
in his watches be-low.

“‘What are you mak-ing there?’ said a ship-mate.

“‘What do you think? what does it look like?’

“‘Like a lan-yard for your bag; but it’s an odd one, seems to me.’

“‘Yes, rather oddish,’ said the Lake-man, hold-ing it at arm’s length
be-fore him; ‘but I think it will an-swer. Ship-mate, I haven’t enough
twine,—have you any?’

“But there was none in the fore-castle.

“‘Then I must get some from old Rad;’ and he rose to go aft.

“‘You don’t mean to go a beg-ging to _him!_’ said a sailor.

“‘Why not? Do you think he won’t do me a turn, when it’s to help
him-self in the end, ship-mate?’ and go-ing to the mate, he looked at him
quietly, and asked him for some twine to mend his ham-mock. It was given
him—neither twine nor lan-yard were seen again; but the next night an
iron ball, closely net-ted, partly rolled from the pocket of the
Lake-man’s mon-key jacket, as he was tuck-ing the coat into his ham-mock
for a pil-low. Twenty-four hours after, his trick at the si-lent
helm—nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave al-ways ready
dug to the sea-man’s hand—that fatal hour was then to come; and in the
fore-or-dain-ing soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and
stretched as a corpse, with his fore-head crushed in.

“But, gen-tle-men, a fool saved the would-be mur-derer from the bloody
deed he had planned. Yet com-plete re-venge he had, and without be-ing the
avenger. For by a mys-ter-i-ous fatal-ity, Heaven it-self seemed to step in
to take out of his hands into its own the damning thing he would have
done.

“It was just between day-break and sun-rise of the morn-ing of the second
day, when they were wash-ing down the decks, that a stu-pid Ten-er-iffe
man, draw-ing wa-ter in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, ‘There
she rolls! there she rolls!’ Jesu, what a whale! It was Moby Dick.

“‘Moby Dick!’ cried Don Se-bastian; ‘St. Dominic! Sir sailor, but do
whales have christen-ings? Whom call you Moby Dick?’

“‘A very white, and fam-ous, and most deadly im-mor-tal mon-ster, Don;—but
that would be too long a story.’

“‘How? how?’ cried all the young Span-iards, crowding.

“‘Nay, Dons, Dons—nay, nay! I can-not re-hearse that now. Let me get more
into the air, Sirs.’

“‘The chicha! the chicha!’ cried Don Pedro; ‘our vig-or-ous friend looks
faint;—fill up his empty glass!’

“No need, gen-tle-men; one mo-ment, and I pro-ceed.—Now, gen-tle-men, so
sud-denly per-ceiv-ing the snowy whale within fifty yards of the
ship—for-get-ful of the com-pact among the crew—in the ex-cite-ment of the
mo-ment, the Ten-er-iffe man had in-stinct-ively and in-vol-un-tar-ily lif-ted
his voice for the mon-ster, though for some little time past it had been
plainly be-held from the three sul-len mast-heads. All was now a phrensy.
‘The White Whale—the White Whale!’ was the cry from cap-tain, mates, and
har-poon-eers, who, un-deterred by fear-ful ru-mours, were all anxious to
cap-ture so fam-ous and pre-cious a fish; while the dogged crew eyed
askance, and with curses, the ap-palling beauty of the vast milky mass,
that lit up by a ho-ri-zontal spangling sun, shif-ted and glistened like a
liv-ing opal in the blue morn-ing sea. Gen-tle-men, a strange fatal-ity
per-vades the whole ca-reer of these events, as if ver-ily mapped out
be-fore the world it-self was charted. The mutin-eer was the bow-sman of
the mate, and when fast to a fish, it was his duty to sit next him,
while Rad-ney stood up with his lance in the prow, and haul in or
slacken the line, at the word of com-mand. Moreover, when the four boats
were lowered, the mate’s got the start; and none howled more fiercely
with de-light than did Steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. After a
stiff pull, their har-poon-eer got fast, and, spear in hand, Rad-ney
sprang to the bow. He was al-ways a furi-ous man, it seems, in a boat.
And now his band-aged cry was, to beach him on the whale’s top-most back.
Noth-ing loath, his bow-sman hauled him up and up, through a blind-ing
foam that blent two white-nesses to-gether; till of a sud-den the boat
struck as against a sunken ledge, and keel-ing over, spilled out the
stand-ing mate. That in-stant, as he fell on the whale’s slip-pery back,
the boat righted, and was dashed aside by the swell, while Rad-ney was
tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of the whale. He struck
out through the spray, and, for an in-stant, was dimly seen through that
veil, wildly seek-ing to re-move him-self from the eye of Moby Dick. But
the whale rushed round in a sud-den mael-strom; seized the swim-mer
between his jaws; and rear-ing high up with him, plunged head-long again,
and went down.

“Mean-time, at the first tap of the boat’s bot-tom, the Lake-man had
slackened the line, so as to drop astern from the whirl-pool; calmly
look-ing on, he thought his own thoughts. But a sud-den, ter-rific,
down-ward jerking of the boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He
cut it; and the whale was free. But, at some dis-tance, Moby Dick rose
again, with some tat-ters of Rad-ney’s red wool-len shirt, caught in the
teeth that had des-troyed him. All four boats gave chase again; but the
whale eluded them, and fi-nally wholly dis-ap-peared.

“In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port—a sav-age, sol-it-ary
place—where no civ-il-ized creature resided. There, headed by the
Lake-man, all but five or six of the fore-mast-men de-lib-er-ately deser-ted
among the palms; even-tu-ally, as it turned out, seiz-ing a large double
war-ca-noe of the sav-ages, and set-ting sail for some other har-bor.

“The ship’s com-pany be-ing re-duced to but a hand-ful, the cap-tain called
upon the Islanders to as-sist him in the la-bor-i-ous busi-ness of heav-ing
down the ship to stop the leak. But to such un-rest-ing vi-gil-ance over
their dan-ger-ous al-lies was this small band of whites ne-ces-sit-ated, both
by night and by day, and so ex-treme was the hard work they un-der-went,
that upon the ves-sel be-ing ready again for sea, they were in such a
weakened con-di-tion that the cap-tain durst not put off with them in so
heavy a ves-sel. After tak-ing coun-sel with his of-ficers, he anchored the
ship as far off shore as pos-sible; loaded and ran out his two can-non
from the bows; stacked his mus-kets on the poop; and warn-ing the
Islanders not to ap-proach the ship at their peril, took one man with
him, and set-ting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight
be-fore the wind for Tahiti, five hun-dred miles dis-tant, to pro-cure a
re-in-force-ment to his crew.

“On the fourth day of the sail, a large ca-noe was descried, which
seemed to have touched at a low isle of cor-als. He steered away from
it; but the sav-age craft bore down on him; and soon the voice of
Steelkilt hailed him to heave to, or he would run him un-der wa-ter. The
cap-tain presen-ted a pis-tol. With one foot on each prow of the yoked
war-ca-noes, the Lake-man laughed him to scorn; as-sur-ing him that if the
pis-tol so much as clicked in the lock, he would bury him in bubbles and
foam.

“‘What do you want of me?’ cried the cap-tain.

“‘Where are you bound? and for what are you bound?’ de-man-ded Steelkilt;
‘no lies.’

“‘I am bound to Tahiti for more men.’

“‘Very good. Let me board you a mo-ment—I come in peace.’ With that he
leaped from the ca-noe, swam to the boat; and climb-ing the gun-wale,
stood face to face with the cap-tain.

“‘Cross your arms, sir; throw back your head. Now, re-peat after me. As
soon as Steelkilt leaves me, I swear to beach this boat on yon-der
is-land, and re-main there six days. If I do not, may light-nings strike
me!’

“‘A pretty scholar,’ laughed the Lake-man. ‘Adios, Senor!’ and leap-ing
into the sea, he swam back to his com-rades.

“Watch-ing the boat till it was fairly beached, and drawn up to the
roots of the co-coa-nut trees, Steelkilt made sail again, and in due
time ar-rived at Tahiti, his own place of des-tin-a-tion. There, luck
be-friended him; two ships were about to sail for France, and were
provid-en-tially in want of pre-cisely that num-ber of men which the sailor
headed. They em-barked; and so for ever got the start of their former
cap-tain, had he been at all minded to work them legal re-tri-bu-tion.

“Some ten days after the French ships sailed, the whale-boat ar-rived,
and the cap-tain was forced to en-list some of the more civ-il-ized
Tahi-tians, who had been some-what used to the sea. Char-ter-ing a small
nat-ive schooner, he re-turned with them to his ves-sel; and find-ing all
right there, again re-sumed his cruis-ings.

“Where Steelkilt now is, gen-tle-men, none know; but upon the is-land of
Nan-tucket, the widow of Rad-ney still turns to the sea which re-fuses to
give up its dead; still in dreams sees the aw-ful white whale that
des-troyed him.  * * * *

“‘Are you through?’ said Don Se-bastian, quietly.

“‘I am, Don.’

“‘Then I en-treat you, tell me if to the best of your own con-vic-tions,
this your story is in sub-stance really true? It is so passing
won-der-ful! Did you get it from an un-ques-tion-able source? Bear with me
if I seem to press.’

“‘Also bear with all of us, sir sailor; for we all join in Don
Se-bastian’s suit,’ cried the com-pany, with ex-ceed-ing in-terest.

“‘Is there a copy of the Holy Evan-gel-ists in the Golden Inn,
gen-tle-men?’

“‘Nay,’ said Don Se-bastian; ‘but I know a worthy priest near by, who
will quickly pro-cure one for me. I go for it; but are you well ad-vised?
this may grow too ser-i-ous.’

“‘Will you be so good as to bring the priest also, Don?’

“‘Though there are no Auto-da-Fés in Lima now,’ said one of the com-pany
to an-other; ‘I fear our sailor friend runs risk of the archiepis-copacy.
Let us with-draw more out of the moon-light. I see no need of this.’

“‘Ex-cuse me for run-ning after you, Don Se-bastian; but may I also beg
that you will be par-tic-u-lar in pro-cur-ing the largest sized Evan-gel-ists
you can.’

* * * * * *

“‘This is the priest, he brings you the Evan-gel-ists,’ said Don
Se-bastian, gravely, re-turn-ing with a tall and sol-emn fig-ure.

“‘Let me re-move my hat. Now, ven-er-able priest, fur-ther into the light,
and hold the Holy Book be-fore me that I may touch it.

“‘So help me Heaven, and on my honor the story I have told ye,
gen-tle-men, is in sub-stance and its great items, true. I know it to be
true; it happened on this ball; I trod the ship; I knew the crew; I
have seen and talked with Steelkilt since the death of Rad-ney.’”


CHAPTER 55. Of the Mon-strous Pic-tures of Whales.

I shall ere long paint to you as well as one can without can-vas,
some-thing like the true form of the whale as he ac-tu-ally ap-pears to the
eye of the whale-man when in his own ab-so-lute body the whale is moored
along-side the whale-ship so that he can be fairly stepped upon there.
It may be worth while, there-fore, pre-vi-ously to ad-vert to those curi-ous
ima-gin-ary por-traits of him which even down to the present day
con-fid-ently chal-lenge the faith of the lands-man. It is time to set the
world right in this mat-ter, by prov-ing such pic-tures of the whale all
wrong.

It may be that the primal source of all those pictorial de-lu-sions will
be found among the old-est Hin-doo, Egyp-tian, and Gre-cian sculp-tures. For
ever since those in-vent-ive but un-scru-pu-lous times when on the marble
pan-el-lings of temples, the ped-es-tals of statues, and on shields,
medal-lions, cups, and coins, the dol-phin was drawn in scales of
chain-ar-mor like Saladin’s, and a helmeted head like St. Ge-orge’s; ever
since then has some-thing of the same sort of li-cense pre-vailed, not
only in most pop-u-lar pic-tures of the whale, but in many sci-entific
present-a-tions of him.

Now, by all odds, the most an-cient ex-tant por-trait any-ways pur-port-ing
to be the whale’s, is to be found in the fam-ous cav-ern-pa-goda of
Elephanta, in In-dia. The Brah-mins main-tain that in the al-most end-less
sculp-tures of that im-me-morial pa-goda, all the trades and pur-suits,
every con-ceiv-able avoca-tion of man, were pre-figured ages be-fore any of
them ac-tu-ally came into be-ing. No won-der then, that in some sort our
noble pro-fes-sion of whal-ing should have been there shad-owed forth. The
Hin-doo whale re-ferred to, oc-curs in a sep-ar-ate de-part-ment of the wall,
de-pict-ing the in-carn-a-tion of Vishnu in the form of le-viathan, learn-edly
known as the Matse Avatar. But though this sculp-ture is half man and
half whale, so as only to give the tail of the lat-ter, yet that small
sec-tion of him is all wrong. It looks more like the taper-ing tail of an
anaconda, than the broad palms of the true whale’s majestic flukes.

But go to the old Galler-ies, and look now at a great Chris-tian
painter’s por-trait of this fish; for he suc-ceeds no bet-ter than the
antedi-lu-vian Hin-doo. It is Guido’s pic-ture of Perseus res-cuing
Andromeda from the sea-mon-ster or whale. Where did Guido get the model
of such a strange creature as that? Nor does Hog-arth, in paint-ing the
same scene in his own “Perseus Des-cend-ing,” make out one whit bet-ter.
The huge cor-pu-lence of that Hog-ar-thian mon-ster un-du-lates on the
sur-face, scarcely draw-ing one inch of wa-ter. It has a sort of howdah on
its back, and its dis-ten-ded tusked mouth into which the bil-lows are
rolling, might be taken for the Trait-ors’ Gate lead-ing from the Thames
by wa-ter into the Tower. Then, there are the Pro-dro-mus whales of old
Scotch Sib-bald, and Jo-nah’s whale, as de-pic-ted in the prints of old
Bibles and the cuts of old primers. What shall be said of these? As for
the book-binder’s whale wind-ing like a vine-stalk round the stock of a
des-cend-ing an-chor—as stamped and gil-ded on the backs and title-pages of
many books both old and new—that is a very pic-tur-esque but purely
fab-ulous creature, im-it-ated, I take it, from the like fig-ures on
an-tique vases. Though uni-ver-sally de-nom-in-ated a dol-phin, I nev-er-the-less
call this book-binder’s fish an at-tempt at a whale; be-cause it was so
in-ten-ded when the device was first in-tro-duced. It was in-tro-duced by an
old Italian pub-lisher some-where about the 15th cen-tury, dur-ing the
Revival of Learn-ing; and in those days, and even down to a
com-par-at-ively late period, dol-phins were pop-ularly sup-posed to be a
spe-cies of the Le-viathan.

In the vign-ettes and other em-bel-lish-ments of some an-cient books you
will at times meet with very curi-ous touches at the whale, where all
man-ner of spouts, jets d’eau, hot springs and cold, Saratoga and
Baden-Baden, come bub-bling up from his un-ex-hausted brain. In the
title-page of the ori-ginal edi-tion of the “Ad-vance-ment of Learn-ing” you
will find some curi-ous whales.

But quit-ting all these un-pro-fes-sional at-tempts, let us glance at those
pic-tures of le-viathan pur-port-ing to be sober, sci-entific de-lin-eations,
by those who know. In old Har-ris’s col-lec-tion of voy-ages there are some
plates of whales ex-trac-ted from a Dutch book of voy-ages, A.D. 1671,
en-titled “A Whal-ing Voy-age to Spitzber-gen in the ship Jo-nas in the
Whale, Peter Peterson of Fries-land, mas-ter.” In one of those plates the
whales, like great rafts of logs, are rep-res-en-ted ly-ing among
ice-isles, with white bears run-ning over their liv-ing backs. In an-other
plate, the prodi-gious blun-der is made of rep-res-ent-ing the whale with
per-pen-dic-u-lar flukes.

Then again, there is an im-pos-ing quarto, writ-ten by one Cap-tain
Col-nett, a Post Cap-tain in the Eng-lish navy, en-titled “A Voy-age round
Cape Horn into the South Seas, for the pur-pose of ex-tend-ing the
Sper-ma-ceti Whale Fish-er-ies.” In this book is an out-line pur-port-ing to
be a “Pic-ture of a Physeter or Sper-ma-ceti whale, drawn by scale from
one killed on the coast of Mex-ico, August, 1793, and hois-ted on deck.”
I doubt not the cap-tain had this vera-cious pic-ture taken for the
be-ne-fit of his mar-ines. To men-tion but one thing about it, let me say
that it has an eye which ap-plied, ac-cord-ing to the ac-com-pa-ny-ing scale,
to a full grown sperm whale, would make the eye of that whale a
bow-win-dow some five feet long. Ah, my gal-lant cap-tain, why did ye not
give us Jo-nah look-ing out of that eye!

Nor are the most con-scien-tious com-pil-a-tions of Nat-ural His-tory for the
be-ne-fit of the young and tender, free from the same hein-ous-ness of
mis-take. Look at that pop-u-lar work “Gold-smith’s An-im-ated Nature.” In
the abridged Lon-don edi-tion of 1807, there are plates of an al-leged
“whale” and a “nar-whale.” I do not wish to seem in-el-eg-ant, but this
un-sightly whale looks much like an am-pu-tated sow; and, as for the
nar-whale, one glimpse at it is enough to amaze one, that in this
nine-teenth cen-tury such a hip-pogriff could be palmed for genu-ine upon
any in-tel-li-gent pub-lic of school-boys.

Then, again, in 1825, Bern-ard Ger-main, Count de Lacépède, a great
nat-ur-al-ist, pub-lished a sci-entific sys-tem-ized whale book, wherein are
sev-eral pic-tures of the dif-fer-ent spe-cies of the Le-viathan. All these
are not only in-cor-rect, but the pic-ture of the Mys-ticetus or Green-land
whale (that is to say, the Right whale), even Scoresby, a long
ex-per-i-enced man as touch-ing that spe-cies, de-clares not to have its
coun-ter-part in nature.

But the pla-cing of the cap-sheaf to all this blun-der-ing busi-ness was
re-served for the sci-entific Fre-d-er-ick Cuvier, brother to the fam-ous
Baron. In 1836, he pub-lished a Nat-ural His-tory of Whales, in which he
gives what he calls a pic-ture of the Sperm Whale. Be-fore show-ing that
pic-ture to any Nan-tuck-eter, you had best provide for your sum-mary
re-treat from Nan-tucket. In a word, Fre-d-er-ick Cuvier’s Sperm Whale is
not a Sperm Whale, but a squash. Of course, he never had the be-ne-fit of
a whal-ing voy-age (such men sel-dom have), but whence he de-rived that
pic-ture, who can tell? Per-haps he got it as his sci-entific pre-de-cessor
in the same field, Des-marest, got one of his au-then-tic abor-tions; that
is, from a Chinese draw-ing. And what sort of lively lads with the
pen-cil those Chinese are, many queer cups and sau-cers in-form us.

As for the sign-paint-ers’ whales seen in the streets hanging over the
shops of oil-deal-ers, what shall be said of them? They are gen-er-ally
Richard III. whales, with dromedary humps, and very sav-age;
break-fast-ing on three or four sailor tarts, that is whale-boats full of
mar-iners: their de-form-it-ies flounder-ing in seas of blood and blue
paint.

But these man-i-fold mis-takes in de-pict-ing the whale are not so very
sur-pris-ing after all. Con-sider! Most of the sci-entific draw-ings have
been taken from the stran-ded fish; and these are about as cor-rect as a
draw-ing of a wrecked ship, with broken back, would cor-rectly rep-res-ent
the noble an-imal it-self in all its un-dashed pride of hull and spars.
Though ele-phants have stood for their full-lengths, the liv-ing
Le-viathan has never yet fairly floated him-self for his por-trait. The
liv-ing whale, in his full majesty and sig-ni-fic-ance, is only to be seen
at sea in un-fathom-able wa-ters; and afloat the vast bulk of him is out
of sight, like a launched line-of-battle ship; and out of that ele-ment
it is a thing etern-ally im-possible for mor-tal man to hoist him bod-ily
into the air, so as to pre-serve all his mighty swells and un-du-la-tions.
And, not to speak of the highly pre-sum-able dif-fer-ence of con-tour
between a young suck-ing whale and a full-grown Plato-nian Le-viathan;
yet, even in the case of one of those young suck-ing whales hois-ted to a
ship’s deck, such is then the out-land-ish, eel-like, limbered, vary-ing
shape of him, that his pre-cise ex-pres-sion the devil him-self could not
catch.

But it may be fan-cied, that from the na-ked skel-eton of the stran-ded
whale, ac-cur-ate hints may be de-rived touch-ing his true form. Not at
all. For it is one of the more curi-ous things about this Le-viathan,
that his skel-eton gives very little idea of his gen-eral shape. Though
Jeremy Bentham’s skel-eton, which hangs for can-de-labra in the lib-rary of
one of his ex-ecut-ors, cor-rectly con-veys the idea of a burly-browed
util-it-arian old gen-tle-man, with all Jeremy’s other lead-ing per-sonal
char-ac-ter-ist-ics; yet noth-ing of this kind could be in-ferred from any
le-viathan’s ar-tic-u-lated bones. In fact, as the great Hunter says, the
mere skel-eton of the whale bears the same re-la-tion to the fully
in-ves-ted and pad-ded an-imal as the in-sect does to the chrysalis that so
round-ingly en-vel-opes it. This pe-cu-li-ar-ity is strik-ingly evinced in the
head, as in some part of this book will be in-cid-ent-ally shown. It is
also very curi-ously dis-played in the side fin, the bones of which
al-most ex-actly an-swer to the bones of the hu-man hand, minus only the
thumb. This fin has four reg-u-lar bone-fin-gers, the in-dex, middle, ring,
and little fin-ger. But all these are per-man-ently lodged in their fleshy
cov-er-ing, as the hu-man fin-gers in an ar-ti-fi-cial cov-er-ing. “However
reck-lessly the whale may some-times serve us,” said hu-mor-ous Stubb one
day, “he can never be truly said to handle us without mit-tens.”

For all these reas-ons, then, any way you may look at it, you must needs
con-clude that the great Le-viathan is that one creature in the world
which must re-main un-painted to the last. True, one por-trait may hit the
mark much nearer than an-other, but none can hit it with any very
con-sid-er-able de-gree of ex-act-ness. So there is no earthly way of find-ing
out pre-cisely what the whale really looks like. And the only mode in
which you can de-rive even a tol-er-able idea of his liv-ing con-tour, is by
go-ing a whal-ing your-self; but by so do-ing, you run no small risk of
be-ing etern-ally stove and sunk by him. Where-fore, it seems to me you
had best not be too fas-ti-di-ous in your curi-os-ity touch-ing this
Le-viathan.


CHAPTER 56. Of the Less Er-ro-neous Pic-tures of Whales, and the True
Pic-tures of Whal-ing Scenes.

In con-nex-ion with the mon-strous pic-tures of whales, I am strongly
temp-ted here to enter upon those still more mon-strous stor-ies of them
which are to be found in cer-tain books, both an-cient and mod-ern,
es-pe-cially in Pliny, Purchas, Hackluyt, Har-ris, Cuvier, etc. But I pass
that mat-ter by.

I know of only four pub-lished out-lines of the great Sperm Whale;
Col-nett’s, Hug-gins’s, Fre-d-er-ick Cuvier’s, and Beale’s. In the pre-vi-ous
chapter Col-nett and Cuvier have been re-ferred to. Hug-gins’s is far
bet-ter than theirs; but, by great odds, Beale’s is the best. All
Beale’s draw-ings of this whale are good, ex-cept-ing the middle fig-ure in
the pic-ture of three whales in vari-ous at-ti-tudes, cap-ping his second
chapter. His frontis-piece, boats at-tack-ing Sperm Whales, though no
doubt cal-cu-lated to ex-cite the civil scep-ti-cism of some par-lor men, is
ad-mir-ably cor-rect and life-like in its gen-eral ef-fect. Some of the
Sperm Whale draw-ings in J. Ross Browne are pretty cor-rect in con-tour;
but they are wretchedly en-graved. That is not his fault though.

Of the Right Whale, the best out-line pic-tures are in Scoresby; but they
are drawn on too small a scale to con-vey a de-sir-able im-pres-sion. He has
but one pic-ture of whal-ing scenes, and this is a sad de-fi-ciency,
be-cause it is by such pic-tures only, when at all well done, that you
can de-rive any-thing like a truth-ful idea of the liv-ing whale as seen by
his liv-ing hunters.

But, taken for all in all, by far the finest, though in some de-tails
not the most cor-rect, present-a-tions of whales and whal-ing scenes to be
any-where found, are two large French en-grav-ings, well ex-ecuted, and
taken from paint-ings by one Garnery. Respect-ively, they rep-res-ent
at-tacks on the Sperm and Right Whale. In the first en-grav-ing a noble
Sperm Whale is de-pic-ted in full majesty of might, just risen be-neath
the boat from the pro-fundit-ies of the ocean, and bear-ing high in the
air upon his back the ter-rific wreck of the stoven planks. The prow of
the boat is par-tially un-broken, and is drawn just bal-an-cing upon the
mon-ster’s spine; and stand-ing in that prow, for that one single
in-com-put-able flash of time, you be-hold an oars-man, half shrouded by the
in-censed boil-ing spout of the whale, and in the act of leap-ing, as if
from a pre-cip-ice. The ac-tion of the whole thing is won-der-fully good and
true. The half-emp-tied line-tub floats on the whitened sea; the wooden
poles of the spilled har-poons ob-liquely bob in it; the heads of the
swim-ming crew are scattered about the whale in con-trast-ing ex-pres-sions
of af-fright; while in the black stormy dis-tance the ship is bear-ing
down upon the scene. Ser-i-ous fault might be found with the ana-tom-ical
de-tails of this whale, but let that pass; since, for the life of me, I
could not draw so good a one.

In the second en-grav-ing, the boat is in the act of draw-ing along-side
the barnacled flank of a large run-ning Right Whale, that rolls his
black weedy bulk in the sea like some mossy rock-slide from the
Patago-nian cliffs. His jets are erect, full, and black like soot; so
that from so abound-ing a smoke in the chim-ney, you would think there
must be a brave sup-per cook-ing in the great bowels be-low. Sea fowls are
peck-ing at the small crabs, shell-fish, and other sea can-dies and
mac-car-oni, which the Right Whale some-times car-ries on his pes-ti-lent
back. And all the while the thick-lipped le-viathan is rush-ing through
the deep, leav-ing tons of tu-mul-tu-ous white curds in his wake, and
caus-ing the slight boat to rock in the swells like a skiff caught nigh
the paddle-wheels of an ocean steamer. Thus, the fore-ground is all
ra-ging com-mo-tion; but be-hind, in ad-mir-able artistic con-trast, is the
glassy level of a sea be-calmed, the droop-ing un-starched sails of the
power-less ship, and the in-ert mass of a dead whale, a conquered
fort-ress, with the flag of cap-ture lazily hanging from the whale-pole
in-ser-ted into his spout-hole.

Who Garnery the painter is, or was, I know not. But my life for it he
was either prac-tic-ally con-vers-ant with his sub-ject, or else
mar-vel-lously tutored by some ex-per-i-enced whale-man. The French are the
lads for paint-ing ac-tion. Go and gaze upon all the paint-ings of Europe,
and where will you find such a gal-lery of liv-ing and breath-ing
com-mo-tion on can-vas, as in that tri-umphal hall at Ver-sailles; where the
be-holder fights his way, pell-mell, through the con-sec-ut-ive great
battles of France; where every sword seems a flash of the North-ern
Lights, and the suc-cess-ive armed kings and Em-per-ors dash by, like a
charge of crowned cen-taurs? Not wholly un-worthy of a place in that
gal-lery, are these sea battle-pieces of Garnery.

The nat-ural aptitude of the French for seiz-ing the pic-tur-esque-ness of
things seems to be pe-cu-li-arly evinced in what paint-ings and en-grav-ings
they have of their whal-ing scenes. With not one tenth of Eng-land’s
ex-per-i-ence in the fish-ery, and not the thou-sandth part of that of the
Amer-ic-ans, they have nev-er-the-less fur-nished both na-tions with the only
fin-ished sketches at all cap-able of con-vey-ing the real spirit of the
whale hunt. For the most part, the Eng-lish and Amer-ican whale
draughts-men seem en-tirely con-tent with present-ing the mech-an-ical
out-line of things, such as the va-cant pro-file of the whale; which, so
far as pic-tur-esque-ness of ef-fect is con-cerned, is about tan-tamount to
sketch-ing the pro-file of a pyr-amid. Even Scoresby, the justly renowned
Right whale-man, after giv-ing us a stiff full length of the Green-land
whale, and three or four del-ic-ate mini-atures of nar-whales and
por-poises, treats us to a series of clas-sical en-grav-ings of boat hooks,
chop-ping knives, and grapnels; and with the mi-cro-scopic di-li-gence of a
Leuwen-hoeck sub-mits to the in-spec-tion of a shiv-er-ing world ninety-six
fac-similes of mag-ni-fied Arc-tic snow crys-tals. I mean no dis-par-age-ment
to the ex-cel-lent voy-ager (I honor him for a vet-eran), but in so
im-port-ant a mat-ter it was cer-tainly an over-sight not to have pro-cured
for every crys-tal a sworn af-fi-davit taken be-fore a Green-land Justice of
the Peace.

In ad-di-tion to those fine en-grav-ings from Garnery, there are two other
French en-grav-ings worthy of note, by some one who sub-scribes him-self
“H. Dur-and.” One of them, though not pre-cisely ad-ap-ted to our present
pur-pose, nev-er-the-less de-serves men-tion on other ac-counts. It is a quiet
noon-scene among the isles of the Pa-cific; a French whaler anchored,
in-shore, in a calm, and lazily tak-ing wa-ter on board; the loosened
sails of the ship, and the long leaves of the palms in the back-ground,
both droop-ing to-gether in the breeze-less air. The ef-fect is very fine,
when con-sidered with ref-er-ence to its present-ing the hardy fish-er-men
un-der one of their few as-pects of ori-ental re-pose. The other en-grav-ing
is quite a dif-fer-ent af-fair: the ship hove-to upon the open sea, and in
the very heart of the Le-viath-anic life, with a Right Whale along-side;
the ves-sel (in the act of cut-ting-in) hove over to the mon-ster as if to
a quay; and a boat, hur-riedly push-ing off from this scene of activ-ity,
is about giv-ing chase to whales in the dis-tance. The har-poons and
lances lie lev-elled for use; three oars-men are just set-ting the mast in
its hole; while from a sud-den roll of the sea, the little craft stands
half-erect out of the wa-ter, like a rear-ing horse. From the ship, the
smoke of the tor-ments of the boil-ing whale is go-ing up like the smoke
over a vil-lage of smith-ies; and to wind-ward, a black cloud, rising up
with earn-est of squalls and rains, seems to quicken the activ-ity of the
ex-cited sea-men.


CHAPTER 57. Of Whales in Paint; in Teeth; in Wood; in Sheet-Iron; in
Stone; in Moun-tains; in Stars.

On Tower-hill, as you go down to the Lon-don docks, you may have seen a
crippled beg-gar (or _kedger_, as the sail-ors say) hold-ing a painted
board be-fore him, rep-res-ent-ing the tra-gic scene in which he lost his
leg. There are three whales and three boats; and one of the boats
(pre-sumed to con-tain the miss-ing leg in all its ori-ginal in-teg-rity) is
be-ing crunched by the jaws of the fore-most whale. Any time these ten
years, they tell me, has that man held up that pic-ture, and ex-hib-ited
that stump to an in-cred-u-lous world. But the time of his jus-ti-fic-a-tion
has now come. His three whales are as good whales as were ever
pub-lished in Wap-ping, at any rate; and his stump as un-ques-tion-able a
stump as any you will find in the west-ern clear-ings. But, though for
ever moun-ted on that stump, never a stump-speech does the poor whale-man
make; but, with down-cast eyes, stands rue-fully con-tem-plat-ing his own
am-pu-ta-tion.

Throughout the Pa-cific, and also in Nan-tucket, and New Bed-ford, and Sag
Har-bor, you will come across lively sketches of whales and
whal-ing-scenes, graven by the fish-er-men them-selves on Sperm
Whale-teeth, or ladies’ busks wrought out of the Right Whale-bone, and
other like skrim-shander art-icles, as the whale-men call the nu-mer-ous
little in-geni-ous con-triv-ances they elab-or-ately carve out of the rough
ma-ter-ial, in their hours of ocean leis-ure. Some of them have little
boxes of dent-ist-ical-look-ing im-ple-ments, spe-cially in-ten-ded for the
skrim-shan-der-ing busi-ness. But, in gen-eral, they toil with their
jack-knives alone; and, with that al-most om-ni-po-tent tool of the sailor,
they will turn you out any-thing you please, in the way of a mar-iner’s
fancy.

Long ex-ile from Christen-dom and civil-iz-a-tion in-ev-it-ably re-stores a man
to that con-di-tion in which God placed him, _i.e._ what is called
sav-agery. Your true whale-hunter is as much a sav-age as an Iroquois. I
my-self am a sav-age, own-ing no al-le-gi-ance but to the King of the
Can-ni-bals; and ready at any mo-ment to rebel against him.

Now, one of the pe-cu-liar char-ac-ter-ist-ics of the sav-age in his do-mestic
hours, is his won-der-ful pa-tience of in-dustry. An an-cient Hawaiian
war-club or spear-paddle, in its full mul-ti-pli-city and elab-or-a-tion of
carving, is as great a trophy of hu-man per-sever-ance as a Latin lex-icon.
For, with but a bit of broken sea-shell or a shark’s tooth, that
mi-ra-cu-lous in-tric-acy of wooden net-work has been achieved; and it has
cost steady years of steady ap-plic-a-tion.

As with the Hawaiian sav-age, so with the white sailor-sav-age. With the
same mar-vel-lous pa-tience, and with the same single shark’s tooth, of
his one poor jack-knife, he will carve you a bit of bone sculp-ture, not
quite as work-man-like, but as close packed in its mazi-ness of design, as
the Greek sav-age, Achilles’s shield; and full of bar-baric spirit and
sug-gest-ive-ness, as the prints of that fine old Dutch sav-age, Al-bert
Durer.

Wooden whales, or whales cut in pro-file out of the small dark slabs of
the noble South Sea war-wood, are fre-quently met with in the
fore-castles of Amer-ican whalers. Some of them are done with much
ac-cur-acy.

At some old gable-roofed coun-try houses you will see brass whales hung
by the tail for knock-ers to the road-side door. When the porter is
sleepy, the an-vil-headed whale would be best. But these knock-ing whales
are sel-dom re-mark-able as faith-ful es-says. On the spires of some
old-fash-ioned churches you will see sheet-iron whales placed there for
weather-cocks; but they are so el-ev-ated, and be-sides that are to all
in-tents and pur-poses so la-belled with “_Hands off!_” you can-not ex-am-ine
them closely enough to de-cide upon their merit.

In bony, ribby re-gions of the earth, where at the base of high broken
cliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fant-astic group-ings upon the plain,
you will of-ten dis-cover im-ages as of the pet-ri-fied forms of the
Le-viathan partly merged in grass, which of a windy day breaks against
them in a surf of green surges.

Then, again, in moun-tain-ous coun-tries where the trav-el-ler is
con-tinu-ally girdled by am-phi-the-at-rical heights; here and there from
some lucky point of view you will catch passing glimpses of the
pro-files of whales defined along the un-du-lat-ing ridges. But you must be
a thor-ough whale-man, to see these sights; and not only that, but if you
wish to re-turn to such a sight again, you must be sure and take the
ex-act in-ter-sect-ing lat-it-ude and lon-git-ude of your first stand-point,
else so chance-like are such ob-ser-va-tions of the hills, that your
pre-cise, pre-vi-ous stand-point would re-quire a la-bor-i-ous re-dis-cov-ery;
like the So-loma Is-lands, which still re-main in-cog-nita, though once
high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuera chron-icled them.

Nor when ex-pand-ingly lif-ted by your sub-ject, can you fail to trace out
great whales in the starry heav-ens, and boats in pur-suit of them; as
when long filled with thoughts of war the Eastern na-tions saw armies
locked in battle among the clouds. Thus at the North have I chased
Le-viathan round and round the Pole with the re-volu-tions of the bright
points that first defined him to me. And be-neath the ef-ful-gent
Antarc-tic skies I have boarded the Argo-Navis, and joined the chase
against the starry Cetus far bey-ond the ut-most stretch of Hy-drus and
the Fly-ing Fish.

With a frig-ate’s an-chors for my bridle-bitts and fasces of har-poons for
spurs, would I could mount that whale and leap the top-most skies, to
see whether the fabled heav-ens with all their count-less tents really
lie en-camped bey-ond my mor-tal sight!


CHAPTER 58. Brit.

Steer-ing north-east-ward from the Croz-etts, we fell in with vast mead-ows
of brit, the minute, yel-low sub-stance, upon which the Right Whale
largely feeds. For leagues and leagues it un-du-lated round us, so that
we seemed to be sail-ing through bound-less fields of ripe and golden
wheat.

On the second day, num-bers of Right Whales were seen, who, se-cure from
the at-tack of a Sperm Whaler like the Pequod, with open jaws slug-gishly
swam through the brit, which, ad-her-ing to the fringing fibres of that
won-drous Vene-tian blind in their mouths, was in that man-ner sep-ar-ated
from the wa-ter that es-caped at the lip.

As morn-ing mowers, who side by side slowly and seeth-ingly ad-vance their
scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads; even so these
mon-sters swam, mak-ing a strange, grassy, cut-ting sound; and leav-ing
be-hind them end-less swaths of blue upon the yel-low sea.*

*That part of the sea known among whale-men as the “Brazil Banks” does
not bear that name as the Banks of New-found-land do, be-cause of there
be-ing shal-lows and sound-ings there, but be-cause of this re-mark-able
meadow-like ap-pear-ance, caused by the vast drifts of brit con-tinu-ally
float-ing in those lat-it-udes, where the Right Whale is of-ten chased.

But it was only the sound they made as they par-ted the brit which at
all re-minded one of mowers. Seen from the mast-heads, es-pe-cially when
they paused and were sta-tion-ary for a while, their vast black forms
looked more like life-less masses of rock than any-thing else. And as in
the great hunt-ing coun-tries of In-dia, the stranger at a dis-tance will
some-times pass on the plains re-cum-bent ele-phants without know-ing them
to be such, tak-ing them for bare, blackened el-ev-a-tions of the soil;
even so, of-ten, with him, who for the first time be-holds this spe-cies
of the le-viath-ans of the sea. And even when re-cog-nised at last, their
im-mense mag-nitude renders it very hard really to be-lieve that such
bulky masses of over-growth can pos-sibly be in-stinct, in all parts, with
the same sort of life that lives in a dog or a horse.

Indeed, in other re-spects, you can hardly re-gard any creatures of the
deep with the same feel-ings that you do those of the shore. For though
some old nat-ur-al-ists have main-tained that all creatures of the land are
of their kind in the sea; and though tak-ing a broad gen-eral view of the
thing, this may very well be; yet com-ing to spe-cial-ties, where, for
ex-ample, does the ocean fur-nish any fish that in dis-pos-i-tion an-swers to
the saga-cious kind-ness of the dog? The ac-cursed shark alone can in any
gen-eric re-spect be said to bear com-par-at-ive ana-logy to him.

But though, to lands-men in gen-eral, the nat-ive in-hab-it-ants of the seas
have ever been re-garded with emo-tions un-speak-ably un-so-cial and
re-pelling; though we know the sea to be an ever-last-ing terra in-cog-nita,
so that Colum-bus sailed over num-ber-less un-known worlds to dis-cover his
one su-per-fi-cial west-ern one; though, by vast odds, the most ter-rific of
all mor-tal dis-asters have im-me-mori-ally and in-dis-crim-in-ately be-fallen
tens and hun-dreds of thou-sands of those who have gone upon the wa-ters;
though but a mo-ment’s con-sid-er-a-tion will teach, that how-ever baby man
may brag of his sci-ence and skill, and how-ever much, in a flat-ter-ing
fu-ture, that sci-ence and skill may aug-ment; yet for ever and for ever,
to the crack of doom, the sea will in-sult and murder him, and pul-ver-ize
the stateli-est, stiffest frig-ate he can make; nev-er-the-less, by the
con-tinual re-pe-ti-tion of these very im-pres-sions, man has lost that sense
of the full aw-ful-ness of the sea which ab-ori-gin-ally be-longs to it.

The first boat we read of, floated on an ocean, that with Por-tuguese
ven-geance had whelmed a whole world without leav-ing so much as a widow.
That same ocean rolls now; that same ocean des-troyed the wrecked ships
of last year. Yea, fool-ish mor-tals, Noah’s flood is not yet sub-sided;
two thirds of the fair world it yet cov-ers.

Wherein dif-fer the sea and the land, that a mir-acle upon one is not a
mir-acle upon the other? Preter-nat-ural ter-rors res-ted upon the Hebrews,
when un-der the feet of Korah and his com-pany the live ground opened and
swal-lowed them up for ever; yet not a mod-ern sun ever sets, but in
pre-cisely the same man-ner the live sea swal-lows up ships and crews.

But not only is the sea such a foe to man who is an alien to it, but it
is also a fiend to its own off-spring; worse than the Per-sian host who
murdered his own guests; spar-ing not the creatures which it-self hath
spawned. Like a sav-age tigress that toss-ing in the jungle over-lays her
own cubs, so the sea dashes even the migh-ti-est whales against the
rocks, and leaves them there side by side with the split wrecks of
ships. No mercy, no power but its own con-trols it. Pant-ing and snort-ing
like a mad battle steed that has lost its rider, the mas-ter-less ocean
over-runs the globe.

Con-sider the sub-tle-ness of the sea; how its most dreaded creatures
glide un-der wa-ter, un-ap-par-ent for the most part, and treach-er-ously
hid-den be-neath the love-li-est tints of azure. Con-sider also the dev-il-ish
bril-liance and beauty of many of its most re-morse-less tribes, as the
dainty em-bel-lished shape of many spe-cies of sharks. Con-sider, once
more, the uni-ver-sal can-ni-bal-ism of the sea; all whose creatures prey
upon each other, car-ry-ing on eternal war since the world began.

Con-sider all this; and then turn to this green, gentle, and most do-cile
earth; con-sider them both, the sea and the land; and do you not find a
strange ana-logy to some-thing in your-self? For as this ap-palling ocean
sur-rounds the verd-ant land, so in the soul of man there lies one
in-su-lar Tahiti, full of peace and joy, but en-com-passed by all the
hor-rors of the half known life. God keep thee! Push not off from that
isle, thou canst never re-turn!


CHAPTER 59. Squid.

Slowly wad-ing through the mead-ows of brit, the Pequod still held on her
way north-east-ward to-wards the is-land of Java; a gentle air im-pel-ling
her keel, so that in the sur-round-ing serenity her three tall taper-ing
masts mildly waved to that lan-guid breeze, as three mild palms on a
plain. And still, at wide in-ter-vals in the sil-very night, the lonely,
al-lur-ing jet would be seen.

But one trans-par-ent blue morn-ing, when a still-ness al-most preter-nat-ural
spread over the sea, how-ever un-at-ten-ded with any stag-nant calm; when
the long burn-ished sun-glade on the wa-ters seemed a golden fin-ger laid
across them, en-join-ing some secrecy; when the slippered waves whispered
to-gether as they softly ran on; in this pro-found hush of the vis-ible
sphere a strange spectre was seen by Dag-goo from the main-mast-head.

In the dis-tance, a great white mass lazily rose, and rising higher and
higher, and dis-en-tangling it-self from the azure, at last gleamed be-fore
our prow like a snow-slide, new slid from the hills. Thus glisten-ing
for a mo-ment, as slowly it sub-sided, and sank. Then once more arose,
and si-lently gleamed. It seemed not a whale; and yet is this Moby Dick?
thought Dag-goo. Again the phantom went down, but on re-ap-pear-ing once
more, with a stiletto-like cry that startled every man from his nod,
the negro yelled out—“There! there again! there she breaches! right
ahead! The White Whale, the White Whale!”

Upon this, the sea-men rushed to the yard-arms, as in swarm-ing-time the
bees rush to the boughs. Bare-headed in the sul-try sun, Ahab stood on
the bow-sprit, and with one hand pushed far be-hind in read-i-ness to wave
his or-ders to the helms-man, cast his eager glance in the dir-ec-tion
in-dic-ated aloft by the out-stretched mo-tion-less arm of Dag-goo.

Whether the flit-ting at-tend-ance of the one still and sol-it-ary jet had
gradu-ally worked upon Ahab, so that he was now pre-pared to con-nect the
ideas of mild-ness and re-pose with the first sight of the par-tic-u-lar
whale he pur-sued; how-ever this was, or whether his eager-ness be-trayed
him; whichever way it might have been, no sooner did he dis-tinctly
per-ceive the white mass, than with a quick in-tens-ity he in-stantly gave
or-ders for lower-ing.

The four boats were soon on the wa-ter; Ahab’s in ad-vance, and all
swiftly pulling to-wards their prey. Soon it went down, and while, with
oars sus-pen-ded, we were await-ing its re-appear-ance, lo! in the same spot
where it sank, once more it slowly rose. Al-most for-get-ting for the
mo-ment all thoughts of Moby Dick, we now gazed at the most won-drous
phe-nomenon which the secret seas have hitherto re-vealed to man-kind. A
vast pulpy mass, fur-longs in length and breadth, of a glan-cing
cream-col-our, lay float-ing on the wa-ter, in-nu-mer-able long arms
ra-di-at-ing from its centre, and curl-ing and twist-ing like a nest of
anacon-das, as if blindly to clutch at any hap-less ob-ject within reach.
No per-cept-ible face or front did it have; no con-ceiv-able token of
either sen-sa-tion or in-stinct; but un-du-lated there on the bil-lows, an
un-earthly, form-less, chance-like ap-par-i-tion of life.

As with a low suck-ing sound it slowly dis-ap-peared again, Star-buck still
gaz-ing at the agit-ated wa-ters where it had sunk, with a wild voice
ex-claimed—“Al-most rather had I seen Moby Dick and fought him, than to
have seen thee, thou white ghost!”

“What was it, Sir?” said Flask.

“The great live squid, which, they say, few whale-ships ever be-held,
and re-turned to their ports to tell of it.”

But Ahab said noth-ing; turn-ing his boat, he sailed back to the ves-sel;
the rest as si-lently fol-low-ing.

Whatever su-per-sti-tions the sperm whale-men in gen-eral have con-nec-ted
with the sight of this ob-ject, cer-tain it is, that a glimpse of it
be-ing so very un-usual, that cir-cum-stance has gone far to in-vest it with
portent-ous-ness. So rarely is it be-held, that though one and all of them
de-clare it to be the largest an-im-ated thing in the ocean, yet very few
of them have any but the most vague ideas con-cern-ing its true nature
and form; not-with-stand-ing, they be-lieve it to fur-nish to the sperm
whale his only food. For though other spe-cies of whales find their food
above wa-ter, and may be seen by man in the act of feed-ing, the
sper-ma-ceti whale ob-tains his whole food in un-known zones be-low the
sur-face; and only by in-fer-ence is it that any one can tell of what,
pre-cisely, that food con-sists. At times, when closely pur-sued, he will
dis-gorge what are sup-posed to be the de-tached arms of the squid; some
of them thus ex-hib-ited ex-ceed-ing twenty and thirty feet in length. They
fancy that the mon-ster to which these arms be-longed or-din-ar-ily clings
by them to the bed of the ocean; and that the sperm whale, un-like other
spe-cies, is sup-plied with teeth in or-der to at-tack and tear it.

There seems some ground to ima-gine that the great Kraken of Bishop
Pon-top-podan may ul-ti-mately re-solve it-self into Squid. The man-ner in
which the Bishop de-scribes it, as al-tern-ately rising and sink-ing, with
some other par-tic-u-lars he nar-rates, in all this the two cor-res-pond. But
much abate-ment is ne-ces-sary with re-spect to the in-cred-ible bulk he
as-signs it.

By some nat-ur-al-ists who have vaguely heard ru-mors of the mys-ter-i-ous
creature, here spoken of, it is in-cluded among the class of
cuttle-fish, to which, in-deed, in cer-tain ex-ternal re-spects it would
seem to be-long, but only as the Anak of the tribe.


CHAPTER 60. The Line.

With ref-er-ence to the whal-ing scene shortly to be de-scribed, as well as
for the bet-ter un-der-stand-ing of all sim-ilar scenes else-where presen-ted,
I have here to speak of the ma-gical, some-times hor-rible whale-line.

The line ori-gin-ally used in the fish-ery was of the best hemp, slightly
vapored with tar, not im-preg-nated with it, as in the case of or-din-ary
ropes; for while tar, as or-din-ar-ily used, makes the hemp more pli-able
to the rope-maker, and also renders the rope it-self more con-veni-ent to
the sailor for com-mon ship use; yet, not only would the or-din-ary
quant-ity too much stiffen the whale-line for the close coil-ing to which
it must be sub-jec-ted; but as most sea-men are be-gin-ning to learn, tar in
gen-eral by no means adds to the rope’s dur-ab-il-ity or strength, how-ever
much it may give it com-pact-ness and gloss.

Of late years the Manilla rope has in the Amer-ican fish-ery al-most
en-tirely su-per-seded hemp as a ma-ter-ial for whale-lines; for, though not
so dur-able as hemp, it is stronger, and far more soft and elastic; and
I will add (since there is an æs-thet-ics in all things), is much more
hand-some and be-com-ing to the boat, than hemp. Hemp is a dusky, dark
fel-low, a sort of In-dian; but Manilla is as a golden-haired Cir-cas-sian
to be-hold.

The whale-line is only two-thirds of an inch in thick-ness. At first
sight, you would not think it so strong as it really is. By ex-per-i-ment
its one and fifty yarns will each sus-pend a weight of one hun-dred and
twenty pounds; so that the whole rope will bear a strain nearly equal
to three tons. In length, the com-mon sperm whale-line meas-ures
some-thing over two hun-dred fathoms. Towards the stern of the boat it is
spir-ally coiled away in the tub, not like the worm-pipe of a still
though, but so as to form one round, cheese-shaped mass of densely
bed-ded “sheaves,” or lay-ers of con-cent-ric spir-al-iz-a-tions, without any
hol-low but the “heart,” or minute ver-tical tube formed at the axis of
the cheese. As the least tangle or kink in the coil-ing would, in
run-ning out, in-fal-libly take some-body’s arm, leg, or en-tire body off,
the ut-most pre-cau-tion is used in stow-ing the line in its tub. Some
har-poon-eers will con-sume al-most an en-tire morn-ing in this busi-ness,
car-ry-ing the line high aloft and then reev-ing it down-wards through a
block to-wards the tub, so as in the act of coil-ing to free it from all
pos-sible wrinkles and twists.

In the Eng-lish boats two tubs are used in-stead of one; the same line
be-ing con-tinu-ously coiled in both tubs. There is some ad-vant-age in
this; be-cause these twin-tubs be-ing so small they fit more read-ily into
the boat, and do not strain it so much; whereas, the Amer-ican tub,
nearly three feet in dia-meter and of pro-por-tion-ate depth, makes a
rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks are but one half-inch in
thick-ness; for the bot-tom of the whale-boat is like crit-ical ice, which
will bear up a con-sid-er-able dis-trib-uted weight, but not very much of a
con-cen-trated one. When the painted can-vas cover is clapped on the
Amer-ican line-tub, the boat looks as if it were pulling off with a
prodi-gious great wed-ding-cake to present to the whales.

Both ends of the line are ex-posed; the lower end ter-min-at-ing in an
eye-splice or loop com-ing up from the bot-tom against the side of the
tub, and hanging over its edge com-pletely dis-en-gaged from everything.
This ar-range-ment of the lower end is ne-ces-sary on two ac-counts. First:
In or-der to fa-cil-it-ate the fasten-ing to it of an ad-di-tional line from a
neigh-bor-ing boat, in case the stricken whale should sound so deep as to
threaten to carry off the en-tire line ori-gin-ally at-tached to the
har-poon. In these in-stances, the whale of course is shif-ted like a mug
of ale, as it were, from the one boat to the other; though the first
boat al-ways hov-ers at hand to as-sist its con-sort. Se-cond: This
ar-range-ment is in-dis-pens-able for com-mon safety’s sake; for were the
lower end of the line in any way at-tached to the boat, and were the
whale then to run the line out to the end al-most in a single, smoking
minute as he some-times does, he would not stop there, for the doomed
boat would in-fal-libly be dragged down after him into the pro-fund-ity of
the sea; and in that case no town-crier would ever find her again.

Be-fore lower-ing the boat for the chase, the up-per end of the line is
taken aft from the tub, and passing round the log-ger-head there, is
again car-ried for-ward the en-tire length of the boat, rest-ing cross-wise
upon the loom or handle of every man’s oar, so that it jogs against his
wrist in row-ing; and also passing between the men, as they al-tern-ately
sit at the op-pos-ite gun-wales, to the leaded chocks or grooves in the
ex-treme poin-ted prow of the boat, where a wooden pin or skewer the size
of a com-mon quill, pre-vents it from slip-ping out. From the chocks it
hangs in a slight fes-toon over the bows, and is then passed in-side the
boat again; and some ten or twenty fathoms (called box-line) be-ing
coiled upon the box in the bows, it con-tin-ues its way to the gun-wale
still a little fur-ther aft, and is then at-tached to the short-warp—the
rope which is im-me-di-ately con-nec-ted with the har-poon; but pre-vi-ous to
that con-nex-ion, the short-warp goes through sun-dry mys-ti-fic-a-tions too
te-di-ous to de-tail.

Thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its com-plic-ated coils,
twist-ing and writh-ing around it in al-most every dir-ec-tion. All the
oars-men are in-volved in its per-il-ous con-tor-tions; so that to the timid
eye of the lands-man, they seem as In-dian jug-glers, with the dead-li-est
snakes sport-ively fes-toon-ing their limbs. Nor can any son of mor-tal
wo-man, for the first time, seat him-self amid those hempen in-tric-a-cies,
and while strain-ing his ut-most at the oar, be-think him that at any
un-known in-stant the har-poon may be dar-ted, and all these hor-rible
con-tor-tions be put in play like ringed light-nings; he can-not be thus
cir-cum-stanced without a shud-der that makes the very mar-row in his bones
to quiver in him like a shaken jelly. Yet habit—strange thing! what
can-not habit ac-com-plish?—Gayer sal-lies, more merry mirth, bet-ter jokes,
and brighter re-partees, you never heard over your ma-hogany, than you
will hear over the half-inch white ce-dar of the whale-boat, when thus
hung in hang-man’s nooses; and, like the six burgh-ers of Cal-ais be-fore
King Ed-ward, the six men com-pos-ing the crew pull into the jaws of
death, with a hal-ter around every neck, as you may say.

Per-haps a very little thought will now en-able you to ac-count for those
re-peated whal-ing dis-asters—some few of which are cas-u-ally chron-icled—of
this man or that man be-ing taken out of the boat by the line, and lost.
For, when the line is dart-ing out, to be seated then in the boat, is
like be-ing seated in the midst of the man-i-fold whizz-ings of a
steam-en-gine in full play, when every fly-ing beam, and shaft, and
wheel, is graz-ing you. It is worse; for you can-not sit mo-tion-less in
the heart of these per-ils, be-cause the boat is rock-ing like a cradle,
and you are pitched one way and the other, without the slight-est
warn-ing; and only by a cer-tain self-ad-just-ing buoy-ancy and
sim-ul-tan-eous-ness of vo-li-tion and ac-tion, can you es-cape be-ing made a
Mazeppa of, and run away with where the all-see-ing sun him-self could
never pierce you out.

Again: as the pro-found calm which only ap-par-ently pre-cedes and
proph-es-ies of the storm, is per-haps more aw-ful than the storm it-self;
for, in-deed, the calm is but the wrap-per and en-vel-ope of the storm; and
con-tains it in it-self, as the seem-ingly harm-less rifle holds the fatal
powder, and the ball, and the ex-plo-sion; so the grace-ful re-pose of the
line, as it si-lently ser-pent-ines about the oars-men be-fore be-ing brought
into ac-tual play—this is a thing which car-ries more of true ter-ror than
any other as-pect of this dan-ger-ous af-fair. But why say more? All men
live en-vel-oped in whale-lines. All are born with hal-ters round their
necks; but it is only when caught in the swift, sud-den turn of death,
that mor-tals real-ize the si-lent, subtle, ever-present per-ils of life.
And if you be a philo-sopher, though seated in the whale-boat, you would
not at heart feel one whit more of ter-ror, than though seated be-fore
your even-ing fire with a poker, and not a har-poon, by your side.


CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

If to Star-buck the ap-par-i-tion of the Squid was a thing of portents, to
Queequeg it was quite a dif-fer-ent ob-ject.

“When you see him ’quid,” said the sav-age, hon-ing his har-poon in the
bow of his hois-ted boat, “then you quick see him ’parm whale.”

The next day was ex-ceed-ingly still and sul-try, and with noth-ing spe-cial
to en-gage them, the Pequod’s crew could hardly res-ist the spell of
sleep in-duced by such a va-cant sea. For this part of the In-dian Ocean
through which we then were voy-aging is not what whale-men call a lively
ground; that is, it af-fords fewer glimpses of por-poises, dol-phins,
fly-ing-fish, and other vi-va-cious den-iz-ens of more stir-ring wa-ters, than
those off the Rio de la Plata, or the in-shore ground off Peru.

It was my turn to stand at the fore-mast-head; and with my shoulders
lean-ing against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed
in what seemed an en-chanted air. No res-ol-u-tion could with-stand it; in
that dreamy mood los-ing all con-scious-ness, at last my soul went out of
my body; though my body still con-tin-ued to sway as a pen-du-lum will,
long after the power which first moved it is with-drawn.

Ere for-get-ful-ness al-to-gether came over me, I had no-ticed that the
sea-men at the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. So that
at last all three of us life-lessly swung from the spars, and for every
swing that we made there was a nod from be-low from the slum-ber-ing
helms-man. The waves, too, nod-ded their in-dol-ent crests; and across the
wide trance of the sea, east nod-ded to west, and the sun over all.

Sud-denly bubbles seemed burst-ing be-neath my closed eyes; like vices my
hands grasped the shrouds; some in-vis-ible, gra-cious agency pre-served
me; with a shock I came back to life. And lo! close un-der our lee, not
forty fathoms off, a gi-gantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in the wa-ter like
the cap-sized hull of a frig-ate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian
hue, glisten-ing in the sun’s rays like a mir-ror. But lazily un-du-lat-ing
in the trough of the sea, and ever and anon tran-quilly spout-ing his
va-pory jet, the whale looked like a portly burgher smoking his pipe of
a warm af-ter-noon. But that pipe, poor whale, was thy last. As if struck
by some en-chanter’s wand, the sleepy ship and every sleeper in it all
at once star-ted into wake-ful-ness; and more than a score of voices from
all parts of the ves-sel, sim-ul-tan-eously with the three notes from
aloft, shouted forth the ac-cus-tomed cry, as the great fish slowly and
reg-u-larly spouted the spark-ling brine into the air.

“Clear away the boats! Luff!” cried Ahab. And obey-ing his own or-der, he
dashed the helm down be-fore the helms-man could handle the spokes.

The sud-den ex-clam-a-tions of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and
ere the boats were down, majestic-ally turn-ing, he swam away to the
lee-ward, but with such a steady tran-quil-lity, and mak-ing so few ripples
as he swam, that think-ing after all he might not as yet be alarmed,
Ahab gave or-ders that not an oar should be used, and no man must speak
but in whis-pers. So seated like Ontario In-di-ans on the gun-wales of the
boats, we swiftly but si-lently paddled along; the calm not ad-mit-ting of
the noise-less sails be-ing set. Presently, as we thus glided in chase,
the mon-ster per-pen-dic-u-larly flit-ted his tail forty feet into the air,
and then sank out of sight like a tower swal-lowed up.

“There go flukes!” was the cry, an an-nounce-ment im-me-di-ately fol-lowed by
Stubb’s pro-du-cing his match and ig-nit-ing his pipe, for now a res-pite
was gran-ted. After the full in-ter-val of his sound-ing had elapsed, the
whale rose again, and be-ing now in ad-vance of the smoker’s boat, and
much nearer to it than to any of the oth-ers, Stubb coun-ted upon the
honor of the cap-ture. It was ob-vi-ous, now, that the whale had at length
be-come aware of his pur-suers. All si-lence of cau-tious-ness was there-fore
no longer of use. Paddles were dropped, and oars came loudly into play.
And still puff-ing at his pipe, Stubb cheered on his crew to the
as-sault.

Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. All alive to his jeop-ardy,
he was go-ing “head out”; that part ob-liquely pro-ject-ing from the mad
yeast which he brewed.*

*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light sub-stance the
en-tire in-terior of the sperm whale’s enorm-ous head con-sists. Though
ap-par-ently the most massive, it is by far the most buoy-ant part about
him. So that with ease he el-ev-ates it in the air, and in-vari-ably does
so when go-ing at his ut-most speed. Besides, such is the breadth of the
up-per part of the front of his head, and such the taper-ing cut-wa-ter
form-a-tion of the lower part, that by ob-liquely el-ev-at-ing his head, he
thereby may be said to trans-form him-self from a bluff-bowed slug-gish
gal-liot into a sharp-poin-ted New York pi-lot-boat.

“Start her, start her, my men! Don’t hurry yourselves; take plenty of
time—but start her; start her like thun-der-claps, that’s all,” cried
Stubb, splut-ter-ing out the smoke as he spoke. “Start her, now; give ’em
the long and strong stroke, Tasht-ego. Start her, Tash, my boy—start
her, all; but keep cool, keep cool—cu-cum-bers is the word—easy,
easy—only start her like grim death and grin-ning dev-ils, and raise the
bur-ied dead per-pen-dic-u-lar out of their graves, boys—that’s all. Start
her!”

“Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!” screamed the Gay-Header in reply, rais-ing some old
war-whoop to the skies; as every oars-man in the strained boat
in-vol-un-tar-ily bounced for-ward with the one tre-mend-ous lead-ing stroke
which the eager In-dian gave.

But his wild screams were answered by oth-ers quite as wild. “Kee-hee!
Kee-hee!” yelled Dag-goo, strain-ing for-wards and back-wards on his seat,
like a pa-cing ti-ger in his cage.

“Ka-la! Koo-loo!” howled Queequeg, as if smack-ing his lips over a
mouth-ful of Gren-adier’s steak. And thus with oars and yells the keels
cut the sea. Mean-while, Stubb re-tain-ing his place in the van, still
en-cour-aged his men to the on-set, all the while puff-ing the smoke from
his mouth. Like des-peradoes they tugged and they strained, till the
wel-come cry was heard—“Stand up, Tasht-ego!—give it to him!” The har-poon
was hurled. “Stern all!” The oars-men backed wa-ter; the same mo-ment
some-thing went hot and hiss-ing along every one of their wrists. It was
the ma-gical line. An in-stant be-fore, Stubb had swiftly caught two
ad-di-tional turns with it round the log-ger-head, whence, by reason of its
in-creased rapid circ-lings, a hempen blue smoke now jet-ted up and
mingled with the steady fumes from his pipe. As the line passed round
and round the log-ger-head; so also, just be-fore reach-ing that point, it
blis-ter-ingly passed through and through both of Stubb’s hands, from
which the hand-cloths, or squares of quilted can-vas some-times worn at
these times, had ac-ci-dent-ally dropped. It was like hold-ing an en-emy’s
sharp two-edged sword by the blade, and that en-emy all the time
striv-ing to wrest it out of your clutch.

“Wet the line! wet the line!” cried Stubb to the tub oars-man (him
seated by the tub) who, snatch-ing off his hat, dashed sea-wa-ter into
it.* More turns were taken, so that the line began hold-ing its place.
The boat now flew through the boil-ing wa-ter like a shark all fins.
Stubb and Tasht-ego here changed places—stem for stern—a stag-ger-ing
busi-ness truly in that rock-ing com-mo-tion.

*Partly to show the in-dis-pens-able-ness of this act, it may here be
stated, that, in the old Dutch fish-ery, a mop was used to dash the
run-ning line with wa-ter; in many other ships, a wooden pig-gin, or
bailer, is set apart for that pur-pose. Your hat, how-ever, is the most
con-veni-ent.

From the vi-brat-ing line ex-tend-ing the en-tire length of the up-per part
of the boat, and from its now be-ing more tight than a harp-string, you
would have thought the craft had two keels—one cleav-ing the wa-ter, the
other the air—as the boat churned on through both op-pos-ing ele-ments at
once. A con-tinual cas-cade played at the bows; a cease-less whirl-ing eddy
in her wake; and, at the slight-est mo-tion from within, even but of a
little fin-ger, the vi-brat-ing, crack-ing craft can-ted over her spas-modic
gun-wale into the sea. Thus they rushed; each man with might and main
cling-ing to his seat, to pre-vent be-ing tossed to the foam; and the tall
form of Tasht-ego at the steer-ing oar crouch-ing al-most double, in or-der
to bring down his centre of grav-ity. Whole At-lantics and Pa-cif-ics
seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length the whale
some-what slackened his flight.

“Haul in—haul in!” cried Stubb to the bow-sman! and, fa-cing round
to-wards the whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while
yet the boat was be-ing towed on. Soon ran-ging up by his flank, Stubb,
firmly plant-ing his knee in the clumsy cleat, dar-ted dart after dart
into the fly-ing fish; at the word of com-mand, the boat al-tern-ately
stern-ing out of the way of the whale’s hor-rible wal-low, and then
ran-ging up for an-other fling.

The red tide now poured from all sides of the mon-ster like brooks down
a hill. His tor-men-ted body rolled not in brine but in blood, which
bubbled and seethed for fur-longs be-hind in their wake. The slant-ing sun
play-ing upon this crim-son pond in the sea, sent back its re-flec-tion
into every face, so that they all glowed to each other like red men.
And all the while, jet after jet of white smoke was ag-on-iz-ingly shot
from the spir-acle of the whale, and vehe-ment puff after puff from the
mouth of the ex-cited heads-man; as at every dart, haul-ing in upon his
crooked lance (by the line at-tached to it), Stubb straightened it again
and again, by a few rapid blows against the gun-wale, then again and
again sent it into the whale.

“Pull up—pull up!” he now cried to the bow-sman, as the wan-ing whale
re-laxed in his wrath. “Pull up!—close to!” and the boat ranged along
the fish’s flank. When reach-ing far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned
his long sharp lance into the fish, and kept it there, care-fully
churn-ing and churn-ing, as if cau-tiously seek-ing to feel after some gold
watch that the whale might have swal-lowed, and which he was fear-ful of
break-ing ere he could hook it out. But that gold watch he sought was
the in-ner-most life of the fish. And now it is struck; for, start-ing
from his trance into that un-speak-able thing called his “flurry,” the
mon-ster hor-ribly wal-lowed in his blood, over-wrapped him-self in
im-pen-et-rable, mad, boil-ing spray, so that the im-per-illed craft,
in-stantly drop-ping astern, had much ado blindly to struggle out from
that phren-sied twi-light into the clear air of the day.

And now abat-ing in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into
view; sur-ging from side to side; spas-mod-ic-ally dilat-ing and con-tract-ing
his spout-hole, with sharp, crack-ing, ag-on-ized res-pir-a-tions. At last,
gush after gush of clot-ted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees
of red wine, shot into the frighted air; and fall-ing back again, ran
drip-ping down his mo-tion-less flanks into the sea. His heart had burst!

“He’s dead, Mr. Stubb,” said Dag-goo.

“Yes; both pipes smoked out!” and with-draw-ing his own from his mouth,
Stubb scattered the dead ashes over the wa-ter; and, for a mo-ment, stood
thought-fully eye-ing the vast corpse he had made.


CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

A word con-cern-ing an in-cid-ent in the last chapter.

Ac-cord-ing to the in-vari-able us-age of the fish-ery, the whale-boat pushes
off from the ship, with the heads-man or whale-killer as tem-por-ary
steers-man, and the har-poon-eer or whale-fastener pulling the fore-most
oar, the one known as the har-poon-eer-oar. Now it needs a strong,
nervous arm to strike the first iron into the fish; for of-ten, in what
is called a long dart, the heavy im-ple-ment has to be flung to the
dis-tance of twenty or thirty feet. But how-ever pro-longed and ex-haust-ing
the chase, the har-poon-eer is ex-pec-ted to pull his oar mean-while to the
ut-ter-most; in-deed, he is ex-pec-ted to set an ex-ample of su-per-hu-man
activ-ity to the rest, not only by in-cred-ible row-ing, but by re-peated
loud and in-trepid ex-clam-a-tions; and what it is to keep shout-ing at the
top of one’s com-pass, while all the other muscles are strained and half
star-ted—what that is none know but those who have tried it. For one, I
can-not bawl very heart-ily and work very reck-lessly at one and the same
time. In this strain-ing, bawl-ing state, then, with his back to the
fish, all at once the ex-hausted har-poon-eer hears the ex-cit-ing
cry—“Stand up, and give it to him!” He now has to drop and se-cure his
oar, turn round on his centre half way, seize his har-poon from the
crotch, and with what little strength may re-main, he es-says to pitch it
some-how into the whale. No won-der, tak-ing the whole fleet of whale-men
in a body, that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are
suc-cess-ful; no won-der that so many hap-less har-poon-eers are madly cursed
and dis-rated; no won-der that some of them ac-tu-ally burst their
blood-ves-sels in the boat; no won-der that some sperm whale-men are
ab-sent four years with four bar-rels; no won-der that to many ship
own-ers, whal-ing is but a los-ing con-cern; for it is the har-poon-eer that
makes the voy-age, and if you take the breath out of his body how can
you ex-pect to find it there when most wanted!

Again, if the dart be suc-cess-ful, then at the second crit-ical in-stant,
that is, when the whale starts to run, the boat-header and har-poon-eer
like-wise start to run-ning fore and aft, to the im-min-ent jeop-ardy of
them-selves and every one else. It is then they change places; and the
heads-man, the chief of-ficer of the little craft, takes his proper
sta-tion in the bows of the boat.

Now, I care not who main-tains the con-trary, but all this is both
fool-ish and un-ne-ces-sary. The heads-man should stay in the bows from
first to last; he should both dart the har-poon and the lance, and no
row-ing whatever should be ex-pec-ted of him, ex-cept un-der cir-cum-stances
ob-vi-ous to any fish-er-man. I know that this would some-times in-volve a
slight loss of speed in the chase; but long ex-per-i-ence in vari-ous
whale-men of more than one na-tion has con-vinced me that in the vast
ma-jor-ity of fail-ures in the fish-ery, it has not by any means been so
much the speed of the whale as the be-fore de-scribed ex-haus-tion of the
har-poon-eer that has caused them.

To in-sure the greatest ef-fi-ciency in the dart, the har-poon-eers of this
world must start to their feet from out of idle-ness, and not from out
of toil.


CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. So, in
pro-duct-ive sub-jects, grow the chapters.

The crotch al-luded to on a pre-vi-ous page de-serves in-de-pend-ent men-tion.
It is a notched stick of a pe-cu-liar form, some two feet in length,
which is per-pen-dic-u-larly in-ser-ted into the star-board gun-wale near the
bow, for the pur-pose of fur-nish-ing a rest for the wooden ex-tremity of
the har-poon, whose other na-ked, barbed end slop-ingly pro-jects from the
prow. Thereby the weapon is in-stantly at hand to its hurler, who
snatches it up as read-ily from its rest as a back-woods-man swings his
rifle from the wall. It is cus-tom-ary to have two har-poons re-pos-ing in
the crotch, re-spect-ively called the first and second irons.

But these two har-poons, each by its own cord, are both con-nec-ted with
the line; the ob-ject be-ing this: to dart them both, if pos-sible, one
in-stantly after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the
com-ing drag, one should draw out, the other may still re-tain a hold. It
is a doub-ling of the chances. But it very of-ten hap-pens that ow-ing to
the in-stant-an-eous, vi-ol-ent, con-vuls-ive run-ning of the whale upon
re-ceiv-ing the first iron, it be-comes im-possible for the har-poon-eer,
how-ever light-ning-like in his move-ments, to pitch the second iron into
him. Never-the-less, as the second iron is already con-nec-ted with the
line, and the line is run-ning, hence that weapon must, at all events,
be an-ti-cip-at-ingly tossed out of the boat, some-how and some-where; else
the most ter-rible jeop-ardy would in-volve all hands. Tumbled into the
wa-ter, it ac-cord-ingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line
(men-tioned in a pre-ced-ing chapter) mak-ing this feat, in most in-stances,
prudently prac-tic-able. But this crit-ical act is not al-ways un-at-ten-ded
with the sad-dest and most fatal cas-u-al-ties.

Fur-ther-more: you must know that when the second iron is thrown
over-board, it thence-forth be-comes a dangling, sharp-edged ter-ror,
skit-tishly cur-vet-ting about both boat and whale, en-tangling the lines,
or cut-ting them, and mak-ing a prodi-gious sen-sa-tion in all dir-ec-tions.
Nor, in gen-eral, is it pos-sible to se-cure it again un-til the whale is
fairly cap-tured and a corpse.

Con-sider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all en-ga-ging
one un-usu-ally strong, act-ive, and know-ing whale; when ow-ing to these
qual-it-ies in him, as well as to the thou-sand con-cur-ring ac-ci-dents of
such an au-da-cious en-ter-prise, eight or ten loose second irons may be
sim-ul-tan-eously dangling about him. For, of course, each boat is
sup-plied with sev-eral har-poons to bend on to the line should the first
one be in-ef-fec-tu-ally dar-ted without re-cov-ery. All these par-tic-u-lars are
faith-fully nar-rated here, as they will not fail to elu-cid-ate sev-eral
most im-port-ant, how-ever in-tric-ate pas-sages, in scenes here-after to be
painted.


CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Sup-per.

Stubb’s whale had been killed some dis-tance from the ship. It was a
calm; so, form-ing a tan-dem of three boats, we com-menced the slow
busi-ness of tow-ing the trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eight-een
men with our thirty-six arms, and one hun-dred and eighty thumbs and
fin-gers, slowly toiled hour after hour upon that in-ert, slug-gish corpse
in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at all, ex-cept at long
in-ter-vals; good evid-ence was hereby fur-nished of the enorm-ous-ness of
the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or whatever
they call it, in Ch-ina, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this
grand ar-gosy we towed heav-ily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead
in bulk.

Dark-ness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod’s
main-rig-ging dimly guided our way; till draw-ing nearer we saw Ahab
drop-ping one of sev-eral more lan-terns over the bul-warks. Vacantly
eye-ing the heav-ing whale for a mo-ment, he is-sued the usual or-ders for
se-cur-ing it for the night, and then hand-ing his lan-tern to a sea-man,
went his way into the cabin, and did not come for-ward again un-til
morn-ing.

Though, in over-see-ing the pur-suit of this whale, Cap-tain Ahab had
evinced his cus-tom-ary activ-ity, to call it so; yet now that the
creature was dead, some vague dis-sat-is-fac-tion, or im-pa-tience, or
des-pair, seemed work-ing in him; as if the sight of that dead body
re-minded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain; and though a thou-sand
other whales were brought to his ship, all that would not one jot
ad-vance his grand, mono-ma-niac ob-ject. Very soon you would have thought
from the sound on the Pequod’s decks, that all hands were pre-par-ing to
cast an-chor in the deep; for heavy chains are be-ing dragged along the
deck, and thrust rat-tling out of the port-holes. But by those clank-ing
links, the vast corpse it-self, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by
the head to the stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies
with its black hull close to the ves-sel’s and seen through the dark-ness
of the night, which ob-scured the spars and rig-ging aloft, the two—ship
and whale, seemed yoked to-gether like co-lossal bul-locks, whereof one
re-clines while the other re-mains stand-ing.*

*A little item may as well be re-lated here. The strongest and most
re-li-able hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored along-side,
is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater dens-ity that part is
re-l-at-ively heav-ier than any other (ex-cept-ing the side-fins), its
flex-ib-il-ity even in death, causes it to sink low be-neath the sur-face;
so that with the hand you can-not get at it from the boat, in or-der to
put the chain round it. But this dif-fi-culty is in-geni-ously over-come: a
small, strong line is pre-pared with a wooden float at its outer end,
and a weight in its middle, while the other end is se-cured to the ship.
By adroit man-age-ment the wooden float is made to rise on the other side
of the mass, so that now hav-ing girdled the whale, the chain is read-ily
made to fol-low suit; and be-ing slipped along the body, is at last
locked fast round the smal-lest part of the tail, at the point of
junc-tion with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all qui-es-cence, at least so far as could be known
on deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with con-quest, be-trayed an
un-usual but still good-natured ex-cite-ment. Such an un-wonted bustle was
he in that the staid Star-buck, his of-fi-cial su-per-ior, quietly resigned
to him for the time the sole man-age-ment of af-fairs. One small, help-ing
cause of all this live-li-ness in Stubb, was soon made strangely
mani-fest. Stubb was a high liver; he was some-what in-tem-per-ately fond of
the whale as a fla-vor-ish thing to his pal-ate.

“A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Dag-goo! over-board you go, and cut
me one from his small!”

Here be it known, that though these wild fish-er-men do not, as a gen-eral
thing, and ac-cord-ing to the great mil-it-ary maxim, make the en-emy de-fray
the cur-rent ex-penses of the war (at least be-fore real-iz-ing the pro-ceeds
of the voy-age), yet now and then you find some of these Nan-tuck-eters
who have a genu-ine rel-ish for that par-tic-u-lar part of the Sperm Whale
des-ig-nated by Stubb; com-pris-ing the taper-ing ex-tremity of the body.

About mid-night that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two
lan-terns of sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his sper-ma-ceti sup-per
at the cap-stan-head, as if that cap-stan were a side-board. Nor was Stubb
the only ban-queter on whale’s flesh that night. Mingling their
mum-blings with his own mas-tic-a-tions, thou-sands on thou-sands of sharks,
swarm-ing round the dead le-viathan, smack-ingly feasted on its fat-ness.
The few sleep-ers be-low in their bunks were of-ten startled by the sharp
slap-ping of their tails against the hull, within a few inches of the
sleep-ers’ hearts. Peer-ing over the side you could just see them (as
be-fore you heard them) wal-low-ing in the sul-len, black wa-ters, and
turn-ing over on their backs as they scooped out huge glob-u-lar pieces of
the whale of the big-ness of a hu-man head. This par-tic-u-lar feat of the
shark seems all but mi-ra-cu-lous. How at such an ap-par-ently un-as-sail-able
sur-face, they con-trive to gouge out such sym-met-rical mouth-fuls, re-mains
a part of the uni-ver-sal prob-lem of all things. The mark they thus leave
on the whale, may best be likened to the hol-low made by a car-penter in
coun-ter-sink-ing for a screw.

Though amid all the smoking hor-ror and di-ab-ol-ism of a sea-fight, sharks
will be seen long-ingly gaz-ing up to the ship’s decks, like hungry dogs
round a table where red meat is be-ing carved, ready to bolt down every
killed man that is tossed to them; and though, while the vali-ant
butchers over the deck-table are thus can-ni-bally carving each other’s
live meat with carving-knives all gil-ded and tas-selled, the sharks,
also, with their jewel-hil-ted mouths, are quar-rel-somely carving away
un-der the table at the dead meat; and though, were you to turn the
whole af-fair up-side down, it would still be pretty much the same thing,
that is to say, a shock-ing shark-ish busi-ness enough for all parties;
and though sharks also are the in-vari-able out-riders of all slave ships
cross-ing the At-lantic, sys-tem-at-ic-ally trot-ting along-side, to be handy
in case a par-cel is to be car-ried any-where, or a dead slave to be
de-cently bur-ied; and though one or two other like in-stances might be
set down, touch-ing the set terms, places, and oc-ca-sions, when sharks do
most so-cially con-greg-ate, and most hil-ari-ously feast; yet is there no
con-ceiv-able time or oc-ca-sion when you will find them in such count-less
num-bers, and in gayer or more jovial spir-its, than around a dead sperm
whale, moored by night to a whale-ship at sea. If you have never seen
that sight, then sus-pend your de-cision about the pro-pri-ety of
devil-wor-ship, and the ex-pedi-ency of con-cili-at-ing the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mum-blings of the ban-quet that was
go-ing on so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smack-ing of
his own epi-cur-ean lips.

“Cook, cook!—where’s that old Fleece?” he cried at length, widen-ing his
legs still fur-ther, as if to form a more se-cure base for his sup-per;
and, at the same time dart-ing his fork into the dish, as if stabbing
with his lance; “cook, you cook!—sail this way, cook!”

The old black, not in any very high glee at hav-ing been pre-vi-ously
roused from his warm ham-mock at a most un-season-able hour, came
sham-bling along from his gal-ley, for, like many old blacks, there was
some-thing the mat-ter with his knee-pans, which he did not keep well
scoured like his other pans; this old Fleece, as they called him, came
shuff-ling and limp-ing along, as-sist-ing his step with his tongs, which,
after a clumsy fash-ion, were made of straightened iron hoops; this old
Ebony floundered along, and in obed-i-ence to the word of com-mand, came
to a dead stop on the op-pos-ite side of Stubb’s side-board; when, with
both hands fol-ded be-fore him, and rest-ing on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still fur-ther over, at the same time side-ways
in-clin-ing his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

“Cook,” said Stubb, rap-idly lift-ing a rather red-dish morsel to his
mouth, “don’t you think this steak is rather over-done? You’ve been
beat-ing this steak too much, cook; it’s too tender. Don’t I al-ways say
that to be good, a whale-steak must be tough? There are those sharks
now over the side, don’t you see they prefer it tough and rare? What a
shindy they are kick-ing up! Cook, go and talk to ’em; tell ’em they are
wel-come to help them-selves civilly, and in mod-er-a-tion, but they must
keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice. Away, cook, and
de-liver my mes-sage. Here, take this lan-tern,” snatch-ing one from his
side-board; “now then, go and preach to ’em!”

Sul-lenly tak-ing the offered lan-tern, old Fleece limped across the deck
to the bul-warks; and then, with one hand drop-ping his light low over
the sea, so as to get a good view of his con-greg-a-tion, with the other
hand he sol-emnly flour-ished his tongs, and lean-ing far over the side in
a mum-bling voice began ad-dress-ing the sharks, while Stubb, softly
crawl-ing be-hind, over-heard all that was said.

“Fel-low-crit-ters: I’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam
noise dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip! Massa Stubb say
dat you can fill your dam bel-lies up to de hatch-ings, but by Gor! you
must stop dat dam racket!”

“Cook,” here in-ter-posed Stubb, ac-com-pa-ny-ing the word with a sud-den slap
on the shoulder,—“Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way
when you’re preach-ing. That’s no way to con-vert sin-ners, cook!”

“Who dat? Den preach to him your-self,” sul-lenly turn-ing to go.

“No, cook; go on, go on.”

“Well, den, Be-lubed fel-low-crit-ters:”—

“Right!” ex-claimed Stubb, ap-prov-ingly, “coax ’em to it; try that,” and
Fleece con-tin-ued.

“Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery wora-cious, yet I zay to you,
fel-low-crit-ters, dat dat wora-cious-ness—’top dat dam slap-pin’ ob de
tail! How you tink to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slap-pin’ and
bitin’ dare?”

“Cook,” cried Stubb, col-lar-ing him, “I won’t have that swear-ing. Talk
to ’em gen-tle-manly.”

Once more the ser-mon pro-ceeded.

“Your wora-cious-ness, fel-low-crit-ters, I don’t blame ye so much for; dat
is natur, and can’t be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is
de pint. You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why
den you be an-gel; for all an-gel is not’ing more dan de shark well
goberned. Now, look here, bred’ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a
help-ing yourselbs from dat whale. Don’t be tearin’ de blub-ber out your
neigh-bour’s mout, I say. Is not one shark dood right as toder to dat
whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de right to dat whale; dat whale
be-long to some one else. I know some o’ you has berry brig mout,
brig-ger dan oders; but den de brig mouts some-times has de small
bel-lies; so dat de brig-ness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to
bit off de blub-ber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can’t get into de
scrouge to help dem-selves.”

“Well done, old Fleece!” cried Stubb, “that’s Chris-tian-ity; go on.”

“No use goin’ on; de dam wil-lains will keep a scou-gin’ and slap-pin’
each oder, Massa Stubb; dey don’t hear one word; no use a-preachin’ to
such dam g’ut-tons as you call ’em, till dare bel-lies is full, and dare
bel-lies is bot-tom-less; and when dey do get ’em full, dey wont hear you
den; for den dey sink in de sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and
can’t hear not’ing at all, no more, for eber and eber.”

“Upon my soul, I am about of the same opin-ion; so give the be-ne-dic-tion,
Fleece, and I’ll away to my sup-per.”

Upon this, Fleece, hold-ing both hands over the fishy mob, raised his
shrill voice, and cried—

“Cussed fel-low-crit-ters! Kick up de damnd-est row as ever you can; fill
your dam’ bel-lies ’till dey bust—and den die.”

“Now, cook,” said Stubb, re-sum-ing his sup-per at the cap-stan; “stand
just where you stood be-fore, there, over against me, and pay par-tic-u-lar
at-ten-tion.”

“All den-tion,” said Fleece, again stoop-ing over upon his tongs in the
de-sired po-s-i-tion.

“Well,” said Stubb, help-ing him-self freely mean-while; “I shall now go
back to the sub-ject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you,
cook?”

“What dat do wid de ’teak,” said the old black, testily.

“Si-lence! How old are you, cook?”

“’Bout ninety, dey say,” he gloomily muttered.

“And you have lived in this world hard upon one hun-dred years, cook,
and don’t know yet how to cook a whale-steak?” rap-idly bolt-ing an-other
mouth-ful at the last word, so that morsel seemed a con-tinu-ation of the
ques-tion. “Where were you born, cook?”

“’Hind de hatch-way, in ferry-boat, goin’ ober de Roan-oke.”

“Born in a ferry-boat! That’s queer, too. But I want to know what
coun-try you were born in, cook!”

“Didn’t I say de Roan-oke coun-try?” he cried sharply.

“No, you didn’t, cook; but I’ll tell you what I’m com-ing to, cook. You
must go home and be born over again; you don’t know how to cook a
whale-steak yet.”

“Bress my soul, if I cook noder one,” he growled, an-grily, turn-ing
round to de-part.

“Come back, cook;—here, hand me those tongs;—now take that bit of steak
there, and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take
it, I say”—hold-ing the tongs to-wards him—“take it, and taste it.”

Faintly smack-ing his withered lips over it for a mo-ment, the old negro
muttered, “Best cooked ’teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.”

“Cook,” said Stubb, squar-ing him-self once more; “do you be-long to the
church?”

“Passed one once in Cape-Down,” said the old man sul-lenly.

“And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town,
where you doubt-less over-heard a holy par-son ad-dress-ing his hear-ers as
his be-loved fel-low-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here,
and tell me such a dread-ful lie as you did just now, eh?” said Stubb.
“Where do you ex-pect to go to, cook?”

“Go to bed berry soon,” he mumbled, half-turn-ing as he spoke.

“Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. It’s an aw-ful ques-tion.
Now what’s your an-swer?”

“When dis old brack man dies,” said the negro slowly, chan-ging his
whole air and de-meanor, “he his-self won’t go nowhere; but some bressed
an-gel will come and fetch him.”

“Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Eli-jah? And fetch
him where?”

“Up dere,” said Fleece, hold-ing his tongs straight over his head, and
keep-ing it there very sol-emnly.

“So, then, you ex-pect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when
you are dead? But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it
gets? Main-top, eh?”

“Didn’t say dat t’all,” said Fleece, again in the sulks.

“You said up there, didn’t you? and now look your-self, and see where
your tongs are point-ing. But, per-haps you ex-pect to get into heaven by
crawl-ing through the lub-ber’s hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you don’t
get there, ex-cept you go the reg-u-lar way, round by the rig-ging. It’s a
tick-lish busi-ness, but must be done, or else it’s no go. But none of us
are in heaven yet. Drop your tongs, cook, and hear my or-ders. Do ye
hear? Hold your hat in one hand, and clap t’other a’top of your heart,
when I’m giv-ing my or-ders, cook. What! that your heart, there?—that’s
your giz-zard! Aloft! aloft!—that’s it—now you have it. Hold it there
now, and pay at-ten-tion.”

“All ’den-tion,” said the old black, with both hands placed as de-sired,
vainly wrig-gling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at
one and the same time.

“Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad,
that I have put it out of sight as soon as pos-sible; you see that,
don’t you? Well, for the fu-ture, when you cook an-other whale-steak for
my private table here, the cap-stan, I’ll tell you what to do so as not
to spoil it by over-do-ing. Hold the steak in one hand, and show a live
coal to it with the other; that done, dish it; d’ye hear? And now
to-mor-row, cook, when we are cut-ting in the fish, be sure you stand by
to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As for the ends
of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.”

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was re-called.

“Cook, give me cut-lets for sup-per to-mor-row night in the mid-watch.
D’ye hear? away you sail, then.—Hal-loa! stop! make a bow be-fore you
go.—Avast heav-ing again! Whale-balls for break-fast—don’t for-get.”

“Wish, by gor! whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale. I’m bressed if
he ain’t more of shark dan Massa Shark his-self,” muttered the old man,
limp-ing away; with which sage ejac-u-la-tion he went to his ham-mock.


CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

That mor-tal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and,
like Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so
out-land-ish a thing that one must needs go a little into the his-tory and
philo-sophy of it.

It is upon re-cord, that three cen-tur-ies ago the tongue of the Right
Whale was es-teemed a great del-ic-acy in France, and com-manded large
prices there. Also, that in Henry VIIIth’s time, a cer-tain cook of the
court ob-tained a hand-some re-ward for in-vent-ing an ad-mir-able sauce to be
eaten with bar-bacued por-poises, which, you re-mem-ber, are a spe-cies of
whale. Por-poises, in-deed, are to this day con-sidered fine eat-ing. The
meat is made into balls about the size of bil-liard balls, and be-ing
well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-balls or veal balls.
The old monks of Dun-ferm-line were very fond of them. They had a great
por-poise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all
hands be con-sidered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but
when you come to sit down be-fore a meat-pie nearly one hun-dred feet
long, it takes away your ap-pet-ite. Only the most un-pre-ju-diced of men
like Stubb, nowadays par-take of cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are
not so fas-ti-di-ous. We all know how they live upon whales, and have rare
old vin-tages of prime old train oil. Zo-granda, one of their most fam-ous
doc-tors, re-com-mends strips of blub-ber for in-fants, as be-ing ex-ceed-ingly
juicy and nour-ish-ing. And this re-minds me that cer-tain Eng-lish-men, who
long ago were ac-ci-dent-ally left in Green-land by a whal-ing ves-sel—that
these men ac-tu-ally lived for sev-eral months on the mouldy scraps of
whales which had been left ashore after try-ing out the blub-ber. Among
the Dutch whale-men these scraps are called “frit-ters”; which, in-deed,
they greatly re-semble, be-ing brown and crisp, and smelling some-thing
like old Am-s-ter-dam house-wives’ dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh.
They have such an eat-able look that the most self-deny-ing stranger can
hardly keep his hands off.

But what fur-ther de-pre-ci-ates the whale as a civ-il-ized dish, is his
ex-ceed-ing rich-ness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be
del-ic-ately good. Look at his hump, which would be as fine eat-ing as the
buf-falo’s (which is es-teemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid
pyr-amid of fat. But the sper-ma-ceti it-self, how bland and creamy that
is; like the trans-par-ent, half-jel-lied, white meat of a co-coa-nut in the
third month of its growth, yet far too rich to sup-ply a sub-sti-tute for
but-ter. Never-the-less, many whale-men have a method of ab-sorb-ing it into
some other sub-stance, and then par-tak-ing of it. In the long try watches
of the night it is a com-mon thing for the sea-men to dip their
ship-bis-cuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good sup-per have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are ac-coun-ted a fine
dish. The cas-ket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two
plump, whit-ish lobes be-ing with-drawn (pre-cisely re-sem-bling two large
pud-dings), they are then mixed with flour, and cooked into a most
de-lect-able mess, in fla-vor some-what re-sem-bling calves’ head, which is
quite a dish among some epi-cures; and every one knows that some young
bucks among the epi-cures, by con-tinu-ally din-ing upon calves’ brains, by
and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to be able to
tell a calf’s head from their own heads; which, in-deed, re-quires
un-com-mon dis-crim-in-a-tion. And that is the reason why a young buck with
an in-tel-li-gent look-ing calf’s head be-fore him, is some-how one of the
sad-dest sights you can see. The head looks a sort of re-proach-fully at
him, with an “Et tu Brute!” ex-pres-sion.

It is not, per-haps, en-tirely be-cause the whale is so ex-cess-ively
unc-tu-ous that lands-men seem to re-gard the eat-ing of him with
ab-hor-rence; that ap-pears to res-ult, in some way, from the con-sid-er-a-tion
be-fore men-tioned: _i.e._ that a man should eat a newly murdered thing
of the sea, and eat it too by its own light. But no doubt the first man
that ever murdered an ox was re-garded as a mur-derer; per-haps he was
hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he cer-tainly would
have been; and he cer-tainly de-served it if any mur-derer does. Go to the
meat-mar-ket of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bi-peds
star-ing up at the long rows of dead quad-ru-peds. Does not that sight
take a tooth out of the can-ni-bal’s jaw? Can-ni-bals? who is not a
can-ni-bal? I tell you it will be more tol-er-able for the Fe-jee that
salted down a lean mis-sion-ary in his cel-lar against a com-ing fam-ine; it
will be more tol-er-able for that provid-ent Fe-jee, I say, in the day of
judg-ment, than for thee, civ-il-ized and en-lightened gour-mand, who
nailest geese to the ground and feast-est on their bloated liv-ers in thy
paté-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is
adding in-sult to in-jury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my
civ-il-ized and en-lightened gour-mand din-ing off that roast beef, what is
that handle made of?—what but the bones of the brother of the very ox
you are eat-ing? And what do you pick your teeth with, after de-vour-ing
that fat goose? With a feather of the same fowl. And with what quill
did the Sec-ret-ary of the So-ci-ety for the Sup-pres-sion of Cruelty to
Ganders form-ally in-dite his cir-cu-lars? It is only within the last month
or two that that so-ci-ety passed a res-ol-u-tion to pat-ron-ize noth-ing but
steel pens.


CHAPTER 66. The Shark Mas-sacre.

When in the South-ern Fish-ery, a cap-tured Sperm Whale, after long and
weary toil, is brought along-side late at night, it is not, as a gen-eral
thing at least, cus-tom-ary to pro-ceed at once to the busi-ness of cut-ting
him in. For that busi-ness is an ex-ceed-ingly la-bor-i-ous one; is not very
soon com-pleted; and re-quires all hands to set about it. There-fore, the
com-mon us-age is to take in all sail; lash the helm a’lee; and then send
every one be-low to his ham-mock till day-light, with the re-ser-va-tion
that, un-til that time, an-chor-watches shall be kept; that is, two and
two for an hour, each couple, the crew in ro-ta-tion shall mount the deck
to see that all goes well.

But some-times, es-pe-cially upon the Line in the Pa-cific, this plan will
not an-swer at all; be-cause such in-cal-cul-able hosts of sharks gather
round the moored car-case, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a
stretch, little more than the skel-eton would be vis-ible by morn-ing. In
most other parts of the ocean, how-ever, where these fish do not so
largely abound, their won-drous vo-ra-city can be at times con-sid-er-ably
di-min-ished, by vig-or-ously stir-ring them up with sharp whal-ing-spades, a
pro-ced-ure not-with-stand-ing, which, in some in-stances, only seems to
tickle them into still greater activ-ity. But it was not thus in the
present case with the Pequod’s sharks; though, to be sure, any man
un-ac-cus-tomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have al-most thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and
those sharks the mag-gots in it.

Never-the-less, upon Stubb set-ting the an-chor-watch after his sup-per was
con-cluded; and when, ac-cord-ingly, Queequeg and a fore-castle sea-man came
on deck, no small ex-cite-ment was cre-ated among the sharks; for
im-me-di-ately sus-pend-ing the cut-ting stages over the side, and lower-ing
three lan-terns, so that they cast long gleams of light over the tur-bid
sea, these two mar-iners, dart-ing their long whal-ing-spades, kept up an
in-cess-ant mur-der-ing of the sharks,* by strik-ing the keen steel deep
into their skulls, seem-ingly their only vi-tal part. But in the foamy
con-fu-sion of their mixed and strug-gling hosts, the marksmen could not
al-ways hit their mark; and this brought about new rev-el-a-tions of the
in-cred-ible fe-ro-city of the foe. They vi-ciously snapped, not only at
each other’s dis-em-bowel-ments, but like flex-ible bows, bent round, and
bit their own; till those en-trails seemed swal-lowed over and over again
by the same mouth, to be op-pos-itely voided by the gap-ing wound. Nor was
this all. It was un-safe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these
creatures. A sort of gen-eric or Pan-the-istic vi-tal-ity seemed to lurk in
their very joints and bones, after what might be called the in-di-vidual
life had de-par-ted. Killed and hois-ted on deck for the sake of his skin,
one of these sharks al-most took poor Queequeg’s hand off, when he tried
to shut down the dead lid of his mur-der-ous jaw.

*The whal-ing-spade used for cut-ting-in is made of the very best steel;
is about the big-ness of a man’s spread hand; and in gen-eral shape,
cor-res-ponds to the garden im-ple-ment after which it is named; only its
sides are per-fectly flat, and its up-per end con-sid-er-ably nar-rower than
the lower. This weapon is al-ways kept as sharp as pos-sible; and when
be-ing used is oc-ca-sion-ally honed, just like a razor. In its socket, a
stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is in-ser-ted for a handle.

“Queequeg no care what god made him shark,” said the sav-age,
ag-on-iz-ingly lift-ing his hand up and down; “wed-der Fe-jee god or
Nan-tucket god; but de god wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.”


CHAPTER 67. Cut-ting In.

It was a Saturday night, and such a Sab-bath as fol-lowed! Ex of-fi-cio
pro-fess-ors of Sab-bath break-ing are all whale-men. The ivory Pequod was
turned into what seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. You would
have thought we were of-fer-ing up ten thou-sand red oxen to the sea gods.

In the first place, the enorm-ous cut-ting tackles, among other pon-der-ous
things com-pris-ing a cluster of blocks gen-er-ally painted green, and
which no single man can pos-sibly lift—this vast bunch of grapes was
swayed up to the main-top and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, the
strongest point any-where above a ship’s deck. The end of the
hawser-like rope wind-ing through these in-tric-a-cies, was then con-duc-ted
to the wind-lass, and the huge lower block of the tackles was swung over
the whale; to this block the great blub-ber hook, weigh-ing some one
hun-dred pounds, was at-tached. And now sus-pen-ded in stages over the
side, Star-buck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades,
began cut-ting a hole in the body for the in-ser-tion of the hook just
above the nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad,
semi-cir-cu-lar line is cut round the hole, the hook is in-ser-ted, and the
main body of the crew strik-ing up a wild chorus, now com-mence heav-ing
in one dense crowd at the wind-lass. When in-stantly, the en-tire ship
ca-reens over on her side; every bolt in her starts like the nail-heads
of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles, quivers, and nods her
frighted mast-heads to the sky. More and more she leans over to the
whale, while every gasp-ing heave of the wind-lass is answered by a
help-ing heave from the bil-lows; till at last, a swift, start-ling snap
is heard; with a great swash the ship rolls up-wards and back-wards from
the whale, and the tri-umphant tackle rises into sight drag-ging after it
the dis-en-gaged semi-cir-cu-lar end of the first strip of blub-ber. Now as
the blub-ber en-vel-opes the whale pre-cisely as the rind does an or-ange,
so is it stripped off from the body pre-cisely as an or-ange is some-times
stripped by spir-al-iz-ing it. For the strain con-stantly kept up by the
wind-lass con-tinu-ally keeps the whale rolling over and over in the
wa-ter, and as the blub-ber in one strip uni-formly peels off along the
line called the “scarf,” sim-ul-tan-eously cut by the spades of Star-buck
and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and
in-deed by that very act it-self, it is all the time be-ing hois-ted higher
and higher aloft till its up-per end grazes the main-top; the men at the
wind-lass then cease heav-ing, and for a mo-ment or two the prodi-gious
blood-drip-ping mass sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and
every one present must take good heed to dodge it when it swings, else
it may box his ears and pitch him head-long over-board.

One of the at-tend-ing har-poon-eers now ad-vances with a long, keen weapon
called a board-ing-sword, and watch-ing his chance he dex-ter-ously slices
out a con-sid-er-able hole in the lower part of the sway-ing mass. Into
this hole, the end of the second al-tern-at-ing great tackle is then
hooked so as to re-tain a hold upon the blub-ber, in or-der to pre-pare for
what fol-lows. Whereupon, this ac-com-plished swords-man, warn-ing all hands
to stand off, once more makes a sci-entific dash at the mass, and with a
few side-long, des-per-ate, lunging sli-cings, severs it com-pletely in
twain; so that while the short lower part is still fast, the long up-per
strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is all ready for
lower-ing. The heavers for-ward now re-sume their song, and while the one
tackle is peel-ing and hoist-ing a second strip from the whale, the other
is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the
main hatch-way right be-neath, into an un-fur-nished par-lor called the
blub-ber-room. Into this twi-light apart-ment sun-dry nimble hands keep
coil-ing away the long blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of
plaited ser-pents. And thus the work pro-ceeds; the two tackles hoist-ing
and lower-ing sim-ul-tan-eously; both whale and wind-lass heav-ing, the
heavers singing, the blub-ber-room gen-tle-men coil-ing, the mates
scarf-ing, the ship strain-ing, and all hands swear-ing oc-ca-sion-ally, by
way of as-suaging the gen-eral fric-tion.


CHAPTER 68. The Blanket.

I have given no small at-ten-tion to that not un-vexed sub-ject, the skin
of the whale. I have had con-tro-ver-sies about it with ex-per-i-enced
whale-men afloat, and learned nat-ur-al-ists ashore. My ori-ginal opin-ion
re-mains un-changed; but it is only an opin-ion.

The ques-tion is, what and where is the skin of the whale? Already you
know what his blub-ber is. That blub-ber is some-thing of the con-sist-ence
of firm, close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and com-pact, and
ranges from eight or ten to twelve and fif-teen inches in thick-ness.

Now, how-ever pre-pos-ter-ous it may at first seem to talk of any
creature’s skin as be-ing of that sort of con-sist-ence and thick-ness, yet
in point of fact these are no ar-gu-ments against such a pre-sump-tion;
be-cause you can-not raise any other dense en-vel-op-ing layer from the
whale’s body but that same blub-ber; and the out-er-most en-vel-op-ing layer
of any an-imal, if reas-on-ably dense, what can that be but the skin?
True, from the un-marred dead body of the whale, you may scrape off with
your hand an in-fin-itely thin, trans-par-ent sub-stance, some-what
re-sem-bling the thin-nest shreds of isin-glass, only it is al-most as
flex-ible and soft as satin; that is, pre-vi-ous to be-ing dried, when it
not only con-tracts and thick-ens, but be-comes rather hard and brittle. I
have sev-eral such dried bits, which I use for marks in my whale-books.
It is trans-par-ent, as I said be-fore; and be-ing laid upon the prin-ted
page, I have some-times pleased my-self with fancy-ing it ex-er-ted a
mag-ni-fy-ing in-flu-ence. At any rate, it is pleas-ant to read about whales
through their own spec-tacles, as you may say. But what I am driv-ing at
here is this. That same in-fin-itely thin, isin-glass sub-stance, which, I
ad-mit, in-vests the en-tire body of the whale, is not so much to be
re-garded as the skin of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to
speak; for it were simply ri-dicu-lous to say, that the proper skin of
the tre-mend-ous whale is thin-ner and more tender than the skin of a
new-born child. But no more of this.

As-sum-ing the blub-ber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin,
as in the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk of one
hun-dred bar-rels of oil; and, when it is con-sidered that, in quant-ity,
or rather weight, that oil, in its ex-pressed state, is only three
fourths, and not the en-tire sub-stance of the coat; some idea may hence
be had of the enorm-ous-ness of that an-im-ated mass, a mere part of whose
mere in-teg-u-ment yields such a lake of li-quid as that. Reck-on-ing ten
bar-rels to the ton, you have ten tons for the net weight of only three
quar-ters of the stuff of the whale’s skin.

In life, the vis-ible sur-face of the Sperm Whale is not the least among
the many mar-vels he presents. Al-most in-vari-ably it is all over
ob-liquely crossed and re-crossed with num-ber-less straight marks in
thick ar-ray, some-thing like those in the finest Italian line
en-grav-ings. But these marks do not seem to be im-pressed upon the
isin-glass sub-stance above men-tioned, but seem to be seen through it, as
if they were en-graved upon the body it-self. Nor is this all. In some
in-stances, to the quick, ob-ser-v-ant eye, those lin-ear marks, as in a
ver-it-able en-grav-ing, but af-ford the ground for far other de-lin-eations.
These are hiero-glyph-ical; that is, if you call those mys-ter-i-ous cyphers
on the walls of pyr-am-ids hiero-glyph-ics, then that is the proper word to
use in the present con-nex-ion. By my re-tent-ive memory of the
hiero-glyph-ics upon one Sperm Whale in par-tic-u-lar, I was much struck
with a plate rep-res-ent-ing the old In-dian char-ac-ters chis-elled on the
fam-ous hiero-glyphic pal-is-ades on the banks of the Up-per Mis-sis-sippi.
Like those mys-tic rocks, too, the mys-tic-marked whale re-mains
un-de-cipher-able. This al-lu-sion to the In-dian rocks re-minds me of an-other
thing. Besides all the other phe-nom-ena which the ex-ter-ior of the Sperm
Whale presents, he not sel-dom dis-plays the back, and more es-pe-cially
his flanks, ef-faced in great part of the reg-u-lar lin-ear ap-pear-ance, by
reason of nu-mer-ous rude scratches, al-to-gether of an ir-reg-u-lar, ran-dom
as-pect. I should say that those New Eng-land rocks on the sea-coast,
which Agassiz ima-gines to bear the marks of vi-ol-ent scrap-ing con-tact
with vast float-ing ice-bergs—I should say, that those rocks must not a
little re-semble the Sperm Whale in this par-tic-u-lar. It also seems to me
that such scratches in the whale are prob-ably made by hos-tile con-tact
with other whales; for I have most re-marked them in the large,
full-grown bulls of the spe-cies.

A word or two more con-cern-ing this mat-ter of the skin or blub-ber of the
whale. It has already been said, that it is stript from him in long
pieces, called blanket-pieces. Like most sea-terms, this one is very
happy and sig-ni-fic-ant. For the whale is in-deed wrapt up in his blub-ber
as in a real blanket or coun-ter-pane; or, still bet-ter, an In-dian poncho
slipt over his head, and skirt-ing his ex-tremity. It is by reason of
this cosy blanket-ing of his body, that the whale is en-abled to keep
him-self com-fort-able in all weath-ers, in all seas, times, and tides.
What would be-come of a Green-land whale, say, in those shud-der-ing, icy
seas of the North, if un-sup-plied with his cosy sur-tout? True, other
fish are found ex-ceed-ingly brisk in those Hyper-borean wa-ters; but
these, be it ob-served, are your cold-blooded, lung-less fish, whose very
bel-lies are re-fri-ger-at-ors; creatures, that warm them-selves un-der the
lee of an ice-berg, as a trav-el-ler in winter would bask be-fore an inn
fire; whereas, like man, the whale has lungs and warm blood. Freeze his
blood, and he dies. How won-der-ful is it then—ex-cept after
ex-plan-a-tion—that this great mon-ster, to whom cor-por-eal warmth is as
in-dis-pens-able as it is to man; how won-der-ful that he should be found at
home, im-mersed to his lips for life in those Arc-tic wa-ters! where, when
sea-men fall over-board, they are some-times found, months af-ter-wards,
per-pen-dic-u-larly frozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is
found glued in am-ber. But more sur-pris-ing is it to know, as has been
proved by ex-per-i-ment, that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than
that of a Borneo negro in sum-mer.

It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare vir-tue of a strong
in-di-vidual vi-tal-ity, and the rare vir-tue of thick walls, and the rare
vir-tue of in-terior spa-cious-ness. Oh, man! ad-mire and model thy-self
after the whale! Do thou, too, re-main warm among ice. Do thou, too,
live in this world without be-ing of it. Be cool at the equator; keep
thy blood fluid at the Pole. Like the great dome of St. Peter’s, and
like the great whale, re-tain, O man! in all sea-sons a tem-per-at-ure of
thine own.

But how easy and how hope-less to teach these fine things! Of erec-tions,
how few are domed like St. Peter’s! of creatures, how few vast as the
whale!


CHAPTER 69. The Fu-neral.

“Haul in the chains! Let the car-case go astern!”

The vast tackles have now done their duty. The peeled white body of the
be-headed whale flashes like a marble sep-ulchre; though changed in hue,
it has not per-cept-ibly lost any-thing in bulk. It is still co-lossal.
Slowly it floats more and more away, the wa-ter round it torn and
splashed by the in-sa-ti-ate sharks, and the air above vexed with
ra-pa-cious flights of scream-ing fowls, whose beaks are like so many
in-sult-ing pon-iards in the whale. The vast white head-less phantom floats
fur-ther and fur-ther from the ship, and every rod that it so floats,
what seem square roods of sharks and cu-bic roods of fowls, aug-ment the
mur-der-ous din. For hours and hours from the al-most sta-tion-ary ship that
hideous sight is seen. Beneath the un-clouded and mild azure sky, upon
the fair face of the pleas-ant sea, waf-ted by the joy-ous breezes, that
great mass of death floats on and on, till lost in in-fin-ite
per-spect-ives.

There’s a most dole-ful and most mock-ing fu-neral! The sea-vul-tures all
in pi-ous mourn-ing, the air-sharks all punc-tili-ously in black or
speckled. In life but few of them would have helped the whale, I ween,
if perad-ven-ture he had needed it; but upon the ban-quet of his fu-neral
they most pi-ously do pounce. Oh, hor-rible vul-ture-ism of earth! from
which not the migh-ti-est whale is free.

Nor is this the end. Desec-rated as the body is, a venge-ful ghost
sur-vives and hov-ers over it to scare. Espied by some timid man-of-war
or blun-der-ing dis-cov-ery-ves-sel from afar, when the dis-tance ob-scur-ing
the swarm-ing fowls, nev-er-the-less still shows the white mass float-ing in
the sun, and the white spray heav-ing high against it; straight-way the
whale’s un-harm-ing corpse, with trem-bling fin-gers is set down in the
log—_shoals, rocks, and break-ers here-abouts: be-ware!_ And for years
af-ter-wards, per-haps, ships shun the place; leap-ing over it as silly
sheep leap over a va-cuum, be-cause their leader ori-gin-ally leaped there
when a stick was held. There’s your law of pre-ced-ents; there’s your
util-ity of tra-di-tions; there’s the story of your ob-stin-ate sur-vival of
old be-liefs never bot-tomed on the earth, and now not even hov-er-ing in
the air! There’s or-tho-doxy!

Thus, while in life the great whale’s body may have been a real ter-ror
to his foes, in his death his ghost be-comes a power-less panic to a
world.

Are you a be-liever in ghosts, my friend? There are other ghosts than
the Cock-Lane one, and far deeper men than Doc-tor John-son who be-lieve
in them.


CHAPTER 70. The Sphynx.

It should not have been omit-ted that pre-vi-ous to com-pletely strip-ping
the body of the le-viathan, he was be-headed. Now, the be-head-ing of the
Sperm Whale is a sci-entific ana-tom-ical feat, upon which ex-per-i-enced
whale sur-geons very much pride them-selves: and not without reason.

Con-sider that the whale has noth-ing that can prop-erly be called a neck;
on the con-trary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that
very place, is the thick-est part of him. Re-mem-ber, also, that the
sur-geon must op-er-ate from above, some eight or ten feet in-ter-ven-ing
between him and his sub-ject, and that sub-ject al-most hid-den in a
dis-col-oured, rolling, and of-ten-times tu-mul-tu-ous and burst-ing sea. Bear
in mind, too, that un-der these un-to-ward cir-cum-stances he has to cut
many feet deep in the flesh; and in that sub-ter-raneous man-ner, without
so much as get-ting one single peep into the ever-con-tract-ing gash thus
made, he must skil-fully steer clear of all ad-ja-cent, in-ter-dicted parts,
and ex-actly di-vide the spine at a crit-ical point hard by its in-ser-tion
into the skull. Do you not mar-vel, then, at Stubb’s boast, that he
de-man-ded but ten minutes to be-head a sperm whale?

When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a
cable till the body is stripped. That done, if it be-long to a small
whale it is hois-ted on deck to be de-lib-er-ately dis-posed of. But, with a
full grown le-viathan this is im-possible; for the sperm whale’s head
em-braces nearly one third of his en-tire bulk, and com-pletely to sus-pend
such a bur-den as that, even by the im-mense tackles of a whaler, this
were as vain a thing as to at-tempt weigh-ing a Dutch barn in jew-ellers’
scales.

The Pequod’s whale be-ing de-cap-it-ated and the body stripped, the head
was hois-ted against the ship’s side—about half way out of the sea, so
that it might yet in great part be buoyed up by its nat-ive ele-ment. And
there with the strained craft steeply lean-ing over to it, by reason of
the enorm-ous down-ward drag from the lower mast-head, and every yard-arm
on that side pro-ject-ing like a crane over the waves; there, that
blood-drip-ping head hung to the Pequod’s waist like the gi-ant
Ho-lofernes’s from the girdle of Judith.

When this last task was ac-com-plished it was noon, and the sea-men went
be-low to their din-ner. Si-lence reigned over the be-fore tu-mul-tu-ous but
now deser-ted deck. An in-tense cop-per calm, like a uni-ver-sal yel-low
lo-tus, was more and more un-fold-ing its noise-less meas-ure-less leaves
upon the sea.

A short space elapsed, and up into this noise-less-ness came Ahab alone
from his cabin. Tak-ing a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused to
gaze over the side, then slowly get-ting into the main-chains he took
Stubb’s long spade—still re-main-ing there after the whale’s
de-cap-it-a-tion—and strik-ing it into the lower part of the half-sus-pen-ded
mass, placed its other end crutch-wise un-der one arm, and so stood
lean-ing over with eyes at-tent-ively fixed on this head.

It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so
in-tense a calm, it seemed the Sphynx’s in the desert. “Speak, thou vast
and ven-er-able head,” muttered Ahab, “which, though un-gar-nished with a
beard, yet here and there lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty
head, and tell us the secret thing that is in thee. Of all divers, thou
hast dived the deep-est. That head upon which the up-per sun now gleams,
has moved amid this world’s found-a-tions. Where un-re-cor-ded names and
navies rust, and un-told hopes and an-chors rot; where in her mur-der-ous
hold this frig-ate earth is bal-las-ted with bones of mil-lions of the
drowned; there, in that aw-ful wa-ter-land, there was thy most fa-mil-iar
home. Thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast slept by many
a sailor’s side, where sleep-less moth-ers would give their lives to lay
them down. Thou saw’st the locked lov-ers when leap-ing from their
flam-ing ship; heart to heart they sank be-neath the ex-ult-ing wave; true
to each other, when heaven seemed false to them. Thou saw’st the
murdered mate when tossed by pir-ates from the mid-night deck; for hours
he fell into the deeper mid-night of the in-sa-ti-ate maw; and his
mur-der-ers still sailed on un-harmed—while swift light-nings shivered the
neigh-bor-ing ship that would have borne a right-eous hus-band to
out-stretched, long-ing arms. O head! thou hast seen enough to split the
plan-ets and make an in-fi-del of Abra-ham, and not one syl-lable is thine!”

“Sail ho!” cried a tri-umphant voice from the main-mast-head.

“Aye? Well, now, that’s cheer-ing,” cried Ahab, sud-denly erect-ing
him-self, while whole thun-der-clouds swept aside from his brow. “That
lively cry upon this deadly calm might al-most con-vert a bet-ter
man.—Where away?”

“Three points on the star-board bow, sir, and bring-ing down her breeze
to us!

“Bet-ter and bet-ter, man. Would now St. Paul would come along that way,
and to my breeze-less-ness bring his breeze! O Nature, and O soul of man!
how far bey-ond all ut-ter-ance are your linked ana-lo-gies! not the
smal-lest atom stirs or lives on mat-ter, but has its cun-ning du-plic-ate
in mind.”


CHAPTER 71. The Jero-boam’s St-ory.

Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster than
the ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.

By and by, through the glass the stranger’s boats and manned mast-heads
proved her a whale-ship. But as she was so far to wind-ward, and
shoot-ing by, ap-par-ently mak-ing a pas-sage to some other ground, the
Pequod could not hope to reach her. So the sig-nal was set to see what
re-sponse would be made.

Here be it said, that like the ves-sels of mil-it-ary mar-ines, the ships
of the Amer-ican Whale Fleet have each a private sig-nal; all which
sig-nals be-ing col-lec-ted in a book with the names of the re-spect-ive
ves-sels at-tached, every cap-tain is provided with it. Thereby, the whale
com-mand-ers are en-abled to re-cog-nise each other upon the ocean, even at
con-sid-er-able dis-tances and with no small fa-cil-ity.

The Pequod’s sig-nal was at last re-spon-ded to by the stranger’s set-ting
her own; which proved the ship to be the Jero-boam of Nan-tucket.
Squar-ing her yards, she bore down, ranged abeam un-der the Pequod’s lee,
and lowered a boat; it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-lad-der was
be-ing rigged by Star-buck’s or-der to ac-com-mod-ate the vis-it-ing cap-tain,
the stranger in ques-tion waved his hand from his boat’s stern in token
of that pro-ceed-ing be-ing en-tirely un-ne-ces-sary. It turned out that the
Jero-boam had a ma-lig-nant epi-demic on board, and that May-hew, her
cap-tain, was fear-ful of in-fect-ing the Pequod’s com-pany. For, though
him-self and boat’s crew re-mained un-tain-ted, and though his ship was
half a rifle-shot off, and an in-cor-rupt-ible sea and air rolling and
flow-ing between; yet con-scien-tiously ad-her-ing to the timid quar-ant-ine
of the land, he per-emp-tor-ily re-fused to come into dir-ect con-tact with
the Pequod.

But this did by no means pre-vent all com-mu-nic-a-tions. Pre-serving an
in-ter-val of some few yards between it-self and the ship, the Jero-boam’s
boat by the oc-ca-sional use of its oars con-trived to keep par-al-lel to
the Pequod, as she heav-ily forged through the sea (for by this time it
blew very fresh), with her main-top-sail aback; though, in-deed, at times
by the sud-den on-set of a large rolling wave, the boat would be pushed
some way ahead; but would be soon skil-fully brought to her proper
bear-ings again. Sub-ject to this, and other the like in-ter-rup-tions now
and then, a con-ver-sa-tion was sus-tained between the two parties; but at
in-ter-vals not without still an-other in-ter-rup-tion of a very dif-fer-ent
sort.

Pulling an oar in the Jero-boam’s boat, was a man of a sin-gu-lar
ap-pear-ance, even in that wild whal-ing life where in-di-vidual
not-ab-il-it-ies make up all to-tal-it-ies. He was a small, short, young-ish
man, sprinkled all over his face with freckles, and wear-ing re-dund-ant
yel-low hair. A long-skir-ted, cabal-ist-ic-ally-cut coat of a faded wal-nut
tinge en-vel-oped him; the over-lap-ping sleeves of which were rolled up on
his wrists. A deep, settled, fan-atic de-li-rium was in his eyes.

So soon as this fig-ure had been first descried, Stubb had
ex-claimed—“That’s he! that’s he!—the long-togged scara-mouch the
Town-Ho’s com-pany told us of!” Stubb here al-luded to a strange story
told of the Jero-boam, and a cer-tain man among her crew, some time
pre-vi-ous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho. Ac-cord-ing to this ac-count
and what was sub-sequently learned, it seemed that the scara-mouch in
ques-tion had gained a won-der-ful as-cend-ency over al-most every-body in the
Jero-boam. His story was this:

He had been ori-gin-ally nur-tured among the crazy so-ci-ety of Neskyeuna
Shakers, where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secret
meet-ings hav-ing sev-eral times des-cen-ded from heaven by the way of a
trap-door, an-noun-cing the speedy open-ing of the sev-enth vial, which he
car-ried in his vest-pocket; but, which, in-stead of con-tain-ing
gun-powder, was sup-posed to be charged with laudanum. A strange,
apostolic whim hav-ing seized him, he had left Neskyeuna for Nan-tucket,
where, with that cun-ning pe-cu-liar to crazi-ness, he as-sumed a steady,
com-mon-sense ex-ter-ior, and offered him-self as a green-hand can-did-ate
for the Jero-boam’s whal-ing voy-age. They en-gaged him; but straight-way
upon the ship’s get-ting out of sight of land, his in-san-ity broke out in
a freshet. He an-nounced him-self as the archangel Gab-riel, and com-manded
the cap-tain to jump over-board. He pub-lished his mani-festo, whereby he
set him-self forth as the de-liverer of the isles of the sea and
vicar-gen-eral of all Ocean-ica. The un-flinch-ing earn-est-ness with which
he de-clared these things;—the dark, dar-ing play of his sleep-less,
ex-cited ima-gin-a-tion, and all the preter-nat-ural ter-rors of real
de-li-rium, united to in-vest this Gab-riel in the minds of the ma-jor-ity of
the ig-nor-ant crew, with an at-mo-sphere of sac-red-ness. Moreover, they
were afraid of him. As such a man, how-ever, was not of much prac-tical
use in the ship, es-pe-cially as he re-fused to work ex-cept when he
pleased, the in-cred-u-lous cap-tain would fain have been rid of him; but
ap-prised that that in-di-vidual’s in-ten-tion was to land him in the first
con-veni-ent port, the archangel forth-with opened all his seals and
vi-als—de-vot-ing the ship and all hands to un-con-di-tional per-di-tion, in
case this in-ten-tion was car-ried out. So strongly did he work upon his
dis-ciples among the crew, that at last in a body they went to the
cap-tain and told him if Gab-riel was sent from the ship, not a man of
them would re-main. He was there-fore forced to re-lin-quish his plan. Nor
would they per-mit Gab-riel to be any way mal-treated, say or do what he
would; so that it came to pass that Gab-riel had the com-plete free-dom of
the ship. The con-sequence of all this was, that the archangel cared
little or noth-ing for the cap-tain and mates; and since the epi-demic had
broken out, he car-ried a higher hand than ever; de-clar-ing that the
plague, as he called it, was at his sole com-mand; nor should it be
stayed but ac-cord-ing to his good pleas-ure. The sail-ors, mostly poor
dev-ils, cringed, and some of them fawned be-fore him; in obed-i-ence to
his in-struc-tions, some-times ren-der-ing him per-sonal homage, as to a god.
Such things may seem in-cred-ible; but, how-ever won-drous, they are true.
Nor is the his-tory of fan-at-ics half so strik-ing in re-spect to the
meas-ure-less self-de-cep-tion of the fan-atic him-self, as his meas-ure-less
power of de-ceiv-ing and be-dev-il-ling so many oth-ers. But it is time to
re-turn to the Pequod.

“I fear not thy epi-demic, man,” said Ahab from the bul-warks, to Cap-tain
May-hew, who stood in the boat’s stern; “come on board.”

But now Gab-riel star-ted to his feet.

“Think, think of the fevers, yel-low and bili-ous! Be-ware of the hor-rible
plague!”

“Gab-riel! Gab-riel!” cried Cap-tain May-hew; “thou must either—” But that
in-stant a head-long wave shot the boat far ahead, and its seeth-ings
drowned all speech.

“Hast thou seen the White Whale?” de-man-ded Ahab, when the boat drif-ted
back.

“Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! Be-ware of the
hor-rible tail!”

“I tell thee again, Gab-riel, that—” But again the boat tore ahead as if
dragged by fiends. Noth-ing was said for some mo-ments, while a
suc-ces-sion of ri-ot-ous waves rolled by, which by one of those oc-ca-sional
caprices of the seas were tum-bling, not heav-ing it. Mean-time, the
hois-ted sperm whale’s head jogged about very vi-ol-ently, and Gab-riel was
seen eye-ing it with rather more ap-pre-hens-ive-ness than his archangel
nature seemed to war-rant.

When this in-ter-lude was over, Cap-tain May-hew began a dark story
con-cern-ing Moby Dick; not, how-ever, without fre-quent in-ter-rup-tions from
Gab-riel, whenever his name was men-tioned, and the crazy sea that seemed
leagued with him.

It seemed that the Jero-boam had not long left home, when upon speak-ing
a whale-ship, her people were re-li-ably ap-prised of the ex-ist-ence of
Moby Dick, and the havoc he had made. Greed-ily suck-ing in this
in-tel-li-gence, Gab-riel sol-emnly warned the cap-tain against at-tack-ing the
White Whale, in case the mon-ster should be seen; in his gib-ber-ing
in-san-ity, pro-noun-cing the White Whale to be no less a be-ing than the
Shaker God in-carn-ated; the Shakers re-ceiv-ing the Bible. But when, some
year or two af-ter-wards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted from the
mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ar-dour to en-counter him;
and the cap-tain him-self be-ing not un-will-ing to let him have the
op-por-tun-ity, des-pite all the archangel’s de-nun-ci-ations and
fore-warn-ings, Macey suc-ceeded in per-suad-ing five men to man his boat.
With them he pushed off; and, after much weary pulling, and many
per-il-ous, un-suc-cess-ful on-sets, he at last suc-ceeded in get-ting one iron
fast. Mean-time, Gab-riel, as-cend-ing to the main-royal mast-head, was
toss-ing one arm in frantic ges-tures, and hurl-ing forth proph-ecies of
speedy doom to the sac-ri-le-gious as-sail-ants of his di-vin-ity. Now, while
Macey, the mate, was stand-ing up in his boat’s bow, and with all the
reck-less en-ergy of his tribe was vent-ing his wild ex-clam-a-tions upon the
whale, and es-say-ing to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo! a
broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fan-ning mo-tion,
tem-por-ar-ily tak-ing the breath out of the bod-ies of the oars-men. Next
in-stant, the luck-less mate, so full of furi-ous life, was smit-ten bod-ily
into the air, and mak-ing a long arc in his des-cent, fell into the sea
at the dis-tance of about fifty yards. Not a chip of the boat was
harmed, nor a hair of any oars-man’s head; but the mate for ever sank.

It is well to par-en-thes-ize here, that of the fatal ac-ci-dents in the
Sperm-Whale Fish-ery, this kind is per-haps al-most as fre-quent as any.
So-me-times, noth-ing is in-jured but the man who is thus an-ni-hil-ated;
of-tener the boat’s bow is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in which the
heads-man stands, is torn from its place and ac-com-pan-ies the body. But
strangest of all is the cir-cum-stance, that in more in-stances than one,
when the body has been re-covered, not a single mark of vi-ol-ence is
dis-cern-ible; the man be-ing stark dead.

The whole calam-ity, with the fall-ing form of Macey, was plainly
descried from the ship. Rais-ing a pier-cing shriek—“The vial! the vial!”
Gab-riel called off the ter-ror-stricken crew from the fur-ther hunt-ing of
the whale. This ter-rible event clothed the archangel with ad-ded
in-flu-ence; be-cause his cred-u-lous dis-ciples be-lieved that he had
spe-cific-ally fore-an-nounced it, in-stead of only mak-ing a gen-eral
proph-ecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced to hit one
of many marks in the wide mar-gin al-lowed. He be-came a name-less ter-ror
to the ship.

May-hew hav-ing con-cluded his nar-ra-tion, Ahab put such ques-tions to him,
that the stranger cap-tain could not for-bear in-quir-ing whether he
in-ten-ded to hunt the White Whale, if op-por-tun-ity should of-fer. To which
Ahab answered—“Aye.” Straight-way, then, Gab-riel once more star-ted to
his feet, glar-ing upon the old man, and vehe-mently ex-claimed, with
down-ward poin-ted fin-ger—“Think, think of the blas-phemer—dead, and down
there!—be-ware of the blas-phemer’s end!”

Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to May-hew, “Cap-tain, I have just
be-thought me of my let-ter-bag; there is a let-ter for one of thy
of-ficers, if I mis-take not. Star-buck, look over the bag.”

Every whale-ship takes out a goodly num-ber of let-ters for vari-ous
ships, whose de-liv-ery to the per-sons to whom they may be ad-dressed,
de-pends upon the mere chance of en-coun-ter-ing them in the four oceans.
Thus, most let-ters never reach their mark; and many are only re-ceived
after at-tain-ing an age of two or three years or more.

Soon Star-buck re-turned with a let-ter in his hand. It was sorely
tumbled, damp, and covered with a dull, spot-ted, green mould, in
con-sequence of be-ing kept in a dark locker of the cabin. Of such a
let-ter, Death him-self might well have been the post-boy.

“Can’st not read it?” cried Ahab. “Give it me, man. Aye, aye, it’s but
a dim scrawl;—what’s this?” As he was study-ing it out, Star-buck took a
long cut-ting-spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the end, to
in-sert the let-ter there, and in that way, hand it to the boat, without
its com-ing any closer to the ship.

Mean-time, Ahab hold-ing the let-ter, muttered, “Mr. Har—yes, Mr. Harry—(a
wo-man’s pinny hand,—the man’s wife, I’ll wager)—Aye—Mr. Harry Macey,
Ship Jero-boam;—why it’s Macey, and he’s dead!”

“Poor fel-low! poor fel-low! and from his wife,” sighed May-hew; “but let
me have it.”

“Nay, keep it thy-self,” cried Gab-riel to Ahab; “thou art soon go-ing
that way.”

“Curses throttle thee!” yelled Ahab. “Cap-tain May-hew, stand by now to
re-ceive it”; and tak-ing the fatal missive from Star-buck’s hands, he
caught it in the slit of the pole, and reached it over to-wards the
boat. But as he did so, the oars-men ex-pect-antly de-sisted from row-ing;
the boat drif-ted a little to-wards the ship’s stern; so that, as if by
ma-gic, the let-ter sud-denly ranged along with Gab-riel’s eager hand. He
clutched it in an in-stant, seized the boat-knife, and im-pal-ing the
let-ter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship. It fell at Ahab’s
feet. Then Gab-riel shrieked out to his com-rades to give way with their
oars, and in that man-ner the mutin-ous boat rap-idly shot away from the
Pequod.

As, after this in-ter-lude, the sea-men re-sumed their work upon the jacket
of the whale, many strange things were hin-ted in ref-er-ence to this wild
af-fair.


CHAPTER 72. The Mon-key-Rope.

In the tu-mul-tu-ous busi-ness of cut-ting-in and at-tend-ing to a whale,
there is much run-ning back-wards and for-wards among the crew. Now hands
are wanted here, and then again hands are wanted there. There is no
stay-ing in any one place; for at one and the same time everything has
to be done every-where. It is much the same with him who en-deavors the
de-scrip-tion of the scene. We must now re-trace our way a little. It was
men-tioned that upon first break-ing ground in the whale’s back, the
blub-ber-hook was in-ser-ted into the ori-ginal hole there cut by the
spades of the mates. But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as that
same hook get fixed in that hole? It was in-ser-ted there by my
par-tic-u-lar friend Queequeg, whose duty it was, as har-poon-eer, to
des-cend upon the mon-ster’s back for the spe-cial pur-pose re-ferred to.
But in very many cases, cir-cum-stances re-quire that the har-poon-eer shall
re-main on the whale till the whole flens-ing or strip-ping op-er-a-tion is
con-cluded. The whale, be it ob-served, lies al-most en-tirely sub-merged,
ex-cept-ing the im-me-di-ate parts op-er-ated upon. So down there, some ten
feet be-low the level of the deck, the poor har-poon-eer flounders about,
half on the whale and half in the wa-ter, as the vast mass re-volves like
a tread-mill be-neath him. On the oc-ca-sion in ques-tion, Queequeg figured
in the High-land cos-tume—a shirt and socks—in which to my eyes, at
least, he ap-peared to un-com-mon ad-vant-age; and no one had a bet-ter
chance to ob-serve him, as will presently be seen.

Be-ing the sav-age’s bow-sman, that is, the per-son who pulled the bow-oar
in his boat (the second one from for-ward), it was my cheer-ful duty to
at-tend upon him while tak-ing that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead
whale’s back. You have seen Italian or-gan-boys hold-ing a dan-cing-ape by
a long cord. Just so, from the ship’s steep side, did I hold Queequeg
down there in the sea, by what is tech-nic-ally called in the fish-ery a
mon-key-rope, at-tached to a strong strip of can-vas belted round his
waist.

It was a hu-mor-ously per-il-ous busi-ness for both of us. For, be-fore we
pro-ceed fur-ther, it must be said that the mon-key-rope was fast at both
ends; fast to Queequeg’s broad can-vas belt, and fast to my nar-row
leather one. So that for bet-ter or for worse, we two, for the time,
were wed-ded; and should poor Queequeg sink to rise no more, then both
us-age and honor de-man-ded, that in-stead of cut-ting the cord, it should
drag me down in his wake. So, then, an elong-ated Sia-mese lig-at-ure
united us. Queequeg was my own in-sep-ar-able twin brother; nor could I
any way get rid of the dan-ger-ous li-ab-il-it-ies which the hempen bond
en-tailed.

So strongly and meta-phys-ic-ally did I con-ceive of my situ-ation then,
that while earn-estly watch-ing his mo-tions, I seemed dis-tinctly to
per-ceive that my own in-di-vidu-al-ity was now merged in a joint stock
com-pany of two; that my free will had re-ceived a mor-tal wound; and that
an-other’s mis-take or mis-for-tune might plunge in-no-cent me into un-mer-ited
dis-aster and death. There-fore, I saw that here was a sort of
in-ter-regnum in Provid-ence; for its even-handed equity never could have
so gross an in-justice. And yet still fur-ther pon-der-ing—while I jerked
him now and then from between the whale and ship, which would threaten
to jam him—still fur-ther pon-der-ing, I say, I saw that this situ-ation of
mine was the pre-cise situ-ation of every mor-tal that breathes; only, in
most cases, he, one way or other, has this Sia-mese con-nex-ion with a
plur-al-ity of other mor-tals. If your banker breaks, you snap; if your
apo-thecary by mis-take sends you poison in your pills, you die. True,
you may say that, by ex-ceed-ing cau-tion, you may pos-sibly es-cape these
and the mul-ti-tudin-ous other evil chances of life. But handle Queequeg’s
mon-key-rope heed-fully as I would, some-times he jerked it so, that I
came very near slid-ing over-board. Nor could I pos-sibly for-get that, do
what I would, I only had the man-age-ment of one end of it.*

*The mon-key-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the Pequod
that the mon-key and his holder were ever tied to-gether. This
im-prove-ment upon the ori-ginal us-age was in-tro-duced by no less a man
than Stubb, in or-der to af-ford the im-per-illed har-poon-eer the strongest
pos-sible guar-an-tee for the faith-ful-ness and vi-gil-ance of his
mon-key-rope holder.

I have hin-ted that I would of-ten jerk poor Queequeg from between the
whale and the ship—where he would oc-ca-sion-ally fall, from the in-cess-ant
rolling and sway-ing of both. But this was not the only jam-ming jeop-ardy
he was ex-posed to. Unap-palled by the mas-sacre made upon them dur-ing the
night, the sharks now freshly and more keenly al-lured by the be-fore
pent blood which began to flow from the car-cass—the ra-bid creatures
swarmed round it like bees in a bee-hive.

And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who of-ten pushed them
aside with his flounder-ing feet. A thing al-to-gether in-cred-ible were it
not that at-trac-ted by such prey as a dead whale, the oth-er-wise
mis-cel-laneously car-ni-vor-ous shark will sel-dom touch a man.

Never-the-less, it may well be be-lieved that since they have such a
raven-ous fin-ger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to
them. Ac-cord-ingly, be-sides the mon-key-rope, with which I now and then
jerked the poor fel-low from too close a vi-cin-ity to the maw of what
seemed a pe-cu-li-arly fe-ro-cious shark—he was provided with still an-other
pro-tec-tion. Sus-pen-ded over the side in one of the stages, Tasht-ego and
Dag-goo con-tinu-ally flour-ished over his head a couple of keen
whale-spades, where-with they slaughtered as many sharks as they could
reach. This pro-ced-ure of theirs, to be sure, was very dis-in-ter-ested and
be-ne-vol-ent of them. They meant Queequeg’s best hap-pi-ness, I ad-mit; but
in their hasty zeal to be-friend him, and from the cir-cum-stance that
both he and the sharks were at times half hid-den by the blood-muddled
wa-ter, those in-dis-creet spades of theirs would come nearer am-pu-tat-ing a
leg than a tail. But poor Queequeg, I sup-pose, strain-ing and gasp-ing
there with that great iron hook—poor Queequeg, I sup-pose, only prayed
to his Yojo, and gave up his life into the hands of his gods.

Well, well, my dear com-rade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew in
and then slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea—what mat-ters
it, after all? Are you not the pre-cious im-age of each and all of us men
in this whal-ing world? That un-soun-ded ocean you gasp in, is Life; those
sharks, your foes; those spades, your friends; and what between sharks
and spades you are in a sad pickle and peril, poor lad.

But cour-age! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg. For now,
as with blue lips and blood-shot eyes the ex-hausted sav-age at last
climbs up the chains and stands all drip-ping and in-vol-un-tar-ily
trem-bling over the side; the stew-ard ad-vances, and with a be-ne-vol-ent,
con-sol-at-ory glance hands him—what? Some hot Cognac? No! hands him, ye
gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and wa-ter!

“Ginger? Do I smell ginger?” sus-pi-ciously asked Stubb, com-ing near.
“Yes, this must be ginger,” peer-ing into the as yet un-tasted cup. Then
stand-ing as if in-cred-u-lous for a while, he calmly walked to-wards the
as-ton-ished stew-ard slowly say-ing, “Ginger? ginger? and will you have
the good-ness to tell me, Mr. Dough-Boy, where lies the vir-tue of
ginger? Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel you use, Dough-boy, to
kindle a fire in this shiv-er-ing can-ni-bal? Ginger!—what the devil is
ginger? Sea-coal? fire-wood?—lu-ci-fer matches?—tinder?—gun-powder?—what
the devil is ginger, I say, that you of-fer this cup to our poor
Queequeg here.”

“There is some sneak-ing Tem-per-ance So-ci-ety move-ment about this
busi-ness,” he sud-denly ad-ded, now ap-proach-ing Star-buck, who had just
come from for-ward. “Will you look at that kan-nakin, sir: smell of it,
if you please.” Then watch-ing the mate’s coun-ten-ance, he ad-ded, “The
stew-ard, Mr. Star-buck, had the face to of-fer that ca-lomel and jalap to
Queequeg, there, this in-stant off the whale. Is the stew-ard an
apo-thecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the sort of bit-ters by
which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?”

“I trust not,” said Star-buck, “it is poor stuff enough.”

“Aye, aye, stew-ard,” cried Stubb, “we’ll teach you to drug a
har-poon-eer; none of your apo-thecary’s medi-cine here; you want to poison
us, do ye? You have got out in-sur-ances on our lives and want to murder
us all, and pocket the pro-ceeds, do ye?”

“It was not me,” cried Dough-Boy, “it was Aunt Char-ity that brought the
ginger on board; and bade me never give the har-poon-eers any spir-its,
but only this ginger-jub—so she called it.”

“Ginger-jub! you gingerly ras-cal! take that! and run along with ye to
the lock-ers, and get some-thing bet-ter. I hope I do no wrong, Mr.
Star-buck. It is the cap-tain’s or-ders—grog for the har-poon-eer on a
whale.”

“Enough,” replied Star-buck, “only don’t hit him again, but—”

“Oh, I never hurt when I hit, ex-cept when I hit a whale or some-thing of
that sort; and this fel-low’s a weazel. What were you about say-ing,
sir?”

“Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thy-self.”

When Stubb re-appeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a
sort of tea-caddy in the other. The first con-tained strong spir-its, and
was handed to Queequeg; the second was Aunt Char-ity’s gift, and that
was freely given to the waves.


CHAPTER 73. Stubb and Flask kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk
over Him.

It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale’s
prodi-gious head hanging to the Pequod’s side. But we must let it
con-tinue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to at-tend to
it. For the present other mat-ters press, and the best we can do now for
the head, is to pray heaven the tackles may hold.

Now, dur-ing the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradu-ally
drif-ted into a sea, which, by its oc-ca-sional patches of yel-low brit,
gave un-usual tokens of the vi-cin-ity of Right Whales, a spe-cies of the
Le-viathan that but few sup-posed to be at this par-tic-u-lar time lurk-ing
any-where near. And though all hands com-monly dis-dained the cap-ture of
those in-ferior creatures; and though the Pequod was not com-mis-sioned to
cruise for them at all, and though she had passed num-bers of them near
the Croz-etts without lower-ing a boat; yet now that a Sperm Whale had
been brought along-side and be-headed, to the sur-prise of all, the
an-nounce-ment was made that a Right Whale should be cap-tured that day,
if op-por-tun-ity offered.

Nor was this long want-ing. Tall spouts were seen to lee-ward; and two
boats, Stubb’s and Flask’s, were de-tached in pur-suit. Pulling fur-ther
and fur-ther away, they at last be-came al-most in-vis-ible to the men at
the mast-head. But sud-denly in the dis-tance, they saw a great heap of
tu-mul-tu-ous white wa-ter, and soon after news came from aloft that one or
both the boats must be fast. An in-ter-val passed and the boats were in
plain sight, in the act of be-ing dragged right to-wards the ship by the
tow-ing whale. So close did the mon-ster come to the hull, that at first
it seemed as if he meant it malice; but sud-denly go-ing down in a
mael-strom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly dis-ap-peared from
view, as if diving un-der the keel. “Cut, cut!” was the cry from the
ship to the boats, which, for one in-stant, seemed on the point of be-ing
brought with a deadly dash against the ves-sel’s side. But hav-ing plenty
of line yet in the tubs, and the whale not sound-ing very rap-idly, they
paid out abund-ance of rope, and at the same time pulled with all their
might so as to get ahead of the ship. For a few minutes the struggle
was in-tensely crit-ical; for while they still slacked out the tightened
line in one dir-ec-tion, and still plied their oars in an-other, the
con-tend-ing strain threatened to take them un-der. But it was only a few
feet ad-vance they sought to gain. And they stuck to it till they did
gain it; when in-stantly, a swift tremor was felt run-ning like light-ning
along the keel, as the strained line, scrap-ing be-neath the ship,
sud-denly rose to view un-der her bows, snap-ping and quiv-er-ing; and so
fling-ing off its drip-pings, that the drops fell like bits of broken
glass on the wa-ter, while the whale bey-ond also rose to sight, and once
more the boats were free to fly. But the fagged whale abated his speed,
and blindly al-ter-ing his course, went round the stern of the ship
tow-ing the two boats after him, so that they per-formed a com-plete
cir-cuit.

Mean-time, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close
flank-ing him on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance;
and thus round and round the Pequod the battle went, while the
mul-ti-tudes of sharks that had be-fore swum round the Sperm Whale’s body,
rushed to the fresh blood that was spilled, thirstily drink-ing at every
new gash, as the eager Is-rael-ites did at the new burst-ing foun-tains
that poured from the smit-ten rock.

At last his spout grew thick, and with a fright-ful roll and vomit, he
turned upon his back a corpse.

While the two heads-men were en-gaged in mak-ing fast cords to his flukes,
and in other ways get-ting the mass in read-i-ness for tow-ing, some
con-ver-sa-tion en-sued between them.

“I won-der what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard,” said
Stubb, not without some dis-gust at the thought of hav-ing to do with so
ig-noble a le-viathan.

“Wants with it?” said Flask, coil-ing some spare line in the boat’s bow,
“did you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale’s
head hois-ted on her star-board side, and at the same time a Right
Whale’s on the lar-board; did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can
never af-ter-wards cap-size?”

“Why not?

“I don’t know, but I heard that gam-boge ghost of a Fedal-lah say-ing so,
and he seems to know all about ships’ charms. But I some-times think
he’ll charm the ship to no good at last. I don’t half like that chap,
Stubb. Did you ever no-tice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved
into a snake’s head, Stubb?”

“Sink him! I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance of a
dark night, and he stand-ing hard by the bul-warks, and no one by; look
down there, Flask”—point-ing into the sea with a pe-cu-liar mo-tion of both
hands—“Aye, will I! Flask, I take that Fedal-lah to be the devil in
dis-guise. Do you be-lieve that cock and bull story about his hav-ing been
stowed away on board ship? He’s the devil, I say. The reason why you
don’t see his tail, is be-cause he tucks it up out of sight; he car-ries
it coiled away in his pocket, I guess. Blast him! now that I think of
it, he’s al-ways want-ing oakum to stuff into the toes of his boots.”

“He sleeps in his boots, don’t he? He hasn’t got any ham-mock; but I’ve
seen him lay of nights in a coil of rig-ging.”

“No doubt, and it’s be-cause of his cursed tail; he coils it down, do ye
see, in the eye of the rig-ging.”

“What’s the old man have so much to do with him for?”

“Strik-ing up a swap or a bar-gain, I sup-pose.”

“Bar-gain?—about what?”

“Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, and
the devil there is try-ing to come round him, and get him to swap away
his sil-ver watch, or his soul, or some-thing of that sort, and then
he’ll sur-render Moby Dick.”

“Pooh! Stubb, you are sky-lark-ing; how can Fedal-lah do that?”

“I don’t know, Flask, but the devil is a curi-ous chap, and a wicked
one, I tell ye. Why, they say as how he went a saun-ter-ing into the old
flag-ship once, switch-ing his tail about dev-il-ish easy and
gen-tle-man-like, and in-quir-ing if the old gov-ernor was at home. Well, he
was at home, and asked the devil what he wanted. The devil, switch-ing
his hoofs, up and says, ‘I want John.’ ‘What for?’ says the old
gov-ernor. ‘What busi-ness is that of yours,’ says the devil, get-ting
mad,—‘I want to use him.’ ‘Take him,’ says the gov-ernor—and by the
Lord, Flask, if the devil didn’t give John the Asi-atic chol-era be-fore
he got through with him, I’ll eat this whale in one mouth-ful. But look
sharp—ain’t you all ready there? Well, then, pull ahead, and let’s get
the whale along-side.”

“I think I re-mem-ber some such story as you were telling,” said Flask,
when at last the two boats were slowly ad-van-cing with their bur-den
to-wards the ship, “but I can’t re-mem-ber where.”

“Three Span-iards? Ad-ven-tures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes?
Did ye read it there, Flask? I guess ye did?”

“No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though. But now, tell me,
Stubb, do you sup-pose that that devil you was speak-ing of just now, was
the same you say is now on board the Pequod?”

“Am I the same man that helped kill this whale? Doesn’t the devil live
for ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? Did you ever see any
par-son a wear-ing mourn-ing for the devil? And if the devil has a
latch-key to get into the ad-miral’s cabin, don’t you sup-pose he can
crawl into a porthole? Tell me that, Mr. Flask?”

“How old do you sup-pose Fedal-lah is, Stubb?”

“Do you see that main-mast there?” point-ing to the ship; “well, that’s
the fig-ure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod’s hold, and string
along in a row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well, that
wouldn’t be-gin to be Fedal-lah’s age. Nor all the coopers in cre-ation
couldn’t show hoops enough to make oughts enough.”

“But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boas-ted just now, that you
meant to give Fedal-lah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance. Now, if
he’s so old as all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is go-ing to
live for ever, what good will it do to pitch him over-board—tell me
that?

“Give him a good duck-ing, any-how.”

“But he’d crawl back.”

“Duck him again; and keep duck-ing him.”

“Sup-pose he should take it into his head to duck you, though—yes, and
drown you—what then?”

“I should like to see him try it; I’d give him such a pair of black
eyes that he wouldn’t dare to show his face in the ad-miral’s cabin
again for a long while, let alone down in the or-lop there, where he
lives, and here-abouts on the up-per decks where he sneaks so much. Damn
the devil, Flask; so you sup-pose I’m afraid of the devil? Who’s afraid
of him, ex-cept the old gov-ernor who daresn’t catch him and put him in
double-dar-bies, as he de-serves, but lets him go about kid-nap-ping
people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the people the devil
kid-napped, he’d roast for him? There’s a gov-ernor!”

“Do you sup-pose Fedal-lah wants to kid-nap Cap-tain Ahab?”

“Do I sup-pose it? You’ll know it be-fore long, Flask. But I am go-ing now
to keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see any-thing very sus-pi-cious
go-ing on, I’ll just take him by the nape of his neck, and say—Look
here, Beelze-bub, you don’t do it; and if he makes any fuss, by the Lord
I’ll make a grab into his pocket for his tail, take it to the cap-stan,
and give him such a wrench-ing and heav-ing, that his tail will come
short off at the stump—do you see; and then, I rather guess when he
finds him-self docked in that queer fash-ion, he’ll sneak off without the
poor sat-is-fac-tion of feel-ing his tail between his legs.”

“And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?”

“Do with it? Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;—what else?”

“Now, do you mean what you say, and have been say-ing all along, Stubb?”

“Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.”

The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the lar-board side,
where fluke chains and other ne-ces-sar-ies were already pre-pared for
se-cur-ing him.

“Didn’t I tell you so?” said Flask; “yes, you’ll soon see this right
whale’s head hois-ted up op-pos-ite that par-ma-cetti’s.”

In good time, Flask’s say-ing proved true. As be-fore, the Pequod steeply
leaned over to-wards the sperm whale’s head, now, by the coun-ter-poise of
both heads, she re-gained her even keel; though sorely strained, you may
well be-lieve. So, when on one side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go
over that way; but now, on the other side, hoist in Kant’s and you come
back again; but in very poor plight. Thus, some minds for ever keep
trim-ming boat. Oh, ye fool-ish! throw all these thun-der-heads over-board,
and then you will float light and right.

In dis-pos-ing of the body of a right whale, when brought along-side the
ship, the same pre-lim-in-ary pro-ceed-ings com-monly take place as in the
case of a sperm whale; only, in the lat-ter in-stance, the head is cut
off whole, but in the former the lips and tongue are sep-ar-ately re-moved
and hois-ted on deck, with all the well known black bone at-tached to
what is called the crown-piece. But noth-ing like this, in the present
case, had been done. The car-cases of both whales had dropped astern;
and the head-laden ship not a little re-sembled a mule car-ry-ing a pair
of over-bur-den-ing pan-niers.

Mean-time, Fedal-lah was calmly eye-ing the right whale’s head, and ever
and anon glan-cing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own
hand. And Ahab chanced so to stand, that the Parsee oc-cu-pied his
shadow; while, if the Parsee’s shadow was there at all it seemed only
to blend with, and lengthen Ahab’s. As the crew toiled on, La-pland-ish
spec-u-la-tions were ban-died among them, con-cern-ing all these passing
things.


CHAPTER 74. The Sperm Whale’s Head—Con-tras-ted View.

Here, now, are two great whales, lay-ing their heads to-gether; let us
join them, and lay to-gether our own.

Of the grand or-der of fo-lio le-viath-ans, the Sperm Whale and the Right
Whale are by far the most note-worthy. They are the only whales
reg-u-larly hunted by man. To the Nan-tuck-eter, they present the two
ex-tremes of all the known vari-et-ies of the whale. As the ex-ternal
dif-fer-ence between them is mainly ob-serv-able in their heads; and as a
head of each is this mo-ment hanging from the Pequod’s side; and as we
may freely go from one to the other, by merely step-ping across the
deck:—where, I should like to know, will you ob-tain a bet-ter chance to
study prac-tical cet-o-logy than here?

In the first place, you are struck by the gen-eral con-trast between
these heads. Both are massive enough in all con-science; but there is a
cer-tain math-em-at-ical sym-metry in the Sperm Whale’s which the Right
Whale’s sadly lacks. There is more char-ac-ter in the Sperm Whale’s head.
As you be-hold it, you in-vol-un-tar-ily yield the im-mense su-peri-or-ity to
him, in point of per-vad-ing dig-nity. In the present in-stance, too, this
dig-nity is heightened by the pep-per and salt col-our of his head at the
sum-mit, giv-ing token of ad-vanced age and large ex-per-i-ence. In short, he
is what the fish-er-men tech-nic-ally call a “grey-headed whale.”

Let us now note what is least dis-sim-ilar in these heads—namely, the two
most im-port-ant or-gans, the eye and the ear. Far back on the side of the
head, and low down, near the angle of either whale’s jaw, if you
nar-rowly search, you will at last see a lash-less eye, which you would
fancy to be a young colt’s eye; so out of all pro-por-tion is it to the
mag-nitude of the head.

Now, from this pe-cu-liar side-way po-s-i-tion of the whale’s eyes, it is
plain that he can never see an ob-ject which is ex-actly ahead, no more
than he can one ex-actly astern. In a word, the po-s-i-tion of the whale’s
eyes cor-res-ponds to that of a man’s ears; and you may fancy, for
your-self, how it would fare with you, did you side-ways sur-vey ob-jects
through your ears. You would find that you could only com-mand some
thirty de-grees of vis-ion in ad-vance of the straight side-line of sight;
and about thirty more be-hind it. If your bitterest foe were walk-ing
straight to-wards you, with dag-ger up-lif-ted in broad day, you would not
be able to see him, any more than if he were steal-ing upon you from
be-hind. In a word, you would have two backs, so to speak; but, at the
same time, also, two fronts (side fronts): for what is it that makes
the front of a man—what, in-deed, but his eyes?

Moreover, while in most other an-im-als that I can now think of, the eyes
are so planted as im-per-cept-ibly to blend their visual power, so as to
pro-duce one pic-ture and not two to the brain; the pe-cu-liar po-s-i-tion of
the whale’s eyes, ef-fec-tu-ally di-vided as they are by many cu-bic feet of
solid head, which towers between them like a great moun-tain sep-ar-at-ing
two lakes in val-leys; this, of course, must wholly sep-ar-ate the
im-pres-sions which each in-de-pend-ent or-gan im-parts. The whale, there-fore,
must see one dis-tinct pic-ture on this side, and an-other dis-tinct
pic-ture on that side; while all between must be pro-found dark-ness and
noth-ing-ness to him. Man may, in ef-fect, be said to look out on the
world from a sen-try-box with two joined sashes for his win-dow. But with
the whale, these two sashes are sep-ar-ately in-ser-ted, mak-ing two
dis-tinct win-dows, but sadly im-pair-ing the view. This pe-cu-li-ar-ity of the
whale’s eyes is a thing al-ways to be borne in mind in the fish-ery; and
to be re-membered by the reader in some sub-sequent scenes.

A curi-ous and most puzz-ling ques-tion might be star-ted con-cern-ing this
visual mat-ter as touch-ing the Le-viathan. But I must be con-tent with a
hint. So long as a man’s eyes are open in the light, the act of see-ing
is in-vol-un-tary; that is, he can-not then help mech-an-ic-ally see-ing
whatever ob-jects are be-fore him. Never-the-less, any one’s ex-per-i-ence
will teach him, that though he can take in an un-dis-crim-in-at-ing sweep of
things at one glance, it is quite im-possible for him, at-tent-ively, and
com-pletely, to ex-am-ine any two things—how-ever large or how-ever small—at
one and the same in-stant of time; never mind if they lie side by side
and touch each other. But if you now come to sep-ar-ate these two
ob-jects, and sur-round each by a circle of pro-found dark-ness; then, in
or-der to see one of them, in such a man-ner as to bring your mind to
bear on it, the other will be ut-terly ex-cluded from your con-tem-por-ary
con-scious-ness. How is it, then, with the whale? True, both his eyes, in
them-selves, must sim-ul-tan-eously act; but is his brain so much more
com-pre-hens-ive, com-bin-ing, and subtle than man’s, that he can at the
same mo-ment of time at-tent-ively ex-am-ine two dis-tinct pro-spects, one on
one side of him, and the other in an ex-actly op-pos-ite dir-ec-tion? If he
can, then is it as mar-vel-lous a thing in him, as if a man were able
sim-ul-tan-eously to go through the demon-stra-tions of two dis-tinct
prob-lems in Euc-lid. Nor, strictly in-vest-ig-ated, is there any
in-con-gru-ity in this com-par-ison.

It may be but an idle whim, but it has al-ways seemed to me, that the
ex-traordin-ary va-cil-la-tions of move-ment dis-played by some whales when
be-set by three or four boats; the timid-ity and li-ab-il-ity to queer
frights, so com-mon to such whales; I think that all this in-dir-ectly
pro-ceeds from the help-less per-plex-ity of vo-li-tion, in which their
di-vided and dia-met-ric-ally op-pos-ite powers of vis-ion must in-volve them.

But the ear of the whale is full as curi-ous as the eye. If you are an
en-tire stranger to their race, you might hunt over these two heads for
hours, and never dis-cover that or-gan. The ear has no ex-ternal leaf
whatever; and into the hole it-self you can hardly in-sert a quill, so
won-drously minute is it. It is lodged a little be-hind the eye. With
re-spect to their ears, this im-port-ant dif-fer-ence is to be ob-served
between the sperm whale and the right. While the ear of the former has
an ex-ternal open-ing, that of the lat-ter is en-tirely and evenly covered
over with a mem-brane, so as to be quite im-per-cept-ible from without.

Is it not curi-ous, that so vast a be-ing as the whale should see the
world through so small an eye, and hear the thun-der through an ear
which is smal-ler than a hare’s? But if his eyes were broad as the lens
of Her-schel’s great tele-scope; and his ears ca-pa-cious as the porches of
cathed-rals; would that make him any longer of sight, or sharper of
hear-ing? Not at all.—Why then do you try to “en-large” your mind?
Sub-til-ize it.

Let us now with whatever levers and steam-en-gines we have at hand, cant
over the sperm whale’s head, that it may lie bot-tom up; then, as-cend-ing
by a lad-der to the sum-mit, have a peep down the mouth; and were it not
that the body is now com-pletely sep-ar-ated from it, with a lan-tern we
might des-cend into the great Ken-tucky Mam-moth Cave of his stom-ach. But
let us hold on here by this tooth, and look about us where we are. What
a really beau-ti-ful and chaste-look-ing mouth! from floor to ceil-ing,
lined, or rather papered with a glisten-ing white mem-brane, glossy as
bridal sat-ins.

But come out now, and look at this portent-ous lower jaw, which seems
like the long nar-row lid of an im-mense snuff-box, with the hinge at one
end, in-stead of one side. If you pry it up, so as to get it over-head,
and ex-pose its rows of teeth, it seems a ter-rific port-cullis; and such,
alas! it proves to many a poor wight in the fish-ery, upon whom these
spikes fall with im-pal-ing force. But far more ter-rible is it to be-hold,
when fathoms down in the sea, you see some sulky whale, float-ing there
sus-pen-ded, with his prodi-gious jaw, some fif-teen feet long, hanging
straight down at right-angles with his body, for all the world like a
ship’s jib-boom. This whale is not dead; he is only dis-pir-ited; out of
sorts, per-haps; hy-po-chon-driac; and so su-pine, that the hinges of his
jaw have re-laxed, leav-ing him there in that un-gainly sort of plight, a
re-proach to all his tribe, who must, no doubt, im-prec-ate lock-jaws upon
him.

In most cases this lower jaw—be-ing eas-ily un-hinged by a prac-tised
artist—is dis-en-gaged and hois-ted on deck for the pur-pose of ex-tract-ing
the ivory teeth, and fur-nish-ing a sup-ply of that hard white whale-bone
with which the fish-er-men fash-ion all sorts of curi-ous art-icles,
in-clud-ing canes, um-brella-stocks, and handles to rid-ing-whips.

With a long, weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board, as if it were an
an-chor; and when the proper time comes—some few days after the other
work—Queequeg, Dag-goo, and Tasht-ego, be-ing all ac-com-plished dent-ists,
are set to draw-ing teeth. With a keen cut-ting-spade, Queequeg lances
the gums; then the jaw is lashed down to ring-bolts, and a tackle be-ing
rigged from aloft, they drag out these teeth, as Michigan oxen drag
stumps of old oaks out of wild wood lands. There are gen-er-ally
forty-two teeth in all; in old whales, much worn down, but un-de-cayed;
nor filled after our ar-ti-fi-cial fash-ion. The jaw is af-ter-wards sawn
into slabs, and piled away like joists for build-ing houses.


CHAPTER 75. The Right Whale’s Head—Con-tras-ted View.

Cross-ing the deck, let us now have a good long look at the Right
Whale’s head.

As in gen-eral shape the noble Sperm Whale’s head may be com-pared to a
Ro-man war-chariot (es-pe-cially in front, where it is so broadly
roun-ded); so, at a broad view, the Right Whale’s head bears a rather
in-el-eg-ant re-semb-lance to a gi-gantic gal-liot-toed shoe. Two hun-dred
years ago an old Dutch voy-ager likened its shape to that of a
shoe-maker’s last. And in this same last or shoe, that old wo-man of the
nurs-ery tale, with the swarm-ing brood, might very com-fort-ably be
lodged, she and all her pro-geny.

But as you come nearer to this great head it be-gins to as-sume dif-fer-ent
as-pects, ac-cord-ing to your point of view. If you stand on its sum-mit
and look at these two F-shaped spoutholes, you would take the whole
head for an enorm-ous bass-viol, and these spir-acles, the aper-tures in
its sound-ing-board. Then, again, if you fix your eye upon this strange,
cres-ted, comb-like in-crust-a-tion on the top of the mass—this green,
barnacled thing, which the Green-land-ers call the “crown,” and the
South-ern fish-ers the “bon-net” of the Right Whale; fix-ing your eyes
solely on this, you would take the head for the trunk of some huge oak,
with a bird’s nest in its crotch. At any rate, when you watch those
live crabs that nestle here on this bon-net, such an idea will be al-most
sure to oc-cur to you; un-less, in-deed, your fancy has been fixed by the
tech-nical term “crown” also be-stowed upon it; in which case you will
take great in-terest in think-ing how this mighty mon-ster is ac-tu-ally a
dia-demed king of the sea, whose green crown has been put to-gether for
him in this mar-vel-lous man-ner. But if this whale be a king, he is a
very sulky look-ing fel-low to grace a dia-dem. Look at that hanging lower
lip! what a huge sulk and pout is there! a sulk and pout, by
car-penter’s meas-ure-ment, about twenty feet long and five feet deep; a
sulk and pout that will yield you some 500 gal-lons of oil and more.

A great pity, now, that this un-for-tu-nate whale should be hare-lipped.
The fis-sure is about a foot across. Prob-ably the mother dur-ing an
im-port-ant in-ter-val was sail-ing down the Per-uvian coast, when
earth-quakes caused the beach to gape. Over this lip, as over a slip-pery
threshold, we now slide into the mouth. Upon my word were I at
Mack-inaw, I should take this to be the in-side of an In-dian wig-wam. Good
Lord! is this the road that Jo-nah went? The roof is about twelve feet
high, and runs to a pretty sharp angle, as if there were a reg-u-lar
ridge-pole there; while these ribbed, arched, hairy sides, present us
with those won-drous, half ver-tical, sci-metar-shaped slats of whale-bone,
say three hun-dred on a side, which de-pend-ing from the up-per part of the
head or crown bone, form those Vene-tian blinds which have else-where
been curs-or-ily men-tioned. The edges of these bones are fringed with
hairy fibres, through which the Right Whale strains the wa-ter, and in
whose in-tric-a-cies he re-tains the small fish, when open-mouthed he goes
through the seas of brit in feed-ing time. In the cent-ral blinds of
bone, as they stand in their nat-ural or-der, there are cer-tain curi-ous
marks, curves, hol-lows, and ridges, whereby some whale-men cal-cu-late the
creature’s age, as the age of an oak by its cir-cu-lar rings. Though the
cer-tainty of this cri-terion is far from demon-strable, yet it has the
sa-vor of ana-lo-gical prob-ab-il-ity. At any rate, if we yield to it, we
must grant a far greater age to the Right Whale than at first glance
will seem reas-on-able.

In old times, there seem to have pre-vailed the most curi-ous fan-cies
con-cern-ing these blinds. One voy-ager in Purchas calls them the won-drous
“whiskers” in-side of the whale’s mouth;* an-other, “hogs’ bristles”; a
third old gen-tle-man in Hackluyt uses the fol-low-ing el-eg-ant lan-guage:
“There are about two hun-dred and fifty fins grow-ing on each side of his
up-per _chop_, which arch over his tongue on each side of his mouth.”

*This re-minds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker, or
rather a mous-tache, con-sist-ing of a few scattered white hairs on the
up-per part of the outer end of the lower jaw. So-me-times these tufts
im-part a rather brig-andish ex-pres-sion to his oth-er-wise sol-emn
coun-ten-ance.

As every one knows, these same “hogs’ bristles,” “fins,” “whiskers,”
“blinds,” or whatever you please, fur-nish to the ladies their busks and
other stiff-en-ing con-triv-ances. But in this par-tic-u-lar, the de-mand has
long been on the de-cline. It was in Queen Anne’s time that the bone was
in its glory, the farthin-gale be-ing then all the fash-ion. And as those
an-cient dames moved about gaily, though in the jaws of the whale, as
you may say; even so, in a shower, with the like thought-less-ness, do we
nowadays fly un-der the same jaws for pro-tec-tion; the um-brella be-ing a
tent spread over the same bone.

But now for-get all about blinds and whiskers for a mo-ment, and,
stand-ing in the Right Whale’s mouth, look around you afresh. See-ing all
these colon-nades of bone so meth-od-ic-ally ranged about, would you not
think you were in-side of the great Haar-lem or-gan, and gaz-ing upon its
thou-sand pipes? For a car-pet to the or-gan we have a rug of the soft-est
Tur-key—the tongue, which is glued, as it were, to the floor of the
mouth. It is very fat and tender, and apt to tear in pieces in hoist-ing
it on deck. This par-tic-u-lar tongue now be-fore us; at a passing glance I
should say it was a six-bar-reler; that is, it will yield you about that
amount of oil.

Ere this, you must have plainly seen the truth of what I star-ted
with—that the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale have al-most en-tirely
dif-fer-ent heads. To sum up, then: in the Right Whale’s there is no
great well of sperm; no ivory teeth at all; no long, slender mand-ible
of a lower jaw, like the Sperm Whale’s. Nor in the Sperm Whale are
there any of those blinds of bone; no huge lower lip; and scarcely
any-thing of a tongue. Again, the Right Whale has two ex-ternal
spout-holes, the Sperm Whale only one.

Look your last, now, on these ven-er-able hooded heads, while they yet
lie to-gether; for one will soon sink, un-re-cor-ded, in the sea; the other
will not be very long in fol-low-ing.

Can you catch the ex-pres-sion of the Sperm Whale’s there? It is the same
he died with, only some of the longer wrinkles in the fore-head seem now
faded away. I think his broad brow to be full of a prairie-like
pla-cid-ity, born of a spec-u-lat-ive in-dif-fer-ence as to death. But mark the
other head’s ex-pres-sion. See that amaz-ing lower lip, pressed by
ac-ci-dent against the ves-sel’s side, so as firmly to em-brace the jaw.
Does not this whole head seem to speak of an enorm-ous prac-tical
res-ol-u-tion in fa-cing death? This Right Whale I take to have been a
Stoic; the Sperm Whale, a Plato-nian, who might have taken up Spinoza in
his lat-ter years.


CHAPTER 76. The Bat-ter-ing-Ram.

Ere quit-ting, for the nonce, the Sperm Whale’s head, I would have you,
as a sens-ible physiolo-gist, simply—par-tic-u-larly re-mark its front
as-pect, in all its com-pacted col-lec-ted-ness. I would have you
in-vest-ig-ate it now with the sole view of form-ing to your-self some
un-ex-ag-ger-ated, in-tel-li-gent es-tim-ate of whatever bat-ter-ing-ram power may
be lodged there. Here is a vi-tal point; for you must either
sat-is-fact-or-ily settle this mat-ter with your-self, or for ever re-main an
in-fi-del as to one of the most ap-palling, but not the less true events,
per-haps any-where to be found in all re-cor-ded his-tory.

You ob-serve that in the or-din-ary swim-ming po-s-i-tion of the Sperm Whale,
the front of his head presents an al-most wholly ver-tical plane to the
wa-ter; you ob-serve that the lower part of that front slopes
con-sid-er-ably back-wards, so as to fur-nish more of a re-treat for the long
socket which re-ceives the boom-like lower jaw; you ob-serve that the
mouth is en-tirely un-der the head, much in the same way, in-deed, as
though your own mouth were en-tirely un-der your chin. Moreover you
ob-serve that the whale has no ex-ternal nose; and that what nose he
has—his spout hole—is on the top of his head; you ob-serve that his eyes
and ears are at the sides of his head, nearly one third of his en-tire
length from the front. Where-fore, you must now have per-ceived that the
front of the Sperm Whale’s head is a dead, blind wall, without a single
or-gan or tender prom-in-ence of any sort what-so-ever. Fur-ther-more, you are
now to con-sider that only in the ex-treme, lower, back-ward slop-ing part
of the front of the head, is there the slight-est vestige of bone; and
not till you get near twenty feet from the fore-head do you come to the
full cra-nial de-vel-op-ment. So that this whole enorm-ous bone-less mass is
as one wad. Fin-ally, though, as will soon be re-vealed, its con-tents
partly com-prise the most del-ic-ate oil; yet, you are now to be ap-prised
of the nature of the sub-stance which so im-preg-nably in-vests all that
ap-par-ent ef-fem-in-acy. In some pre-vi-ous place I have de-scribed to you how
the blub-ber wraps the body of the whale, as the rind wraps an or-ange.
Just so with the head; but with this dif-fer-ence: about the head this
en-vel-ope, though not so thick, is of a bone-less tough-ness, in-es-tim-able
by any man who has not handled it. The severest poin-ted har-poon, the
sharpest lance dar-ted by the strongest hu-man arm, im-pot-ently re-bounds
from it. It is as though the fore-head of the Sperm Whale were paved
with horses’ hoofs. I do not think that any sen-sa-tion lurks in it.

Be-think your-self also of an-other thing. When two large, loaded In-dia-men
chance to crowd and crush to-wards each other in the docks, what do the
sail-ors do? They do not sus-pend between them, at the point of com-ing
con-tact, any merely hard sub-stance, like iron or wood. No, they hold
there a large, round wad of tow and cork, en-vel-oped in the thick-est and
toughest of ox-hide. That bravely and un-injured takes the jam which
would have snapped all their oaken hand-spikes and iron crow-bars. By
it-self this suf-fi-ciently il-lus-trates the ob-vi-ous fact I drive at. But
sup-ple-ment-ary to this, it has hy-po-thet-ic-ally oc-curred to me, that as
or-din-ary fish pos-sess what is called a swim-ming blad-der in them,
cap-able, at will, of dis-ten-sion or con-trac-tion; and as the Sperm Whale,
as far as I know, has no such pro-vi-sion in him; con-sid-er-ing, too, the
oth-er-wise in-ex-plic-able man-ner in which he now de-presses his head
al-to-gether be-neath the sur-face, and anon swims with it high el-ev-ated
out of the wa-ter; con-sid-er-ing the un-ob-struc-ted elasti-city of its
en-vel-ope; con-sid-er-ing the unique in-terior of his head; it has
hy-po-thet-ic-ally oc-curred to me, I say, that those mys-tical lung-celled
hon-ey-combs there may pos-sibly have some hitherto un-known and
un-sus-pec-ted con-nex-ion with the outer air, so as to be sus-cept-ible to
at-mo-spheric dis-ten-sion and con-trac-tion. If this be so, fancy the
ir-res-ist-ible-ness of that might, to which the most im-palp-able and
de-struct-ive of all ele-ments con-trib-utes.

Now, mark. Un-err-ingly im-pel-ling this dead, im-preg-nable, un-injur-able
wall, and this most buoy-ant thing within; there swims be-hind it all a
mass of tre-mend-ous life, only to be ad-equately es-tim-ated as piled wood
is—by the cord; and all obed-i-ent to one vo-li-tion, as the smal-lest
in-sect. So that when I shall here-after de-tail to you all the
spe-ci-al-it-ies and con-cen-tra-tions of po-tency every-where lurk-ing in this
ex-pans-ive mon-ster; when I shall show you some of his more
in-con-sid-er-able brain-ing feats; I trust you will have re-nounced all
ig-nor-ant in-credu-lity, and be ready to abide by this; that though the
Sperm Whale stove a pas-sage through the Isth-mus of Darien, and mixed
the At-lantic with the Pa-cific, you would not el-ev-ate one hair of your
eye-brow. For un-less you own the whale, you are but a pro-vin-cial and
sen-ti-ment-al-ist in Truth. But clear Truth is a thing for sala-man-der
gi-ants only to en-counter; how small the chances for the pro-vin-cials
then? What be-fell the weak-ling youth lift-ing the dread god-dess’s veil
at Lais?


CHAPTER 77. The Great Heidel-burgh Tun.

Now comes the Bal-ing of the Case. But to com-pre-hend it aright, you must
know some-thing of the curi-ous in-ternal struc-ture of the thing op-er-ated
upon.

Regard-ing the Sperm Whale’s head as a solid ob-long, you may, on an
in-clined plane, side-ways di-vide it into two quoins,* whereof the lower
is the bony struc-ture, form-ing the cra-nium and jaws, and the up-per an
unc-tu-ous mass wholly free from bones; its broad for-ward end form-ing the
ex-pan-ded ver-tical ap-par-ent fore-head of the whale. At the middle of the
fore-head ho-ri-zont-ally sub-divide this up-per quoin, and then you have two
al-most equal parts, which be-fore were nat-ur-ally di-vided by an in-ternal
wall of a thick tendin-ous sub-stance.

*Quoin is not a Euc-lidean term. It be-longs to the pure naut-ical
math-em-at-ics. I know not that it has been defined be-fore. A quoin is a
solid which dif-fers from a wedge in hav-ing its sharp end formed by the
steep in-clin-a-tion of one side, in-stead of the mu-tual taper-ing of both
sides.

The lower sub-divided part, called the junk, is one im-mense hon-ey-comb of
oil, formed by the cross-ing and re-cross-ing, into ten thou-sand
in-filt-rated cells, of tough elastic white fibres through-out its whole
ex-tent. The up-per part, known as the Case, may be re-garded as the great
Heidel-burgh Tun of the Sperm Whale. And as that fam-ous great tierce is
mys-tic-ally carved in front, so the whale’s vast plaited fore-head forms
in-nu-mer-able strange devices for the em-blem-at-ical ad-orn-ment of his
won-drous tun. Moreover, as that of Heidel-burgh was al-ways re-plen-ished
with the most ex-cel-lent of the wines of the Rhen-ish val-leys, so the tun
of the whale con-tains by far the most pre-cious of all his oily
vin-tages; namely, the highly-prized sper-ma-ceti, in its ab-so-lutely pure,
limpid, and odor-i-fer-ous state. Nor is this pre-cious sub-stance found
un-al-loyed in any other part of the creature. Though in life it re-mains
per-fectly fluid, yet, upon ex-pos-ure to the air, after death, it soon
be-gins to con-crete; send-ing forth beau-ti-ful crys-tal-line shoots, as when
the first thin del-ic-ate ice is just form-ing in wa-ter. A large whale’s
case gen-er-ally yields about five hun-dred gal-lons of sperm, though from
un-avoid-able cir-cum-stances, con-sid-er-able of it is spilled, leaks, and
dribbles away, or is oth-er-wise ir-re-voc-ably lost in the tick-lish
busi-ness of se-cur-ing what you can.

I know not with what fine and costly ma-ter-ial the Heidel-burgh Tun was
coated within, but in su-per-lat-ive rich-ness that coat-ing could not
pos-sibly have com-pared with the silken pearl-col-oured mem-brane, like
the lin-ing of a fine pe-lisse, form-ing the in-ner sur-face of the Sperm
Whale’s case.

It will have been seen that the Heidel-burgh Tun of the Sperm Whale
em-braces the en-tire length of the en-tire top of the head; and since—as
has been else-where set forth—the head em-braces one third of the whole
length of the creature, then set-ting that length down at eighty feet
for a good sized whale, you have more than twenty-six feet for the
depth of the tun, when it is length-wise hois-ted up and down against a
ship’s side.

As in de-cap-it-at-ing the whale, the op-er-ator’s in-stru-ment is brought
close to the spot where an en-trance is sub-sequently forced into the
sper-ma-ceti magazine; he has, there-fore, to be un-com-monly heed-ful, lest
a care-less, un-timely stroke should in-vade the sanc-tu-ary and wast-ingly
let out its in-valu-able con-tents. It is this de-cap-it-ated end of the
head, also, which is at last el-ev-ated out of the wa-ter, and re-tained in
that po-s-i-tion by the enorm-ous cut-ting tackles, whose hempen
com-bin-a-tions, on one side, make quite a wil-der-ness of ropes in that
quarter.

Thus much be-ing said, at-tend now, I pray you, to that mar-vel-lous and—in
this par-tic-u-lar in-stance—al-most fatal op-er-a-tion whereby the Sperm
Whale’s great Heidel-burgh Tun is tapped.


CHAPTER 78. Cistern and Buck-ets.

Nimble as a cat, Tasht-ego mounts aloft; and without al-ter-ing his erect
pos-ture, runs straight out upon the over-hanging main-yard-arm, to the
part where it ex-actly pro-jects over the hois-ted Tun. He has car-ried
with him a light tackle called a whip, con-sist-ing of only two parts,
trav-el-ling through a single-sheaved block. Se-cur-ing this block, so that
it hangs down from the yard-arm, he swings one end of the rope, till it
is caught and firmly held by a hand on deck. Then, hand-over-hand, down
the other part, the In-dian drops through the air, till dex-ter-ously he
lands on the sum-mit of the head. There—still high el-ev-ated above the
rest of the com-pany, to whom he vi-va-ciously cries—he seems some Turk-ish
Muezzin call-ing the good people to pray-ers from the top of a tower. A
short-handled sharp spade be-ing sent up to him, he di-li-gently searches
for the proper place to be-gin break-ing into the Tun. In this busi-ness
he pro-ceeds very heed-fully, like a treas-ure-hunter in some old house,
sound-ing the walls to find where the gold is masoned in. By the time
this cau-tious search is over, a stout iron-bound bucket, pre-cisely like
a well-bucket, has been at-tached to one end of the whip; while the
other end, be-ing stretched across the deck, is there held by two or
three alert hands. These last now hoist the bucket within grasp of the
In-dian, to whom an-other per-son has reached up a very long pole.
In-sert-ing this pole into the bucket, Tasht-ego down-ward guides the
bucket into the Tun, till it en-tirely dis-ap-pears; then giv-ing the word
to the sea-men at the whip, up comes the bucket again, all bub-bling like
a dairy-maid’s pail of new milk. Care-fully lowered from its height, the
full-freighted ves-sel is caught by an ap-poin-ted hand, and quickly
emp-tied into a large tub. Then re-mount-ing aloft, it again goes through
the same round un-til the deep cistern will yield no more. Towards the
end, Tasht-ego has to ram his long pole harder and harder, and deeper
and deeper into the Tun, un-til some twenty feet of the pole have gone
down.

Now, the people of the Pequod had been bal-ing some time in this way;
sev-eral tubs had been filled with the fra-grant sperm; when all at once
a queer ac-ci-dent happened. Whether it was that Tasht-ego, that wild
In-dian, was so heed-less and reck-less as to let go for a mo-ment his
one-handed hold on the great cabled tackles sus-pend-ing the head; or
whether the place where he stood was so treach-er-ous and oozy; or
whether the Evil One him-self would have it to fall out so, without
stat-ing his par-tic-u-lar reas-ons; how it was ex-actly, there is no telling
now; but, on a sud-den, as the eighti-eth or nineti-eth bucket came
suck-ingly up—my God! poor Tasht-ego—like the twin re-cip-roc-at-ing bucket
in a ver-it-able well, dropped head-fore-most down into this great Tun of
Heidel-burgh, and with a hor-rible oily gurg-ling, went clean out of
sight!

“Man over-board!” cried Dag-goo, who amid the gen-eral con-sterna-tion first
came to his senses. “Swing the bucket this way!” and put-ting one foot
into it, so as the bet-ter to se-cure his slip-pery hand-hold on the whip
it-self, the hoisters ran him high up to the top of the head, al-most
be-fore Tasht-ego could have reached its in-terior bot-tom. Mean-time, there
was a ter-rible tu-mult. Look-ing over the side, they saw the be-fore
life-less head throb-bing and heav-ing just be-low the sur-face of the sea,
as if that mo-ment seized with some mo-ment-ous idea; whereas it was only
the poor In-dian un-con-sciously re-veal-ing by those struggles the per-il-ous
depth to which he had sunk.

At this in-stant, while Dag-goo, on the sum-mit of the head, was clear-ing
the whip—which had some-how got foul of the great cut-ting tackles—a
sharp crack-ing noise was heard; and to the un-speak-able hor-ror of all,
one of the two enorm-ous hooks sus-pend-ing the head tore out, and with a
vast vi-bra-tion the enorm-ous mass side-ways swung, till the drunk ship
reeled and shook as if smit-ten by an ice-berg. The one re-main-ing hook,
upon which the en-tire strain now de-pended, seemed every in-stant to be
on the point of giv-ing way; an event still more likely from the vi-ol-ent
mo-tions of the head.

“Come down, come down!” yelled the sea-men to Dag-goo, but with one hand
hold-ing on to the heavy tackles, so that if the head should drop, he
would still re-main sus-pen-ded; the negro hav-ing cleared the foul line,
rammed down the bucket into the now col-lapsed well, mean-ing that the
bur-ied har-poon-eer should grasp it, and so be hois-ted out.

“In heaven’s name, man,” cried Stubb, “are you ram-ming home a cart-ridge
there?—Avast! How will that help him; jam-ming that iron-bound bucket on
top of his head? Avast, will ye!”

“Stand clear of the tackle!” cried a voice like the burst-ing of a
rocket.

Al-most in the same in-stant, with a thun-der-boom, the enorm-ous mass
dropped into the sea, like Niagara’s Table-Rock into the whirl-pool; the
sud-denly re-lieved hull rolled away from it, to far down her glit-ter-ing
cop-per; and all caught their breath, as half swinging—now over the
sail-ors’ heads, and now over the wa-ter—Dag-goo, through a thick mist of
spray, was dimly be-held cling-ing to the pen-du-lous tackles, while poor,
bur-ied-alive Tasht-ego was sink-ing ut-terly down to the bot-tom of the
sea! But hardly had the blind-ing va-por cleared away, when a na-ked
fig-ure with a board-ing-sword in his hand, was for one swift mo-ment seen
hov-er-ing over the bul-warks. The next, a loud splash an-nounced that my
brave Queequeg had dived to the res-cue. One packed rush was made to the
side, and every eye coun-ted every ripple, as mo-ment fol-lowed mo-ment,
and no sign of either the sinker or the diver could be seen. Some hands
now jumped into a boat along-side, and pushed a little off from the
ship.

“Ha! ha!” cried Dag-goo, all at once, from his now quiet, swinging perch
over-head; and look-ing fur-ther off from the side, we saw an arm thrust
up-right from the blue waves; a sight strange to see, as an arm thrust
forth from the grass over a grave.

“Both! both!—it is both!”—cried Dag-goo again with a joy-ful shout; and
soon after, Queequeg was seen boldly strik-ing out with one hand, and
with the other clutch-ing the long hair of the In-dian. Drawn into the
wait-ing boat, they were quickly brought to the deck; but Tasht-ego was
long in com-ing to, and Queequeg did not look very brisk.

Now, how had this noble res-cue been ac-com-plished? Why, diving after the
slowly des-cend-ing head, Queequeg with his keen sword had made side
lunges near its bot-tom, so as to scuttle a large hole there; then
drop-ping his sword, had thrust his long arm far in-wards and up-wards,
and so hauled out poor Tash by the head. He averred, that upon first
thrust-ing in for him, a leg was presen-ted; but well know-ing that that
was not as it ought to be, and might oc-ca-sion great trouble;—he had
thrust back the leg, and by a dex-ter-ous heave and toss, had wrought a
somer-set upon the In-dian; so that with the next trial, he came forth in
the good old way—head fore-most. As for the great head it-self, that was
do-ing as well as could be ex-pec-ted.

And thus, through the cour-age and great skill in ob-stet-rics of
Queequeg, the de-liv-er-ance, or rather, de-liv-ery of Tasht-ego, was
suc-cess-fully ac-com-plished, in the teeth, too, of the most un-to-ward and
ap-par-ently hope-less im-ped-i-ments; which is a les-son by no means to be
for-got-ten. Mid-wifery should be taught in the same course with fen-cing
and box-ing, rid-ing and row-ing.

I know that this queer ad-ven-ture of the Gay-Header’s will be sure to
seem in-cred-ible to some lands-men, though they them-selves may have
either seen or heard of some one’s fall-ing into a cistern ashore; an
ac-ci-dent which not sel-dom hap-pens, and with much less reason too than
the In-dian’s, con-sid-er-ing the ex-ceed-ing slip-per-i-ness of the curb of the
Sperm Whale’s well.

But, perad-ven-ture, it may be saga-ciously urged, how is this? We thought
the tis-sued, in-filt-rated head of the Sperm Whale, was the light-est and
most corky part about him; and yet thou makest it sink in an ele-ment of
a far greater spe-cific grav-ity than it-self. We have thee there. Not at
all, but I have ye; for at the time poor Tash fell in, the case had
been nearly emp-tied of its lighter con-tents, leav-ing little but the
dense tendin-ous wall of the well—a double wel-ded, hammered sub-stance,
as I have be-fore said, much heav-ier than the sea wa-ter, and a lump of
which sinks in it like lead al-most. But the tend-ency to rapid sink-ing
in this sub-stance was in the present in-stance ma-ter-i-ally coun-ter-ac-ted
by the other parts of the head re-main-ing un-detached from it, so that it
sank very slowly and de-lib-er-ately in-deed, af-ford-ing Queequeg a fair
chance for per-form-ing his agile ob-stet-rics on the run, as you may say.
Yes, it was a run-ning de-liv-ery, so it was.

Now, had Tasht-ego per-ished in that head, it had been a very pre-cious
per-ish-ing; smothered in the very whitest and dain-ti-est of fra-grant
sper-ma-ceti; coffined, hearsed, and tombed in the secret in-ner cham-ber
and sanc-tum sanc-torum of the whale. Only one sweeter end can read-ily be
re-called—the de-li-cious death of an Ohio honey-hunter, who seek-ing honey
in the crotch of a hol-low tree, found such ex-ceed-ing store of it, that
lean-ing too far over, it sucked him in, so that he died em-balmed. How
many, think ye, have like-wise fallen into Plato’s honey head, and
sweetly per-ished there?


CHAPTER 79. The Prairie.

To scan the lines of his face, or feel the bumps on the head of this
Le-viathan; this is a thing which no Physiognom-ist or Phren-o-lo-gist has
as yet un-der-taken. Such an en-ter-prise would seem al-most as hope-ful as
for Lavater to have scru-tin-ized the wrinkles on the Rock of Gibral-tar,
or for Gall to have moun-ted a lad-der and ma-nip-u-lated the Dome of the
Pan-theon. Still, in that fam-ous work of his, Lavater not only treats of
the vari-ous faces of men, but also at-tent-ively stud-ies the faces of
horses, birds, ser-pents, and fish; and dwells in de-tail upon the
modi-fic-a-tions of ex-pres-sion dis-cern-ible therein. Nor have Gall and his
dis-ciple Spurzheim failed to throw out some hints touch-ing the
phren-o-lo-gical char-ac-ter-ist-ics of other be-ings than man. There-fore,
though I am but ill qual-i-fied for a pi-on-eer, in the ap-plic-a-tion of
these two semi-sci-ences to the whale, I will do my en-deavor. I try all
things; I achieve what I can.

Physiognom-ic-ally re-garded, the Sperm Whale is an an-om-al-ous creature. He
has no proper nose. And since the nose is the cent-ral and most
con-spicu-ous of the fea-tures; and since it per-haps most mod-i-fies and
fi-nally con-trols their com-bined ex-pres-sion; hence it would seem that
its en-tire ab-sence, as an ex-ternal ap-pend-age, must very largely af-fect
the coun-ten-ance of the whale. For as in land-scape garden-ing, a spire,
cu-pola, monu-ment, or tower of some sort, is deemed al-most in-dis-pens-able
to the com-ple-tion of the scene; so no face can be physiognom-ic-ally in
keep-ing without the el-ev-ated open-work bel-fry of the nose. Dash the
nose from Phidias’s marble Jove, and what a sorry re-mainder!
Never-the-less, Le-viathan is of so mighty a mag-nitude, all his
pro-por-tions are so stately, that the same de-fi-ciency which in the
sculp-tured Jove were hideous, in him is no blem-ish at all. Nay, it is
an ad-ded grandeur. A nose to the whale would have been im-per-tin-ent. As
on your physiognom-ical voy-age you sail round his vast head in your
jolly-boat, your noble con-cep-tions of him are never in-sul-ted by the
re-flec-tion that he has a nose to be pulled. A pes-ti-lent con-ceit, which
so of-ten will in-sist upon ob-trud-ing even when be-hold-ing the migh-ti-est
royal beadle on his throne.

In some par-tic-u-lars, per-haps the most im-pos-ing physiognom-ical view to
be had of the Sperm Whale, is that of the full front of his head. This
as-pect is sub-lime.

In thought, a fine hu-man brow is like the East when troubled with the
morn-ing. In the re-pose of the pas-ture, the curled brow of the bull has
a touch of the grand in it. Push-ing heavy can-non up moun-tain de-files,
the ele-phant’s brow is majestic. Hu-man or an-imal, the mys-tical brow is
as that great golden seal af-fixed by the Ger-man em-per-ors to their
de-crees. It sig-ni-fies—“God: done this day by my hand.” But in most
creatures, nay in man him-self, very of-ten the brow is but a mere strip
of alpine land ly-ing along the snow line. Few are the fore-heads which
like Shakespeare’s or Mel-anc-thon’s rise so high, and des-cend so low,
that the eyes them-selves seem clear, eternal, tide-less moun-tain lakes;
and all above them in the fore-head’s wrinkles, you seem to track the
antlered thoughts des-cend-ing there to drink, as the High-land hunters
track the snow prints of the deer. But in the great Sperm Whale, this
high and mighty god-like dig-nity in-her-ent in the brow is so im-mensely
amp-li-fied, that gaz-ing on it, in that full front view, you feel the
Deity and the dread powers more for-cibly than in be-hold-ing any other
ob-ject in liv-ing nature. For you see no one point pre-cisely; not one
dis-tinct fea-ture is re-vealed; no nose, eyes, ears, or mouth; no face;
he has none, proper; noth-ing but that one broad firm-a-ment of a
fore-head, pleated with riddles; dumbly lower-ing with the doom of boats,
and ships, and men. Nor, in pro-file, does this won-drous brow di-min-ish;
though that way viewed its grandeur does not dom-in-eer upon you so. In
pro-file, you plainly per-ceive that ho-ri-zontal, semi-cres-centic
de-pres-sion in the fore-head’s middle, which, in man, is Lavater’s mark
of genius.

But how? Genius in the Sperm Whale? Has the Sperm Whale ever writ-ten a
book, spoken a speech? No, his great genius is de-clared in his do-ing
noth-ing par-tic-u-lar to prove it. It is moreover de-clared in his
pyr-amidical si-lence. And this re-minds me that had the great Sperm Whale
been known to the young Ori-ent World, he would have been dei-fied by
their child-ma-gian thoughts. They dei-fied the cro-codile of the Nile,
be-cause the cro-codile is tongue-less; and the Sperm Whale has no tongue,
or at least it is so ex-ceed-ingly small, as to be in-cap-able of
pro-tru-sion. If here-after any highly cul-tured, po-et-ical na-tion shall
lure back to their birth-right, the merry May-day gods of old; and
liv-ingly en-throne them again in the now egot-ist-ical sky; in the now
un-haunted hill; then be sure, ex-al-ted to Jove’s high seat, the great
Sperm Whale shall lord it.

Cham-po-l-lion de-ciphered the wrinkled gran-ite hiero-glyph-ics. But there is
no Cham-po-l-lion to de-cipher the Egypt of every man’s and every be-ing’s
face. Physiognomy, like every other hu-man sci-ence, is but a passing
fable. If then, Sir Wil-liam Jones, who read in thirty lan-guages, could
not read the simplest peas-ant’s face in its pro-founder and more subtle
mean-ings, how may un-lettered Ish-mael hope to read the aw-ful Chaldee of
the Sperm Whale’s brow? I but put that brow be-fore you. Read it if you
can.


CHAPTER 80. The Nut.

If the Sperm Whale be physiognom-ic-ally a Sph-inx, to the phren-o-lo-gist
his brain seems that geo-met-rical circle which it is im-possible to
square.

In the full-grown creature the skull will meas-ure at least twenty feet
in length. Un-hinge the lower jaw, and the side view of this skull is as
the side of a mod-er-ately in-clined plane rest-ing through-out on a level
base. But in life—as we have else-where seen—this in-clined plane is
an-gu-larly filled up, and al-most squared by the enorm-ous su-per-in-cum-bent
mass of the junk and sperm. At the high end the skull forms a crater to
bed that part of the mass; while un-der the long floor of this crater—in
an-other cav-ity sel-dom ex-ceed-ing ten inches in length and as many in
depth—re-poses the mere hand-ful of this mon-ster’s brain. The brain is at
least twenty feet from his ap-par-ent fore-head in life; it is hid-den away
be-hind its vast out-works, like the in-ner-most cit-adel within the
amp-li-fied for-ti-fic-a-tions of Que-bec. So like a choice cas-ket is it
secreted in him, that I have known some whale-men who per-emp-tor-ily deny
that the Sperm Whale has any other brain than that palp-able semb-lance
of one formed by the cu-bic-yards of his sperm magazine. Ly-ing in
strange folds, courses, and con-vo-lu-tions, to their ap-pre-hen-sions, it
seems more in keep-ing with the idea of his gen-eral might to re-gard that
mys-tic part of him as the seat of his in-tel-li-gence.

It is plain, then, that phren-o-lo-gic-ally the head of this Le-viathan, in
the creature’s liv-ing in-tact state, is an en-tire de-lu-sion. As for his
true brain, you can then see no in-dic-a-tions of it, nor feel any. The
whale, like all things that are mighty, wears a false brow to the
com-mon world.

If you un-load his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear view
of its rear end, which is the high end, you will be struck by its
re-semb-lance to the hu-man skull, be-held in the same situ-ation, and from
the same point of view. Indeed, place this re-versed skull (scaled down
to the hu-man mag-nitude) among a plate of men’s skulls, and you would
in-vol-un-tar-ily con-found it with them; and re-mark-ing the de-pres-sions on
one part of its sum-mit, in phren-o-lo-gical phrase you would say—This man
had no self-es-teem, and no ven-er-a-tion. And by those neg-a-tions,
con-sidered along with the af-firm-at-ive fact of his prodi-gious bulk and
power, you can best form to your-self the truest, though not the most
ex-hil-ar-at-ing con-cep-tion of what the most ex-al-ted po-tency is.

But if from the com-par-at-ive di-men-sions of the whale’s proper brain, you
deem it in-cap-able of be-ing ad-equately charted, then I have an-other idea
for you. If you at-tent-ively re-gard al-most any quad-ruped’s spine, you
will be struck with the re-semb-lance of its ver-tebræ to a strung
neck-lace of dwarfed skulls, all bear-ing rudi-mental re-semb-lance to the
skull proper. It is a Ger-man con-ceit, that the ver-tebræ are ab-so-lutely
un-developed skulls. But the curi-ous ex-ternal re-semb-lance, I take it the
Ger-mans were not the first men to per-ceive. A for-eign friend once
poin-ted it out to me, in the skel-eton of a foe he had slain, and with
the ver-tebræ of which he was in-lay-ing, in a sort of basso-re-lievo, the
beaked prow of his ca-noe. Now, I con-sider that the phren-o-lo-gists have
omit-ted an im-port-ant thing in not push-ing their in-vest-ig-a-tions from the
cere-bel-lum through the spinal canal. For I be-lieve that much of a man’s
char-ac-ter will be found be-tokened in his back-bone. I would rather feel
your spine than your skull, who-ever you are. A thin joist of a spine
never yet up-held a full and noble soul. I re-joice in my spine, as in
the firm au-da-cious staff of that flag which I fling half out to the
world.

Ap-ply this spinal branch of phren-o-logy to the Sperm Whale. His cra-nial
cav-ity is con-tinu-ous with the first neck-ver-tebra; and in that ver-tebra
the bot-tom of the spinal canal will meas-ure ten inches across, be-ing
eight in height, and of a tri-an-gu-lar fig-ure with the base down-wards. As
it passes through the re-main-ing ver-tebræ the canal tapers in size, but
for a con-sid-er-able dis-tance re-mains of large ca-pa-city. Now, of course,
this canal is filled with much the same strangely fibrous sub-stance—the
spinal cord—as the brain; and dir-ectly com-mu-nic-ates with the brain. And
what is still more, for many feet after emer-ging from the brain’s
cav-ity, the spinal cord re-mains of an un-decreas-ing girth, al-most equal
to that of the brain. Under all these cir-cum-stances, would it be
un-reas-on-able to sur-vey and map out the whale’s spine phren-o-lo-gic-ally?
For, viewed in this light, the won-der-ful com-par-at-ive small-ness of his
brain proper is more than com-pensated by the won-der-ful com-par-at-ive
mag-nitude of his spinal cord.

But leav-ing this hint to op-er-ate as it may with the phren-o-lo-gists, I
would merely as-sume the spinal the-ory for a mo-ment, in ref-er-ence to the
Sperm Whale’s hump. This au-gust hump, if I mis-take not, rises over one
of the lar-ger ver-tebræ, and is, there-fore, in some sort, the outer
con-vex mould of it. From its re-l-at-ive situ-ation then, I should call
this high hump the or-gan of firm-ness or in-dom-it-able-ness in the Sperm
Whale. And that the great mon-ster is in-dom-it-able, you will yet have
reason to know.


CHAPTER 81. The Pequod Meets The Vir-gin.

The pre-des-tin-ated day ar-rived, and we duly met the ship Jung-frau,
Der-ick De Deer, mas-ter, of Bre-men.

At one time the greatest whal-ing people in the world, the Dutch and
Ger-mans are now among the least; but here and there at very wide
in-ter-vals of lat-it-ude and lon-git-ude, you still oc-ca-sion-ally meet with
their flag in the Pa-cific.

For some reason, the Jung-frau seemed quite eager to pay her re-spects.
While yet some dis-tance from the Pequod, she roun-ded to, and drop-ping a
boat, her cap-tain was im-pelled to-wards us, im-pa-tiently stand-ing in the
bows in-stead of the stern.

“What has he in his hand there?” cried Star-buck, point-ing to some-thing
wav-ingly held by the Ger-man. “Im-possible!—a lamp-feeder!”

“Not that,” said Stubb, “no, no, it’s a cof-fee-pot, Mr. Star-buck; he’s
com-ing off to make us our cof-fee, is the Yar-man; don’t you see that big
tin can there along-side of him?—that’s his boil-ing wa-ter. Oh! he’s all
right, is the Yar-man.”

“Go along with you,” cried Flask, “it’s a lamp-feeder and an oil-can.
He’s out of oil, and has come a-beg-ging.”

However curi-ous it may seem for an oil-ship to be bor-row-ing oil on the
whale-ground, and how-ever much it may in-ver-tedly con-tra-dict the old
pro-verb about car-ry-ing coals to New-castle, yet some-times such a thing
really hap-pens; and in the present case Cap-tain Der-ick De Deer did
in-dubit-ably con-duct a lamp-feeder as Flask did de-clare.

As he moun-ted the deck, Ahab ab-ruptly ac-cos-ted him, without at all
heed-ing what he had in his hand; but in his broken lingo, the Ger-man
soon evinced his com-plete ig-nor-ance of the White Whale; im-me-di-ately
turn-ing the con-ver-sa-tion to his lamp-feeder and oil can, with some
re-marks touch-ing his hav-ing to turn into his ham-mock at night in
pro-found dark-ness—his last drop of Bre-men oil be-ing gone, and not a
single fly-ing-fish yet cap-tured to sup-ply the de-fi-ciency; con-clud-ing by
hint-ing that his ship was in-deed what in the Fish-ery is tech-nic-ally
called a _clean_ one (that is, an empty one), well de-serving the name
of Jung-frau or the Vir-gin.

His ne-ces-sit-ies sup-plied, Der-ick de-par-ted; but he had not gained his
ship’s side, when whales were al-most sim-ul-tan-eously raised from the
mast-heads of both ves-sels; and so eager for the chase was Der-ick, that
without paus-ing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard, he slewed
round his boat and made after the le-viathan lamp-feed-ers.

Now, the game hav-ing risen to lee-ward, he and the other three Ger-man
boats that soon fol-lowed him, had con-sid-er-ably the start of the
Pequod’s keels. There were eight whales, an av-er-age pod. Aware of their
danger, they were go-ing all abreast with great speed straight be-fore
the wind, rub-bing their flanks as closely as so many spans of horses in
har-ness. They left a great, wide wake, as though con-tinu-ally un-rolling
a great wide parch-ment upon the sea.

Full in this rapid wake, and many fathoms in the rear, swam a huge,
humped old bull, which by his com-par-at-ively slow pro-gress, as well as
by the un-usual yel-low-ish in-crust-a-tions over-grow-ing him, seemed
af-flic-ted with the jaun-dice, or some other in-firm-ity. Whether this
whale be-longed to the pod in ad-vance, seemed ques-tion-able; for it is
not cus-tom-ary for such ven-er-able le-viath-ans to be at all so-cial.
Never-the-less, he stuck to their wake, though in-deed their back wa-ter
must have re-tarded him, be-cause the white-bone or swell at his broad
muzzle was a dashed one, like the swell formed when two hos-tile
cur-rents meet. His spout was short, slow, and la-bor-i-ous; com-ing forth
with a chok-ing sort of gush, and spend-ing it-self in torn shreds,
fol-lowed by strange sub-ter-ranean com-mo-tions in him, which seemed to
have egress at his other bur-ied ex-tremity, caus-ing the wa-ters be-hind
him to up-bubble.

“Who’s got some paregoric?” said Stubb, “he has the stom-ach-ache, I’m
afraid. Lord, think of hav-ing half an acre of stom-ach-ache! Ad-verse
winds are hold-ing mad Christ-mas in him, boys. It’s the first foul wind
I ever knew to blow from astern; but look, did ever whale yaw so
be-fore? it must be, he’s lost his tiller.”

As an over-laden In-dia-man bear-ing down the Hin-dostan coast with a deck
load of frightened horses, ca-reens, bur-ies, rolls, and wal-lows on her
way; so did this old whale heave his aged bulk, and now and then partly
turn-ing over on his cum-brous rib-ends, ex-pose the cause of his de-vi-ous
wake in the un-nat-ural stump of his star-board fin. Whether he had lost
that fin in battle, or had been born without it, it were hard to say.

“Only wait a bit, old chap, and I’ll give ye a sling for that wounded
arm,” cried cruel Flask, point-ing to the whale-line near him.

“Mind he don’t sling thee with it,” cried Star-buck. “Give way, or the
Ger-man will have him.”

With one in-tent all the com-bined rival boats were poin-ted for this one
fish, be-cause not only was he the largest, and there-fore the most
valu-able whale, but he was nearest to them, and the other whales were
go-ing with such great ve-lo-city, moreover, as al-most to defy pur-suit for
the time. At this junc-ture the Pequod’s keels had shot by the three
Ger-man boats last lowered; but from the great start he had had,
Der-ick’s boat still led the chase, though every mo-ment neared by his
for-eign rivals. The only thing they feared, was, that from be-ing
already so nigh to his mark, he would be en-abled to dart his iron
be-fore they could com-pletely over-take and pass him. As for Der-ick, he
seemed quite con-fid-ent that this would be the case, and oc-ca-sion-ally
with a de-rid-ing ges-ture shook his lamp-feeder at the other boats.

“The un-gra-cious and un-grate-ful dog!” cried Star-buck; “he mocks and
dares me with the very poor-box I filled for him not five minutes
ago!”—then in his old in-tense whis-per—“Give way, grey-hounds! Dog to
it!”

“I tell ye what it is, men”—cried Stubb to his crew—“it’s against my
re-li-gion to get mad; but I’d like to eat that vil-lain-ous
Yar-man—Pull—won’t ye? Are ye go-ing to let that ras-cal beat ye? Do ye
love brandy? A hogshead of brandy, then, to the best man. Come, why
don’t some of ye burst a blood-ves-sel? Who’s that been drop-ping an
an-chor over-board—we don’t budge an inch—we’re be-calmed. Hal-loo, here’s
grass grow-ing in the boat’s bot-tom—and by the Lord, the mast there’s
bud-ding. This won’t do, boys. Look at that Yar-man! The short and long
of it is, men, will ye spit fire or not?”

“Oh! see the suds he makes!” cried Flask, dan-cing up and down—“What a
hump—Oh, _do_ pile on the beef—lays like a log! Oh! my lads, _do_
spring—slap-jacks and qua-hogs for sup-per, you know, my lads—baked clams
and muffins—oh, _do_, _do_, spring,—he’s a hun-dred bar-reller—don’t lose
him now—don’t oh, _don’t!_—see that Yar-man—Oh, won’t ye pull for your
duff, my lads—such a sog! such a sog-ger! Don’t ye love sperm? There
goes three thou-sand dol-lars, men!—a bank!—a whole bank! The bank of
Eng-land!—Oh, _do_, _do_, _do!_—What’s that Yar-man about now?”

At this mo-ment Der-ick was in the act of pitch-ing his lamp-feeder at the
ad-van-cing boats, and also his oil-can; per-haps with the double view of
re-tard-ing his rivals’ way, and at the same time eco-nom-ic-ally
ac-cel-er-at-ing his own by the mo-ment-ary im-petus of the back-ward toss.

“The un-man-nerly Dutch dog-ger!” cried Stubb. “Pull now, men, like fifty
thou-sand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired dev-ils. What d’ye say,
Tasht-ego; are you the man to snap your spine in two-and-twenty pieces
for the honor of old Gay-head? What d’ye say?”

“I say, pull like god-dam,”—cried the In-dian.

Fiercely, but evenly in-cited by the taunts of the Ger-man, the Pequod’s
three boats now began ran-ging al-most abreast; and, so dis-posed,
mo-ment-ar-ily neared him. In that fine, loose, chiv-al-rous at-ti-tude of the
heads-man when draw-ing near to his prey, the three mates stood up
proudly, oc-ca-sion-ally back-ing the after oars-man with an ex-hil-ar-at-ing
cry of, “There she slides, now! Hur-rah for the white-ash breeze! Down
with the Yar-man! Sail over him!”

But so de-cided an ori-ginal start had Der-ick had, that spite of all
their gal-lantry, he would have proved the vic-tor in this race, had not
a right-eous judg-ment des-cen-ded upon him in a crab which caught the
blade of his mid-ship oars-man. While this clumsy lub-ber was striv-ing to
free his white-ash, and while, in con-sequence, Der-ick’s boat was nigh
to cap-siz-ing, and he thun-der-ing away at his men in a mighty rage;—that
was a good time for Star-buck, Stubb, and Flask. With a shout, they took
a mor-tal start for-wards, and slant-ingly ranged up on the Ger-man’s
quarter. An in-stant more, and all four boats were di-ag-on-ic-ally in the
whale’s im-me-di-ate wake, while stretch-ing from them, on both sides, was
the foam-ing swell that he made.

It was a ter-rific, most pi-ti-able, and mad-den-ing sight. The whale was
now go-ing head out, and send-ing his spout be-fore him in a con-tinual
tor-men-ted jet; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony of
fright. Now to this hand, now to that, he yawed in his fal-ter-ing
flight, and still at every bil-low that he broke, he spas-mod-ic-ally sank
in the sea, or side-ways rolled to-wards the sky his one beat-ing fin. So
have I seen a bird with clipped wing mak-ing af-frighted broken circles
in the air, vainly striv-ing to es-cape the pir-at-ical hawks. But the bird
has a voice, and with plaint-ive cries will make known her fear; but the
fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea, was chained up and en-chanted
in him; he had no voice, save that chok-ing res-pir-a-tion through his
spir-acle, and this made the sight of him un-speak-ably pi-ti-able; while
still, in his amaz-ing bulk, port-cullis jaw, and om-ni-po-tent tail, there
was enough to ap-pal the stoutest man who so pit-ied.

See-ing now that but a very few mo-ments more would give the Pequod’s
boats the ad-vant-age, and rather than be thus foiled of his game, Der-ick
chose to haz-ard what to him must have seemed a most un-usu-ally long
dart, ere the last chance would for ever es-cape.

But no sooner did his har-poon-eer stand up for the stroke, than all
three ti-gers—Queequeg, Tasht-ego, Dag-goo—in-stinct-ively sprang to their
feet, and stand-ing in a di-ag-onal row, sim-ul-tan-eously poin-ted their
barbs; and dar-ted over the head of the Ger-man har-poon-eer, their three
Nan-tucket irons entered the whale. Blind-ing va-pors of foam and
white-fire! The three boats, in the first fury of the whale’s head-long
rush, bumped the Ger-man’s aside with such force, that both Der-ick and
his baffled har-poon-eer were spilled out, and sailed over by the three
fly-ing keels.

“Don’t be afraid, my but-ter-boxes,” cried Stubb, cast-ing a passing
glance upon them as he shot by; “ye’ll be picked up presently—all
right—I saw some sharks astern—St. Bern-ard’s dogs, you know—re-lieve
dis-tressed trav-el-lers. Hur-rah! this is the way to sail now. Every keel
a sun-beam! Hur-rah!—Here we go like three tin kettles at the tail of a
mad cou-gar! This puts me in mind of fasten-ing to an ele-phant in a
tilbury on a plain—makes the wheel-spokes fly, boys, when you fasten to
him that way; and there’s danger of be-ing pitched out too, when you
strike a hill. Hur-rah! this is the way a fel-low feels when he’s go-ing
to Davy Jones—all a rush down an end-less in-clined plane! Hur-rah! this
whale car-ries the ever-last-ing mail!”

But the mon-ster’s run was a brief one. Giv-ing a sud-den gasp, he
tu-mul-tu-ously soun-ded. With a grat-ing rush, the three lines flew round
the log-ger-heads with such a force as to gouge deep grooves in them;
while so fear-ful were the har-poon-eers that this rapid sound-ing would
soon ex-haust the lines, that us-ing all their dex-ter-ous might, they
caught re-peated smoking turns with the rope to hold on; till at
last—ow-ing to the per-pen-dic-u-lar strain from the lead-lined chocks of
the boats, whence the three ropes went straight down into the blue—the
gun-wales of the bows were al-most even with the wa-ter, while the three
sterns tilted high in the air. And the whale soon ceas-ing to sound, for
some time they re-mained in that at-ti-tude, fear-ful of ex-pend-ing more
line, though the po-s-i-tion was a little tick-lish. But though boats have
been taken down and lost in this way, yet it is this “hold-ing on,” as
it is called; this hook-ing up by the sharp barbs of his live flesh from
the back; this it is that of-ten tor-ments the Le-viathan into soon rising
again to meet the sharp lance of his foes. Yet not to speak of the
peril of the thing, it is to be doubted whether this course is al-ways
the best; for it is but reas-on-able to pre-sume, that the longer the
stricken whale stays un-der wa-ter, the more he is ex-hausted. Be-cause,
ow-ing to the enorm-ous sur-face of him—in a full grown sperm whale
some-thing less than 2000 square feet—the pres-sure of the wa-ter is
im-mense. We all know what an as-ton-ish-ing at-mo-spheric weight we
ourselves stand up un-der; even here, above-ground, in the air; how
vast, then, the bur-den of a whale, bear-ing on his back a column of two
hun-dred fathoms of ocean! It must at least equal the weight of fifty
at-mo-spheres. One whale-man has es-tim-ated it at the weight of twenty
line-of-battle ships, with all their guns, and stores, and men on
board.

As the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea, gaz-ing down
into its eternal blue noon; and as not a single groan or cry of any
sort, nay, not so much as a ripple or a bubble came up from its depths;
what lands-man would have thought, that be-neath all that si-lence and
pla-cid-ity, the ut-most mon-ster of the seas was writh-ing and wrench-ing in
agony! Not eight inches of per-pen-dic-u-lar rope were vis-ible at the bows.
Seems it cred-ible that by three such thin threads the great Le-viathan
was sus-pen-ded like the big weight to an eight day clock. Sus-pen-ded? and
to what? To three bits of board. Is this the creature of whom it was
once so tri-umphantly said—“Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons?
or his head with fish-spears? The sword of him that layeth at him
can-not hold, the spear, the dart, nor the haber-geon: he es-teemeth iron
as straw; the ar-row can-not make him flee; darts are coun-ted as stubble;
he laugheth at the shak-ing of a spear!” This the creature? this he? Oh!
that un-ful-fil-ments should fol-low the proph-ets. For with the strength of
a thou-sand thighs in his tail, Le-viathan had run his head un-der the
moun-tains of the sea, to hide him from the Pequod’s fish-spears!

In that slop-ing af-ter-noon sun-light, the shad-ows that the three boats
sent down be-neath the sur-face, must have been long enough and broad
enough to shade half Xer-xes’ army. Who can tell how ap-palling to the
wounded whale must have been such huge phantoms flit-ting over his head!

“Stand by, men; he stirs,” cried Star-buck, as the three lines sud-denly
vi-brated in the wa-ter, dis-tinctly con-duct-ing up-wards to them, as by
mag-netic wires, the life and death throbs of the whale, so that every
oars-man felt them in his seat. The next mo-ment, re-lieved in great part
from the down-ward strain at the bows, the boats gave a sud-den bounce
up-wards, as a small ice-field will, when a dense herd of white bears are
scared from it into the sea.

“Haul in! Haul in!” cried Star-buck again; “he’s rising.”

The lines, of which, hardly an in-stant be-fore, not one hand’s breadth
could have been gained, were now in long quick coils flung back all
drip-ping into the boats, and soon the whale broke wa-ter within two
ship’s lengths of the hunters.

His mo-tions plainly de-noted his ex-treme ex-haus-tion. In most land
an-im-als there are cer-tain valves or flood-gates in many of their veins,
whereby when wounded, the blood is in some de-gree at least in-stantly
shut off in cer-tain dir-ec-tions. Not so with the whale; one of whose
pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies it is to have an en-tire non-valv-u-lar struc-ture of the
blood-ves-sels, so that when pierced even by so small a point as a
har-poon, a deadly drain is at once be-gun upon his whole ar-ter-ial
sys-tem; and when this is heightened by the ex-traordin-ary pres-sure of
wa-ter at a great dis-tance be-low the sur-face, his life may be said to
pour from him in in-cess-ant streams. Yet so vast is the quant-ity of
blood in him, and so dis-tant and nu-mer-ous its in-terior foun-tains, that
he will keep thus bleed-ing and bleed-ing for a con-sid-er-able period; even
as in a drought a river will flow, whose source is in the well-springs
of far-off and un-dis-cern-ible hills. Even now, when the boats pulled
upon this whale, and per-il-ously drew over his sway-ing flukes, and the
lances were dar-ted into him, they were fol-lowed by steady jets from the
new made wound, which kept con-tinu-ally play-ing, while the nat-ural
spout-hole in his head was only at in-ter-vals, how-ever rapid, send-ing
its af-frighted mois-ture into the air. From this last vent no blood yet
came, be-cause no vi-tal part of him had thus far been struck. His life,
as they sig-ni-fic-antly call it, was un-touched.

As the boats now more closely sur-roun-ded him, the whole up-per part of
his form, with much of it that is or-din-ar-ily sub-merged, was plainly
re-vealed. His eyes, or rather the places where his eyes had been, were
be-held. As strange mis-grown masses gather in the knot-holes of the
noblest oaks when pros-trate, so from the points which the whale’s eyes
had once oc-cu-pied, now pro-truded blind bulbs, hor-ribly pi-ti-able to see.
But pity there was none. For all his old age, and his one arm, and his
blind eyes, he must die the death and be murdered, in or-der to light
the gay bridals and other merry-mak-ings of men, and also to il-lu-min-ate
the sol-emn churches that preach un-con-di-tional in-of-fens-ive-ness by all to
all. Still rolling in his blood, at last he par-tially dis-closed a
strangely dis-col-oured bunch or pro-tuber-ance, the size of a bushel, low
down on the flank.

“A nice spot,” cried Flask; “just let me prick him there once.”

“Avast!” cried Star-buck, “there’s no need of that!”

But hu-mane Star-buck was too late. At the in-stant of the dart an
ul-cer-ous jet shot from this cruel wound, and goaded by it into more
than suf-fer-able an-guish, the whale now spout-ing thick blood, with swift
fury blindly dar-ted at the craft, be-spat-ter-ing them and their glory-ing
crews all over with showers of gore, cap-siz-ing Flask’s boat and mar-ring
the bows. It was his death stroke. For, by this time, so spent was he
by loss of blood, that he help-lessly rolled away from the wreck he had
made; lay pant-ing on his side, im-pot-ently flapped with his stumped fin,
then over and over slowly re-volved like a wan-ing world; turned up the
white secrets of his belly; lay like a log, and died. It was most
piteous, that last ex-pir-ing spout. As when by un-seen hands the wa-ter is
gradu-ally drawn off from some mighty foun-tain, and with half-stifled
mel-an-choly gurg-lings the spray-column lowers and lowers to the
ground—so the last long dy-ing spout of the whale.

Soon, while the crews were await-ing the ar-rival of the ship, the body
showed symp-toms of sink-ing with all its treas-ures un-rifled.
Im-me-di-ately, by Star-buck’s or-ders, lines were se-cured to it at
dif-fer-ent points, so that ere long every boat was a buoy; the sunken
whale be-ing sus-pen-ded a few inches be-neath them by the cords. By very
heed-ful man-age-ment, when the ship drew nigh, the whale was trans-ferred
to her side, and was strongly se-cured there by the stiffest
fluke-chains, for it was plain that un-less ar-ti-fi-cially up-held, the
body would at once sink to the bot-tom.

It so chanced that al-most upon first cut-ting into him with the spade,
the en-tire length of a cor-roded har-poon was found im-bed-ded in his
flesh, on the lower part of the bunch be-fore de-scribed. But as the
stumps of har-poons are fre-quently found in the dead bod-ies of cap-tured
whales, with the flesh per-fectly healed around them, and no prom-in-ence
of any kind to de-note their place; there-fore, there must needs have
been some other un-known reason in the present case fully to ac-count for
the ul-cer-a-tion al-luded to. But still more curi-ous was the fact of a
lance-head of stone be-ing found in him, not far from the bur-ied iron,
the flesh per-fectly firm about it. Who had dar-ted that stone lance? And
when? It might have been dar-ted by some Nor’ West In-dian long be-fore
Amer-ica was dis-covered.

What other mar-vels might have been rum-maged out of this mon-strous
cab-inet there is no telling. But a sud-den stop was put to fur-ther
dis-cov-er-ies, by the ship’s be-ing un-pre-ced-en-tedly dragged over side-ways
to the sea, ow-ing to the body’s im-mensely in-creas-ing tend-ency to sink.
However, Star-buck, who had the or-der-ing of af-fairs, hung on to it to
the last; hung on to it so res-ol-utely, in-deed, that when at length the
ship would have been cap-sized, if still per-sist-ing in lock-ing arms with
the body; then, when the com-mand was given to break clear from it, such
was the im-mov-able strain upon the tim-ber-heads to which the
fluke-chains and cables were fastened, that it was im-possible to cast
them off. Mean-time everything in the Pequod was aslant. To cross to the
other side of the deck was like walk-ing up the steep gabled roof of a
house. The ship groaned and gasped. Many of the ivory in-lay-ings of her
bul-warks and cab-ins were star-ted from their places, by the un-nat-ural
dis-lo-ca-tion. In vain hand-spikes and crows were brought to bear upon the
im-mov-able fluke-chains, to pry them adrift from the tim-ber-heads; and so
low had the whale now settled that the sub-merged ends could not be at
all ap-proached, while every mo-ment whole tons of pon-der-os-ity seemed
ad-ded to the sink-ing bulk, and the ship seemed on the point of go-ing
over.

“Hold on, hold on, won’t ye?” cried Stubb to the body, “don’t be in
such a devil of a hurry to sink! By thun-der, men, we must do some-thing
or go for it. No use pry-ing there; avast, I say with your hand-spikes,
and run one of ye for a prayer book and a pen-knife, and cut the big
chains.”

“Knife? Aye, aye,” cried Queequeg, and seiz-ing the car-penter’s heavy
hatchet, he leaned out of a porthole, and steel to iron, began slash-ing
at the largest fluke-chains. But a few strokes, full of sparks, were
given, when the ex-ceed-ing strain ef-fected the rest. With a ter-rific
snap, every fasten-ing went adrift; the ship righted, the car-case sank.

Now, this oc-ca-sional in-ev-it-able sink-ing of the re-cently killed Sperm
Whale is a very curi-ous thing; nor has any fish-er-man yet ad-equately
ac-coun-ted for it. Usu-ally the dead Sperm Whale floats with great
buoy-ancy, with its side or belly con-sid-er-ably el-ev-ated above the
sur-face. If the only whales that thus sank were old, mea-gre, and
broken-hearted creatures, their pads of lard di-min-ished and all their
bones heavy and rheum-atic; then you might with some reason as-sert that
this sink-ing is caused by an un-com-mon spe-cific grav-ity in the fish so
sink-ing, con-sequent upon this ab-sence of buoy-ant mat-ter in him. But it
is not so. For young whales, in the highest health, and swell-ing with
noble as-pir-a-tions, pre-ma-turely cut off in the warm flush and May of
life, with all their pant-ing lard about them; even these brawny,
buoy-ant her-oes do some-times sink.

Be it said, how-ever, that the Sperm Whale is far less li-able to this
ac-ci-dent than any other spe-cies. Where one of that sort go down, twenty
Right Whales do. This dif-fer-ence in the spe-cies is no doubt im-put-able
in no small de-gree to the greater quant-ity of bone in the Right Whale;
his Vene-tian blinds alone some-times weigh-ing more than a ton; from this
in-cum-brance the Sperm Whale is wholly free. But there are in-stances
where, after the lapse of many hours or sev-eral days, the sunken whale
again rises, more buoy-ant than in life. But the reason of this is
ob-vi-ous. Gases are gen-er-ated in him; he swells to a prodi-gious
mag-nitude; be-comes a sort of an-imal bal-loon. A line-of-battle ship
could hardly keep him un-der then. In the Shore Whal-ing, on sound-ings,
among the Bays of New Zea-l-and, when a Right Whale gives token of
sink-ing, they fasten buoys to him, with plenty of rope; so that when
the body has gone down, they know where to look for it when it shall
have as-cen-ded again.

It was not long after the sink-ing of the body that a cry was heard from
the Pequod’s mast-heads, an-noun-cing that the Jung-frau was again
lower-ing her boats; though the only spout in sight was that of a
Fin-Back, be-long-ing to the spe-cies of un-cap-tur-able whales, be-cause of
its in-cred-ible power of swim-ming. Never-the-less, the Fin-Back’s spout is
so sim-ilar to the Sperm Whale’s, that by un-skil-ful fish-er-men it is
of-ten mis-taken for it. And con-sequently Der-ick and all his host were
now in vali-ant chase of this un-near-able brute. The Vir-gin crowding all
sail, made after her four young keels, and thus they all dis-ap-peared
far to lee-ward, still in bold, hope-ful chase.

Oh! many are the Fin-Backs, and many are the Der-icks, my friend.


CHAPTER 82. The Honor and Glory of Whal-ing.

There are some en-ter-prises in which a care-ful dis-order-li-ness is the
true method.

The more I dive into this mat-ter of whal-ing, and push my re-searches up
to the very spring-head of it so much the more am I im-pressed with its
great hon-or-able-ness and an-tiquity; and es-pe-cially when I find so many
great demi-gods and her-oes, proph-ets of all sorts, who one way or other
have shed dis-tinc-tion upon it, I am trans-por-ted with the re-flec-tion
that I my-self be-long, though but sub-or-din-ately, to so em-blazoned a
fra-tern-ity.

The gal-lant Perseus, a son of Jupiter, was the first whale-man; and to
the eternal honor of our call-ing be it said, that the first whale
at-tacked by our broth-er-hood was not killed with any sor-did in-tent.
Those were the knightly days of our pro-fes-sion, when we only bore arms
to suc-cor the dis-tressed, and not to fill men’s lamp-feed-ers. Every one
knows the fine story of Perseus and Andromeda; how the lovely
Andromeda, the daugh-ter of a king, was tied to a rock on the sea-coast,
and as Le-viathan was in the very act of car-ry-ing her off, Perseus, the
prince of whale-men, in-trep-idly ad-van-cing, har-pooned the mon-ster, and
de-livered and mar-ried the maid. It was an ad-mir-able artistic ex-ploit,
rarely achieved by the best har-poon-eers of the present day; inas-much as
this Le-viathan was slain at the very first dart. And let no man doubt
this Arkite story; for in the an-cient Joppa, now Jaffa, on the Syrian
coast, in one of the Pagan temples, there stood for many ages the vast
skel-eton of a whale, which the city’s le-gends and all the in-hab-it-ants
as-ser-ted to be the identical bones of the mon-ster that Perseus slew.
When the Ro-mans took Joppa, the same skel-eton was car-ried to Italy in
tri-umph. What seems most sin-gu-lar and sug-gest-ively im-port-ant in this
story, is this: it was from Joppa that Jo-nah set sail.

Akin to the ad-ven-ture of Perseus and Andromeda—in-deed, by some sup-posed
to be in-dir-ectly de-rived from it—is that fam-ous story of St. Ge-orge and
the Dragon; which dragon I main-tain to have been a whale; for in many
old chron-icles whales and dragons are strangely jumbled to-gether, and
of-ten stand for each other. “Thou art as a lion of the wa-ters, and as a
dragon of the sea,” saith Ezekiel; hereby, plainly mean-ing a whale; in
truth, some ver-sions of the Bible use that word it-self. Besides, it
would much sub-tract from the glory of the ex-ploit had St. Ge-orge but
en-countered a crawl-ing rep-tile of the land, in-stead of do-ing battle
with the great mon-ster of the deep. Any man may kill a snake, but only
a Perseus, a St. Ge-orge, a Coffin, have the heart in them to march
boldly up to a whale.

Let not the mod-ern paint-ings of this scene mis-lead us; for though the
creature en-countered by that vali-ant whale-man of old is vaguely
rep-res-en-ted of a griffin-like shape, and though the battle is de-pic-ted
on land and the saint on horse-back, yet con-sid-er-ing the great ig-nor-ance
of those times, when the true form of the whale was un-known to artists;
and con-sid-er-ing that as in Perseus’ case, St. Ge-orge’s whale might have
crawled up out of the sea on the beach; and con-sid-er-ing that the an-imal
rid-den by St. Ge-orge might have been only a large seal, or sea-horse;
bear-ing all this in mind, it will not ap-pear al-to-gether in-com-pat-ible
with the sac-red le-gend and the an-cientest draughts of the scene, to
hold this so-called dragon no other than the great Le-viathan him-self.
In fact, placed be-fore the strict and pier-cing truth, this whole story
will fare like that fish, flesh, and fowl idol of the Phil-istines,
Dagon by name; who be-ing planted be-fore the ark of Is-rael, his horse’s
head and both the palms of his hands fell off from him, and only the
stump or fishy part of him re-mained. Thus, then, one of our own noble
stamp, even a whale-man, is the tu-telary guard-ian of Eng-land; and by
good rights, we har-poon-eers of Nan-tucket should be en-rolled in the most
noble or-der of St. Ge-orge. And there-fore, let not the knights of that
hon-or-able com-pany (none of whom, I ven-ture to say, have ever had to do
with a whale like their great pat-ron), let them never eye a Nan-tuck-eter
with dis-dain, since even in our wool-len frocks and tarred trowsers we
are much bet-ter en-titled to St. Ge-orge’s dec-or-a-tion than they.

Whether to ad-mit Her-cules among us or not, con-cern-ing this I long
re-mained du-bi-ous: for though ac-cord-ing to the Greek myth-o-lo-gies, that
an-tique Crock-ett and Kit Car-son—that brawny doer of re-joicing good
deeds, was swal-lowed down and thrown up by a whale; still, whether that
strictly makes a whale-man of him, that might be mooted. It nowhere
ap-pears that he ever ac-tu-ally har-pooned his fish, un-less, in-deed, from
the in-side. Never-the-less, he may be deemed a sort of in-vol-un-tary
whale-man; at any rate the whale caught him, if he did not the whale. I
claim him for one of our clan.

But, by the best con-tra-dict-ory au-thor-it-ies, this Gre-cian story of
Her-cules and the whale is con-sidered to be de-rived from the still more
an-cient Hebrew story of Jo-nah and the whale; and vice versâ; cer-tainly
they are very sim-ilar. If I claim the demi-god then, why not the
prophet?

Nor do her-oes, saints, demi-gods, and proph-ets alone com-prise the whole
roll of our or-der. Our grand mas-ter is still to be named; for like
royal kings of old times, we find the head wa-ters of our fra-tern-ity in
noth-ing short of the great gods them-selves. That won-drous ori-ental
story is now to be re-hearsed from the Shaster, which gives us the dread
Vish-noo, one of the three per-sons in the god-head of the Hin-doos; gives
us this di-vine Vish-noo him-self for our Lord;—Vish-noo, who, by the first
of his ten earthly in-carn-a-tions, has for ever set apart and sanc-ti-fied
the whale. When Brahma, or the God of Gods, saith the Shaster, re-solved
to re-cre-ate the world after one of its peri-od-ical dis-sol-u-tions, he gave
birth to Vish-noo, to preside over the work; but the Ve-das, or mys-tical
books, whose per-usal would seem to have been in-dis-pens-able to Vish-noo
be-fore be-gin-ning the cre-ation, and which there-fore must have con-tained
some-thing in the shape of prac-tical hints to young ar-chi-tects, these
Ve-das were ly-ing at the bot-tom of the wa-ters; so Vish-noo be-came
in-carn-ate in a whale, and sound-ing down in him to the ut-ter-most depths,
res-cued the sac-red volumes. Was not this Vish-noo a whale-man, then? even
as a man who rides a horse is called a horse-man?

Perseus, St. Ge-orge, Her-cules, Jo-nah, and Vish-noo! there’s a
mem-ber-roll for you! What club but the whale-man’s can head off like
that?


CHAPTER 83. Jo-nah His-tor-ic-ally Regarded.

Re-fer-ence was made to the his-tor-ical story of Jo-nah and the whale in
the pre-ced-ing chapter. Now some Nan-tuck-eters rather dis-trust this
his-tor-ical story of Jo-nah and the whale. But then there were some
scep-tical Greeks and Ro-mans, who, stand-ing out from the or-tho-dox pa-gans
of their times, equally doubted the story of Her-cules and the whale,
and Arion and the dol-phin; and yet their doubt-ing those tra-di-tions did
not make those tra-di-tions one whit the less facts, for all that.

One old Sag-Har-bor whale-man’s chief reason for ques-tion-ing the Hebrew
story was this:—He had one of those quaint old-fash-ioned Bibles,
em-bel-lished with curi-ous, un-scientific plates; one of which rep-res-en-ted
Jo-nah’s whale with two spouts in his head—a pe-cu-li-ar-ity only true with
re-spect to a spe-cies of the Le-viathan (the Right Whale, and the
vari-et-ies of that or-der), con-cern-ing which the fish-er-men have this
say-ing, “A penny roll would choke him”; his swal-low is so very small.
But, to this, Bishop Jebb’s an-ti-cip-at-ive an-swer is ready. It is not
ne-ces-sary, hints the Bishop, that we con-sider Jo-nah as tombed in the
whale’s belly, but as tem-por-ar-ily lodged in some part of his mouth. And
this seems reas-on-able enough in the good Bishop. For truly, the Right
Whale’s mouth would ac-com-mod-ate a couple of whist-tables, and
com-fort-ably seat all the play-ers. Poss-ibly, too, Jo-nah might have
en-sconced him-self in a hol-low tooth; but, on second thoughts, the Right
Whale is tooth-less.

Another reason which Sag-Har-bor (he went by that name) urged for his
want of faith in this mat-ter of the prophet, was some-thing ob-scurely in
ref-er-ence to his in-car-cer-ated body and the whale’s gast-ric juices. But
this ob-jec-tion like-wise falls to the ground, be-cause a Ger-man ex-eget-ist
sup-poses that Jo-nah must have taken refuge in the float-ing body of a
_dead_ whale—even as the French sol-diers in the Rus-sian cam-paign turned
their dead horses into tents, and crawled into them. Besides, it has
been di-vined by other con-tin-ental com-ment-at-ors, that when Jo-nah was
thrown over-board from the Joppa ship, he straight-way ef-fected his
es-cape to an-other ves-sel near by, some ves-sel with a whale for a
fig-ure-head; and, I would add, pos-sibly called “The Whale,” as some
craft are nowadays christened the “Shark,” the “Gull,” the “Eagle.” Nor
have there been want-ing learned ex-eget-ists who have opined that the
whale men-tioned in the book of Jo-nah merely meant a life-pre-server—an
in-flated bag of wind—which the en-dangered prophet swam to, and so was
saved from a wa-tery doom. Poor Sag-Har-bor, there-fore, seems worsted all
round. But he had still an-other reason for his want of faith. It was
this, if I re-mem-ber right: Jo-nah was swal-lowed by the whale in the
Medi-ter-ranean Sea, and after three days he was vomited up some-where
within three days’ jour-ney of Nineveh, a city on the Ti-gris, very much
more than three days’ jour-ney across from the nearest point of the
Medi-ter-ranean coast. How is that?

But was there no other way for the whale to land the prophet within
that short dis-tance of Nineveh? Yes. He might have car-ried him round by
the way of the Cape of Good Hope. But not to speak of the pas-sage
through the whole length of the Medi-ter-ranean, and an-other pas-sage up
the Per-sian Gulf and Red Sea, such a sup-pos-i-tion would in-volve the
com-plete cir-cum-nav-ig-a-tion of all Africa in three days, not to speak of
the Ti-gris wa-ters, near the site of Nineveh, be-ing too shal-low for any
whale to swim in. Besides, this idea of Jo-nah’s weath-er-ing the Cape of
Good Hope at so early a day would wrest the honor of the dis-cov-ery of
that great head-land from Bartho-lomew Diaz, its re-puted dis-coverer, and
so make mod-ern his-tory a liar.

But all these fool-ish ar-gu-ments of old Sag-Har-bor only evinced his
fool-ish pride of reason—a thing still more rep-re-hens-ible in him, see-ing
that he had but little learn-ing ex-cept what he had picked up from the
sun and the sea. I say it only shows his fool-ish, im-pi-ous pride, and
ab-om-in-able, dev-il-ish re-bel-lion against the rev-er-end clergy. For by a
Por-tuguese Cath-olic priest, this very idea of Jo-nah’s go-ing to Nineveh
via the Cape of Good Hope was ad-vanced as a sig-nal mag-ni-fic-a-tion of the
gen-eral mir-acle. And so it was. Besides, to this day, the highly
en-lightened Turks de-voutly be-lieve in the his-tor-ical story of Jo-nah.
And some three cen-tur-ies ago, an Eng-lish trav-el-ler in old Har-ris’s
Voy-ages, speaks of a Turk-ish Mosque built in honor of Jo-nah, in which
Mosque was a mi-ra-cu-lous lamp that burnt without any oil.


CHAPTER 84. Pitch-pol-ing.

To make them run eas-ily and swiftly, the axles of car-riages are
anoin-ted; and for much the same pur-pose, some whalers per-form an
ana-log-ous op-er-a-tion upon their boat; they grease the bot-tom. Nor is it
to be doubted that as such a pro-ced-ure can do no harm, it may pos-sibly
be of no con-tempt-ible ad-vant-age; con-sid-er-ing that oil and wa-ter are
hos-tile; that oil is a slid-ing thing, and that the ob-ject in view is to
make the boat slide bravely. Queequeg be-lieved strongly in anoint-ing
his boat, and one morn-ing not long after the Ger-man ship Jung-frau
dis-ap-peared, took more than cus-tom-ary pains in that oc-cu-pa-tion;
crawl-ing un-der its bot-tom, where it hung over the side, and rub-bing in
the unc-tu-ous-ness as though di-li-gently seek-ing to in-sure a crop of hair
from the craft’s bald keel. He seemed to be work-ing in obed-i-ence to
some par-tic-u-lar presen-ti-ment. Nor did it re-main un-war-ran-ted by the
event.

Towards noon whales were raised; but so soon as the ship sailed down to
them, they turned and fled with swift pre-cip-it-ancy; a dis-ordered
flight, as of Cleo-patra’s barges from Ac-tium.

Never-the-less, the boats pur-sued, and Stubb’s was fore-most. By great
ex-er-tion, Tasht-ego at last suc-ceeded in plant-ing one iron; but the
stricken whale, without at all sound-ing, still con-tin-ued his ho-ri-zontal
flight, with ad-ded fleet-ness. Such un-in-ter-mit-ted strain-ings upon the
planted iron must sooner or later in-ev-it-ably ex-tract it. It be-came
im-per-at-ive to lance the fly-ing whale, or be con-tent to lose him. But to
haul the boat up to his flank was im-possible, he swam so fast and
furi-ous. What then re-mained?

Of all the won-drous devices and dex-ter-it-ies, the sleights of hand and
count-less sub-tleties, to which the vet-eran whale-man is so of-ten forced,
none ex-ceed that fine manœuvre with the lance called pitch-pol-ing. Small
sword, or broad sword, in all its ex-er-cises boasts noth-ing like it. It
is only in-dis-pens-able with an in-vet-er-ate run-ning whale; its grand fact
and fea-ture is the won-der-ful dis-tance to which the long lance is
ac-cur-ately dar-ted from a vi-ol-ently rock-ing, jerking boat, un-der ex-treme
head-way. Steel and wood in-cluded, the en-tire spear is some ten or
twelve feet in length; the staff is much slighter than that of the
har-poon, and also of a lighter ma-ter-ial—pine. It is fur-nished with a
small rope called a warp, of con-sid-er-able length, by which it can be
hauled back to the hand after dart-ing.

But be-fore go-ing fur-ther, it is im-port-ant to men-tion here, that though
the har-poon may be pitch-poled in the same way with the lance, yet it is
sel-dom done; and when done, is still less fre-quently suc-cess-ful, on
ac-count of the greater weight and in-ferior length of the har-poon as
com-pared with the lance, which in ef-fect be-come ser-i-ous draw-backs. As a
gen-eral thing, there-fore, you must first get fast to a whale, be-fore
any pitch-pol-ing comes into play.

Look now at Stubb; a man who from his hu-mor-ous, de-lib-er-ate cool-ness and
equan-im-ity in the direst emer-gen-cies, was spe-cially qual-i-fied to ex-cel
in pitch-pol-ing. Look at him; he stands up-right in the tossed bow of the
fly-ing boat; wrapt in fleecy foam, the tow-ing whale is forty feet
ahead. Hand-ling the long lance lightly, glan-cing twice or thrice along
its length to see if it be ex-actly straight, Stubb whist-lingly gath-ers
up the coil of the warp in one hand, so as to se-cure its free end in
his grasp, leav-ing the rest un-ob-struc-ted. Then hold-ing the lance full
be-fore his waist-band’s middle, he levels it at the whale; when,
cov-er-ing him with it, he stead-ily de-presses the butt-end in his hand,
thereby el-ev-at-ing the point till the weapon stands fairly bal-anced upon
his palm, fif-teen feet in the air. He minds you some-what of a jug-gler,
bal-an-cing a long staff on his chin. Next mo-ment with a rapid, name-less
im-pulse, in a su-perb lofty arch the bright steel spans the foam-ing
dis-tance, and quivers in the life spot of the whale. In-stead of
spark-ling wa-ter, he now spouts red blood.

“That drove the spigot out of him!” cried Stubb. “’Tis July’s im-mor-tal
Fourth; all foun-tains must run wine today! Would now, it were old
Or-leans whis-key, or old Ohio, or un-speak-able old Mononga-hela! Then,
Tasht-ego, lad, I’d have ye hold a cana-kin to the jet, and we’d drink
round it! Yea, ver-ily, hearts alive, we’d brew choice punch in the
spread of his spout-hole there, and from that live punch-bowl quaff the
liv-ing stuff.”

Again and again to such game-some talk, the dex-ter-ous dart is re-peated,
the spear re-turn-ing to its mas-ter like a grey-hound held in skil-ful
leash. The ag-on-ized whale goes into his flurry; the tow-line is
slackened, and the pitch-poler drop-ping astern, folds his hands, and
mutely watches the mon-ster die.


CHAPTER 85. The Foun-tain.

That for six thou-sand years—and no one knows how many mil-lions of ages
be-fore—the great whales should have been spout-ing all over the sea, and
sprink-ling and mis-ti-fy-ing the gar-dens of the deep, as with so many
sprink-ling or mis-ti-fy-ing pots; and that for some cen-tur-ies back,
thou-sands of hunters should have been close by the foun-tain of the
whale, watch-ing these sprink-lings and spout-ings—that all this should
be, and yet, that down to this blessed minute (fif-teen and a quarter
minutes past one o’clock P.M. of this six-teenth day of Decem-ber, A.D.
1851), it should still re-main a prob-lem, whether these spout-ings are,
after all, really wa-ter, or noth-ing but va-por—this is surely a
note-worthy thing.

Let us, then, look at this mat-ter, along with some in-ter-est-ing items
con-tin-gent. Every one knows that by the pe-cu-liar cun-ning of their
gills, the finny tribes in gen-eral breathe the air which at all times
is com-bined with the ele-ment in which they swim; hence, a her-ring or a
cod might live a cen-tury, and never once raise its head above the
sur-face. But ow-ing to his marked in-ternal struc-ture which gives him
reg-u-lar lungs, like a hu-man be-ing’s, the whale can only live by
in-hal-ing the dis-en-gaged air in the open at-mo-sphere. Where-fore the
ne-ces-sity for his peri-od-ical vis-its to the up-per world. But he can-not
in any de-gree breathe through his mouth, for, in his or-din-ary at-ti-tude,
the Sperm Whale’s mouth is bur-ied at least eight feet be-neath the
sur-face; and what is still more, his wind-pipe has no con-nex-ion with his
mouth. No, he breathes through his spir-acle alone; and this is on the
top of his head.

If I say, that in any creature breath-ing is only a func-tion
in-dis-pens-able to vi-tal-ity, inas-much as it with-draws from the air a
cer-tain ele-ment, which be-ing sub-sequently brought into con-tact with the
blood im-parts to the blood its viv-i-fy-ing prin-ciple, I do not think I
shall err; though I may pos-sibly use some su-per-flu-ous sci-entific words.
As-sume it, and it fol-lows that if all the blood in a man could be
aer-ated with one breath, he might then seal up his nos-trils and not
fetch an-other for a con-sid-er-able time. That is to say, he would then
live without breath-ing. Anom-al-ous as it may seem, this is pre-cisely the
case with the whale, who sys-tem-at-ic-ally lives, by in-ter-vals, his full
hour and more (when at the bot-tom) without draw-ing a single breath, or
so much as in any way in-hal-ing a particle of air; for, re-mem-ber, he has
no gills. How is this? Between his ribs and on each side of his spine
he is sup-plied with a re-mark-able in-volved Cretan labyrinth of
ver-mi-celli-like ves-sels, which ves-sels, when he quits the sur-face, are
com-pletely dis-ten-ded with oxy-gen-ated blood. So that for an hour or
more, a thou-sand fathoms in the sea, he car-ries a sur-plus stock of
vi-tal-ity in him, just as the camel cross-ing the wa-ter-less desert
car-ries a sur-plus sup-ply of drink for fu-ture use in its four
sup-ple-ment-ary stom-achs. The ana-tom-ical fact of this labyrinth is
in-dis-put-able; and that the sup-pos-i-tion foun-ded upon it is reas-on-able
and true, seems the more co-gent to me, when I con-sider the oth-er-wise
in-ex-plic-able ob-stin-acy of that le-viathan in _hav-ing his spout-ings out_,
as the fish-er-men phrase it. This is what I mean. If un-mo-les-ted, upon
rising to the sur-face, the Sperm Whale will con-tinue there for a period
of time ex-actly uni-form with all his other un-mo-les-ted risings. Say he
stays el-even minutes, and jets sev-enty times, that is, respires sev-enty
breaths; then whenever he rises again, he will be sure to have his
sev-enty breaths over again, to a minute. Now, if after he fetches a few
breaths you alarm him, so that he sounds, he will be al-ways dodging up
again to make good his reg-u-lar al-low-ance of air. And not till those
sev-enty breaths are told, will he fi-nally go down to stay out his full
term be-low. Re-mark, how-ever, that in dif-fer-ent in-di-vidu-als these rates
are dif-fer-ent; but in any one they are alike. Now, why should the whale
thus in-sist upon hav-ing his spout-ings out, un-less it be to re-plen-ish
his reser-voir of air, ere des-cend-ing for good? How ob-vi-ous is it, too,
that this ne-ces-sity for the whale’s rising ex-poses him to all the fatal
haz-ards of the chase. For not by hook or by net could this vast
le-viathan be caught, when sail-ing a thou-sand fathoms be-neath the
sun-light. Not so much thy skill, then, O hunter, as the great
ne-ces-sit-ies that strike the vic-tory to thee!

In man, breath-ing is in-cess-antly go-ing on—one breath only serving for
two or three pulsa-tions; so that whatever other busi-ness he has to
at-tend to, wak-ing or sleep-ing, breathe he must, or die he will. But the
Sperm Whale only breathes about one sev-enth or Sunday of his time.

It has been said that the whale only breathes through his spout-hole;
if it could truth-fully be ad-ded that his spouts are mixed with wa-ter,
then I opine we should be fur-nished with the reason why his sense of
smell seems ob-lit-er-ated in him; for the only thing about him that at
all an-swers to his nose is that identical spout-hole; and be-ing so
clogged with two ele-ments, it could not be ex-pec-ted to have the power
of smelling. But ow-ing to the mys-tery of the spout—whether it be wa-ter
or whether it be va-por—no ab-so-lute cer-tainty can as yet be ar-rived at
on this head. Sure it is, nev-er-the-less, that the Sperm Whale has no
proper ol-factor-ies. But what does he want of them? No roses, no
vi-ol-ets, no Co-logne-wa-ter in the sea.

Fur-ther-more, as his wind-pipe solely opens into the tube of his spout-ing
canal, and as that long canal—like the grand Erie Canal—is fur-nished
with a sort of locks (that open and shut) for the down-ward re-ten-tion of
air or the up-ward ex-clu-sion of wa-ter, there-fore the whale has no voice;
un-less you in-sult him by say-ing, that when he so strangely rumbles, he
talks through his nose. But then again, what has the whale to say?
Sel-dom have I known any pro-found be-ing that had any-thing to say to this
world, un-less forced to stam-mer out some-thing by way of get-ting a
liv-ing. Oh! happy that the world is such an ex-cel-lent listener!

Now, the spout-ing canal of the Sperm Whale, chiefly in-ten-ded as it is
for the con-vey-ance of air, and for sev-eral feet laid along,
ho-ri-zont-ally, just be-neath the up-per sur-face of his head, and a little
to one side; this curi-ous canal is very much like a gas-pipe laid down
in a city on one side of a street. But the ques-tion re-turns whether
this gas-pipe is also a wa-ter-pipe; in other words, whether the spout
of the Sperm Whale is the mere va-por of the ex-haled breath, or whether
that ex-haled breath is mixed with wa-ter taken in at the mouth, and
dis-charged through the spir-acle. It is cer-tain that the mouth
in-dir-ectly com-mu-nic-ates with the spout-ing canal; but it can-not be
proved that this is for the pur-pose of dis-char-ging wa-ter through the
spir-acle. Be-cause the greatest ne-ces-sity for so do-ing would seem to be,
when in feed-ing he ac-ci-dent-ally takes in wa-ter. But the Sperm Whale’s
food is far be-neath the sur-face, and there he can-not spout even if he
would. Besides, if you re-gard him very closely, and time him with your
watch, you will find that when un-mo-les-ted, there is an un-devi-at-ing
rhyme between the peri-ods of his jets and the or-din-ary peri-ods of
res-pir-a-tion.

But why pester one with all this reas-on-ing on the sub-ject? Speak out!
You have seen him spout; then de-clare what the spout is; can you not
tell wa-ter from air? My dear sir, in this world it is not so easy to
settle these plain things. I have ever found your plain things the
knot-ti-est of all. And as for this whale spout, you might al-most stand
in it, and yet be un-de-cided as to what it is pre-cisely.

The cent-ral body of it is hid-den in the snowy spark-ling mist en-vel-op-ing
it; and how can you cer-tainly tell whether any wa-ter falls from it,
when, al-ways, when you are close enough to a whale to get a close view
of his spout, he is in a prodi-gious com-mo-tion, the wa-ter cas-cad-ing all
around him. And if at such times you should think that you really
per-ceived drops of mois-ture in the spout, how do you know that they are
not merely con-densed from its va-por; or how do you know that they are
not those identical drops su-per-fi-cially lodged in the spout-hole
fis-sure, which is coun-ter-sunk into the sum-mit of the whale’s head? For
even when tran-quilly swim-ming through the mid-day sea in a calm, with
his el-ev-ated hump sun-dried as a dromedary’s in the desert; even then,
the whale al-ways car-ries a small basin of wa-ter on his head, as un-der a
blaz-ing sun you will some-times see a cav-ity in a rock filled up with
rain.

Nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curi-ous touch-ing the
pre-cise nature of the whale spout. It will not do for him to be peer-ing
into it, and put-ting his face in it. You can-not go with your pitcher to
this foun-tain and fill it, and bring it away. For even when com-ing into
slight con-tact with the outer, va-pory shreds of the jet, which will
of-ten hap-pen, your skin will fe-ver-ishly smart, from the ac-rid-ness of
the thing so touch-ing it. And I know one, who com-ing into still closer
con-tact with the spout, whether with some sci-entific ob-ject in view, or
oth-er-wise, I can-not say, the skin peeled off from his cheek and arm.
Where-fore, among whale-men, the spout is deemed pois-on-ous; they try to
evade it. Another thing; I have heard it said, and I do not much doubt
it, that if the jet is fairly spouted into your eyes, it will blind
you. The wisest thing the in-vest-ig-ator can do then, it seems to me, is
to let this deadly spout alone.

Still, we can hy-po-thes-ize, even if we can-not prove and es-tab-lish. My
hy-po-thesis is this: that the spout is noth-ing but mist. And be-sides
other reas-ons, to this con-clu-sion I am im-pelled, by con-sid-er-a-tions
touch-ing the great in-her-ent dig-nity and sub-lim-ity of the Sperm Whale; I
ac-count him no com-mon, shal-low be-ing, inas-much as it is an un-dis-puted
fact that he is never found on sound-ings, or near shores; all other
whales some-times are. He is both pon-der-ous and pro-found. And I am
con-vinced that from the heads of all pon-der-ous pro-found be-ings, such as
Plato, Pyrrho, the Devil, Jupiter, Dante, and so on, there al-ways goes
up a cer-tain semi-vis-ible steam, while in the act of think-ing deep
thoughts. While com-pos-ing a little treat-ise on Etern-ity, I had the
curi-os-ity to place a mir-ror be-fore me; and ere long saw re-flec-ted
there, a curi-ous in-volved worm-ing and un-du-la-tion in the at-mo-sphere over
my head. The in-vari-able mois-ture of my hair, while plunged in deep
thought, after six cups of hot tea in my thin shingled at-tic, of an
August noon; this seems an ad-di-tional ar-gu-ment for the above
sup-pos-i-tion.

And how nobly it raises our con-ceit of the mighty, misty mon-ster, to
be-hold him sol-emnly sail-ing through a calm trop-ical sea; his vast, mild
head over-hung by a can-opy of va-por, en-gendered by his in-com-mu-nic-able
con-tem-pla-tions, and that va-por—as you will some-times see it—glor-i-fied
by a rain-bow, as if Heaven it-self had put its seal upon his thoughts.
For, d’ye see, rain-bows do not visit the clear air; they only ir-ra-di-ate
va-por. And so, through all the thick mists of the dim doubts in my
mind, di-vine in-tu-itions now and then shoot, en-kind-ling my fog with a
heav-enly ray. And for this I thank God; for all have doubts; many deny;
but doubts or deni-als, few along with them, have in-tu-itions. Doubts of
all things earthly, and in-tu-itions of some things heav-enly; this
com-bin-a-tion makes neither be-liever nor in-fi-del, but makes a man who
re-gards them both with equal eye.


CHAPTER 86. The Tail.

Other po-ets have warbled the praises of the soft eye of the ante-lope,
and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights; less ce-les-tial,
I cel-eb-rate a tail.

Reck-on-ing the largest sized Sperm Whale’s tail to be-gin at that point
of the trunk where it tapers to about the girth of a man, it com-prises
upon its up-per sur-face alone, an area of at least fifty square feet.
The com-pact round body of its root ex-pands into two broad, firm, flat
palms or flukes, gradu-ally shoal-ing away to less than an inch in
thick-ness. At the crotch or junc-tion, these flukes slightly over-lap,
then side-ways re-cede from each other like wings, leav-ing a wide va-cancy
between. In no liv-ing thing are the lines of beauty more ex-quis-itely
defined than in the cres-centic bor-ders of these flukes. At its ut-most
ex-pan-sion in the full grown whale, the tail will con-sid-er-ably ex-ceed
twenty feet across.

The en-tire mem-ber seems a dense webbed bed of wel-ded sinews; but cut
into it, and you find that three dis-tinct strata com-pose it:—up-per,
middle, and lower. The fibres in the up-per and lower lay-ers, are long
and ho-ri-zontal; those of the middle one, very short, and run-ning
cross-wise between the out-side lay-ers. This tri-une struc-ture, as much as
any-thing else, im-parts power to the tail. To the stu-dent of old Ro-man
walls, the middle layer will fur-nish a curi-ous par-al-lel to the thin
course of tiles al-ways al-tern-at-ing with the stone in those won-der-ful
rel-ics of the an-tique, and which un-doubtedly con-trib-ute so much to the
great strength of the ma-sonry.

But as if this vast local power in the tendin-ous tail were not enough,
the whole bulk of the le-viathan is knit over with a warp and woof of
mus-cu-lar fibres and fil-a-ments, which passing on either side the loins
and run-ning down into the flukes, in-sens-ibly blend with them, and
largely con-trib-ute to their might; so that in the tail the con-flu-ent
meas-ure-less force of the whole whale seems con-cen-trated to a point.
Could an-ni-hil-a-tion oc-cur to mat-ter, this were the thing to do it.

Nor does this—its amaz-ing strength, at all tend to cripple the grace-ful
flex-ion of its mo-tions; where in-fant-i-le-ness of ease un-du-lates through a
Tit-an-ism of power. On the con-trary, those mo-tions de-rive their most
ap-palling beauty from it. Real strength never im-pairs beauty or
har-mony, but it of-ten be-stows it; and in everything im-pos-ingly
beau-ti-ful, strength has much to do with the ma-gic. Take away the tied
ten-dons that all over seem burst-ing from the marble in the carved
Her-cules, and its charm would be gone. As de-vout Eck-er-man lif-ted the
linen sheet from the na-ked corpse of Go-ethe, he was over-whelmed with
the massive chest of the man, that seemed as a Ro-man tri-umphal arch.
When An-gelo paints even God the Father in hu-man form, mark what
ro-bust-ness is there. And whatever they may re-veal of the di-vine love in
the Son, the soft, curled, herm-aph-rod-it-ical Italian pic-tures, in which
his idea has been most suc-cess-fully em-bod-ied; these pic-tures, so
des-ti-tute as they are of all brawni-ness, hint noth-ing of any power, but
the mere neg-at-ive, fem-in-ine one of sub-mis-sion and en-dur-ance, which on
all hands it is con-ceded, form the pe-cu-liar prac-tical vir-tues of his
teach-ings.

Such is the subtle elasti-city of the or-gan I treat of, that whether
wiel-ded in sport, or in earn-est, or in an-ger, whatever be the mood it
be in, its flex-ions are in-vari-ably marked by ex-ceed-ing grace. Therein
no fairy’s arm can tran-scend it.

Five great mo-tions are pe-cu-liar to it. First, when used as a fin for
pro-gres-sion; Se-cond, when used as a mace in battle; Third, in sweep-ing;
Fourth, in lob-tail-ing; Fifth, in peak-ing flukes.

First: Be-ing ho-ri-zontal in its po-s-i-tion, the Le-viathan’s tail acts in a
dif-fer-ent man-ner from the tails of all other sea creatures. It never
wriggles. In man or fish, wrig-gling is a sign of in-feri-or-ity. To the
whale, his tail is the sole means of propul-sion. Scroll-wise coiled
for-wards be-neath the body, and then rap-idly sprung back-wards, it is
this which gives that sin-gu-lar dart-ing, leap-ing mo-tion to the mon-ster
when furi-ously swim-ming. His side-fins only serve to steer by.

Se-cond: It is a little sig-ni-fic-ant, that while one sperm whale only
fights an-other sperm whale with his head and jaw, nev-er-the-less, in his
con-flicts with man, he chiefly and con-temp-tu-ously uses his tail. In
strik-ing at a boat, he swiftly curves away his flukes from it, and the
blow is only in-flic-ted by the re-coil. If it be made in the un-ob-struc-ted
air, es-pe-cially if it des-cend to its mark, the stroke is then simply
ir-res-ist-ible. No ribs of man or boat can with-stand it. Your only
sal-va-tion lies in elud-ing it; but if it comes side-ways through the
op-pos-ing wa-ter, then partly ow-ing to the light buoy-ancy of the
whale-boat, and the elasti-city of its ma-ter-i-als, a cracked rib or a
dashed plank or two, a sort of stitch in the side, is gen-er-ally the
most ser-i-ous res-ult. These sub-merged side blows are so of-ten re-ceived
in the fish-ery, that they are ac-coun-ted mere child’s play. Some one
strips off a frock, and the hole is stopped.

Third: I can-not demon-strate it, but it seems to me, that in the whale
the sense of touch is con-cen-trated in the tail; for in this re-spect
there is a del-ic-acy in it only equalled by the dainti-ness of the
ele-phant’s trunk. This del-ic-acy is chiefly evinced in the ac-tion of
sweep-ing, when in maid-enly gen-tle-ness the whale with a cer-tain soft
slow-ness moves his im-mense flukes from side to side upon the sur-face of
the sea; and if he feel but a sailor’s whisker, woe to that sailor,
whiskers and all. What ten-der-ness there is in that pre-lim-in-ary touch!
Had this tail any pre-hensile power, I should straight-way be-think me of
Dar-monodes’ ele-phant that so fre-quen-ted the flower-mar-ket, and with low
sa-luta-tions presen-ted nose-gays to dam-sels, and then caressed their
zones. On more ac-counts than one, a pity it is that the whale does not
pos-sess this pre-hensile vir-tue in his tail; for I have heard of yet
an-other ele-phant, that when wounded in the fight, curved round his
trunk and ex-trac-ted the dart.

Fourth: Steal-ing un-awares upon the whale in the fan-cied se-cur-ity of the
middle of sol-it-ary seas, you find him un-bent from the vast cor-pu-lence
of his dig-nity, and kit-ten-like, he plays on the ocean as if it were a
hearth. But still you see his power in his play. The broad palms of his
tail are flir-ted high into the air; then smit-ing the sur-face, the
thun-der-ous con-cus-sion re-sounds for miles. You would al-most think a
great gun had been dis-charged; and if you no-ticed the light wreath of
va-por from the spir-acle at his other ex-tremity, you would think that
that was the smoke from the touch-hole.

Fifth: As in the or-din-ary float-ing pos-ture of the le-viathan the flukes
lie con-sid-er-ably be-low the level of his back, they are then com-pletely
out of sight be-neath the sur-face; but when he is about to plunge into
the deeps, his en-tire flukes with at least thirty feet of his body are
tossed erect in the air, and so re-main vi-brat-ing a mo-ment, till they
down-wards shoot out of view. Ex-cept-ing the sub-lime _breach_—some-where
else to be de-scribed—this peak-ing of the whale’s flukes is per-haps the
grand-est sight to be seen in all an-im-ated nature. Out of the bot-tom-less
pro-fundit-ies the gi-gantic tail seems spas-mod-ic-ally snatch-ing at the
highest heaven. So in dreams, have I seen majestic Satan thrust-ing
forth his tor-men-ted co-lossal claw from the flame Baltic of Hell. But in
gaz-ing at such scenes, it is all in all what mood you are in; if in the
Dantean, the dev-ils will oc-cur to you; if in that of Isaiah, the
archangels. Stand-ing at the mast-head of my ship dur-ing a sun-rise that
crim-soned sky and sea, I once saw a large herd of whales in the east,
all head-ing to-wards the sun, and for a mo-ment vi-brat-ing in con-cert with
peaked flukes. As it seemed to me at the time, such a grand em-bod-i-ment
of ad-or-a-tion of the gods was never be-held, even in Per-sia, the home of
the fire wor-ship-pers. As Ptolemy Philo-pa-ter test-i-fied of the African
ele-phant, I then test-i-fied of the whale, pro-noun-cing him the most
de-vout of all be-ings. For ac-cord-ing to King Juba, the mil-it-ary
ele-phants of an-tiquity of-ten hailed the morn-ing with their trunks
up-lif-ted in the pro-found-est si-lence.

The chance com-par-ison in this chapter, between the whale and the
ele-phant, so far as some as-pects of the tail of the one and the trunk
of the other are con-cerned, should not tend to place those two op-pos-ite
or-gans on an equal-ity, much less the creatures to which they
re-spect-ively be-long. For as the migh-ti-est ele-phant is but a ter-rier to
Le-viathan, so, com-pared with Le-viathan’s tail, his trunk is but the
stalk of a lily. The most dire-ful blow from the ele-phant’s trunk were
as the play-ful tap of a fan, com-pared with the meas-ure-less crush and
crash of the sperm whale’s pon-der-ous flukes, which in re-peated
in-stances have one after the other hurled en-tire boats with all their
oars and crews into the air, very much as an In-dian jug-gler tosses his
balls.*

*Though all com-par-ison in the way of gen-eral bulk between the whale and
the ele-phant is pre-pos-ter-ous, inas-much as in that par-tic-u-lar the
ele-phant stands in much the same re-spect to the whale that a dog does
to the ele-phant; nev-er-the-less, there are not want-ing some points of
curi-ous simil-it-ude; among these is the spout. It is well known that the
ele-phant will of-ten draw up wa-ter or dust in his trunk, and then
el-ev-at-ing it, jet it forth in a stream.

The more I con-sider this mighty tail, the more do I de-plore my
in-ab-il-ity to ex-press it. At times there are ges-tures in it, which,
though they would well grace the hand of man, re-main wholly
in-ex-plic-able. In an ex-tens-ive herd, so re-mark-able, oc-ca-sion-ally, are
these mys-tic ges-tures, that I have heard hunters who have de-clared them
akin to Free-Mason signs and sym-bols; that the whale, in-deed, by these
meth-ods in-tel-li-gently con-versed with the world. Nor are there want-ing
other mo-tions of the whale in his gen-eral body, full of strange-ness,
and un-ac-count-able to his most ex-per-i-enced as-sail-ant. Dis-sect him how I
may, then, I but go skin deep; I know him not, and never will. But if I
know not even the tail of this whale, how un-der-stand his head? much
more, how com-pre-hend his face, when face he has none? Thou shalt see my
back parts, my tail, he seems to say, but my face shall not be seen.
But I can-not com-pletely make out his back parts; and hint what he will
about his face, I say again he has no face.


CHAPTER 87. The Grand Ar-mada.

The long and nar-row pen-in-sula of Malacca, ex-tend-ing south-east-ward from
the ter-rit-or-ies of Birmah, forms the most south-erly point of all Asia.
In a con-tinu-ous line from that pen-in-sula stretch the long is-lands of
Su-matra, Java, Bally, and Timor; which, with many oth-ers, form a vast
mole, or ram-part, length-wise con-nect-ing Asia with Aus-tralia, and
di-vid-ing the long un-broken In-dian ocean from the thickly stud-ded
ori-ental ar-chipela-goes. This ram-part is pierced by sev-eral sally-ports
for the con-veni-ence of ships and whales; con-spicu-ous among which are
the straits of Sunda and Malacca. By the straits of Sunda, chiefly,
ves-sels bound to Ch-ina from the west, emerge into the Ch-ina seas.

Those nar-row straits of Sunda di-vide Su-matra from Java; and stand-ing
mid-way in that vast ram-part of is-lands, but-tressed by that bold green
promon-tory, known to sea-men as Java Head; they not a little cor-res-pond
to the cent-ral gate-way open-ing into some vast walled em-pire: and
con-sid-er-ing the in-ex-haust-ible wealth of spices, and silks, and jew-els,
and gold, and ivory, with which the thou-sand is-lands of that ori-ental
sea are en-riched, it seems a sig-ni-fic-ant pro-vi-sion of nature, that such
treas-ures, by the very form-a-tion of the land, should at least bear the
ap-pear-ance, how-ever in-ef-fec-tual, of be-ing guarded from the all-grasp-ing
west-ern world. The shores of the Straits of Sunda are un-sup-plied with
those dom-in-eer-ing fort-resses which guard the en-trances to the
Medi-ter-ranean, the Baltic, and the Pro-pontis. Un-like the Danes, these
Ori-ent-als do not de-mand the ob-sequious homage of lowered top-sails from
the end-less pro-ces-sion of ships be-fore the wind, which for cen-tur-ies
past, by night and by day, have passed between the is-lands of Su-matra
and Java, freighted with the cost-li-est car-goes of the east. But while
they freely waive a ce-re-mo-nial like this, they do by no means re-nounce
their claim to more solid trib-ute.

Time out of mind the pir-at-ical proas of the Malays, lurk-ing among the
low shaded coves and is-lets of Su-matra, have sal-lied out upon the
ves-sels sail-ing through the straits, fiercely de-mand-ing trib-ute at the
point of their spears. Though by the re-peated bloody chas-tise-ments they
have re-ceived at the hands of European cruis-ers, the au-da-city of these
cor-sairs has of late been some-what repressed; yet, even at the present
day, we oc-ca-sion-ally hear of Eng-lish and Amer-ican ves-sels, which, in
those wa-ters, have been re-morse-lessly boarded and pil-laged.

With a fair, fresh wind, the Pequod was now draw-ing nigh to these
straits; Ahab pur-pos-ing to pass through them into the Javan sea, and
thence, cruis-ing north-wards, over wa-ters known to be fre-quen-ted here
and there by the Sperm Whale, sweep in-shore by the Phil-ip-pine Is-lands,
and gain the far coast of Japan, in time for the great whal-ing sea-son
there. By these means, the cir-cum-nav-ig-at-ing Pequod would sweep al-most
all the known Sperm Whale cruis-ing grounds of the world, pre-vi-ous to
des-cend-ing upon the Line in the Pa-cific; where Ahab, though every-where
else foiled in his pur-suit, firmly coun-ted upon giv-ing battle to Moby
Dick, in the sea he was most known to fre-quent; and at a sea-son when he
might most reas-on-ably be pre-sumed to be haunt-ing it.

But how now? in this zoned quest, does Ahab touch no land? does his
crew drink air? Surely, he will stop for wa-ter. Nay. For a long time,
now, the cir-cus-run-ning sun has raced within his fiery ring, and needs
no susten-ance but what’s in him-self. So Ahab. Mark this, too, in the
whaler. While other hulls are loaded down with alien stuff, to be
trans-ferred to for-eign wharves; the world-wan-der-ing whale-ship car-ries
no cargo but her-self and crew, their weapons and their wants. She has a
whole lake’s con-tents bottled in her ample hold. She is bal-las-ted with
util-it-ies; not al-to-gether with un-us-able pig-lead and kentledge. She
car-ries years’ wa-ter in her. Clear old prime Nan-tucket wa-ter; which,
when three years afloat, the Nan-tuck-eter, in the Pa-cific, prefers to
drink be-fore the brack-ish fluid, but yes-ter-day raf-ted off in casks,
from the Per-uvian or In-dian streams. Hence it is, that, while other
ships may have gone to Ch-ina from New York, and back again, touch-ing at
a score of ports, the whale-ship, in all that in-ter-val, may not have
sighted one grain of soil; her crew hav-ing seen no man but float-ing
sea-men like them-selves. So that did you carry them the news that
an-other flood had come; they would only an-swer—“Well, boys, here’s the
ark!”

Now, as many Sperm Whales had been cap-tured off the west-ern coast of
Java, in the near vi-cin-ity of the Straits of Sunda; in-deed, as most of
the ground, round-about, was gen-er-ally re-cog-nised by the fish-er-men as an
ex-cel-lent spot for cruis-ing; there-fore, as the Pequod gained more and
more upon Java Head, the look-outs were re-peatedly hailed, and
ad-mon-ished to keep wide awake. But though the green palmy cliffs of the
land soon loomed on the star-board bow, and with de-lighted nos-trils the
fresh cin-na-mon was snuffed in the air, yet not a single jet was
descried. Al-most re-noun-cing all thought of fall-ing in with any game
here-abouts, the ship had well nigh entered the straits, when the
cus-tom-ary cheer-ing cry was heard from aloft, and ere long a spec-tacle
of sin-gu-lar mag-ni-fi-cence sa-luted us.

But here be it premised, that ow-ing to the un-wear-ied activ-ity with
which of late they have been hunted over all four oceans, the Sperm
Whales, in-stead of al-most in-vari-ably sail-ing in small de-tached
com-pan-ies, as in former times, are now fre-quently met with in ex-tens-ive
herds, some-times em-bra-cing so great a mul-ti-tude, that it would al-most
seem as if nu-mer-ous na-tions of them had sworn sol-emn league and
cov-en-ant for mu-tual as-sist-ance and pro-tec-tion. To this ag-greg-a-tion of
the Sperm Whale into such im-mense cara-vans, may be im-puted the
cir-cum-stance that even in the best cruis-ing grounds, you may now
some-times sail for weeks and months to-gether, without be-ing greeted by
a single spout; and then be sud-denly sa-luted by what some-times seems
thou-sands on thou-sands.

Broad on both bows, at the dis-tance of some two or three miles, and
form-ing a great semi-circle, em-bra-cing one half of the level ho-ri-zon, a
con-tinu-ous chain of whale-jets were up-play-ing and spark-ling in the
noon-day air. Un-like the straight per-pen-dic-u-lar twin-jets of the Right
Whale, which, di-vid-ing at top, fall over in two branches, like the
cleft droop-ing boughs of a wil-low, the single for-ward-slant-ing spout of
the Sperm Whale presents a thick curled bush of white mist, con-tinu-ally
rising and fall-ing away to lee-ward.

Seen from the Pequod’s deck, then, as she would rise on a high hill of
the sea, this host of va-pory spouts, in-di-vidu-ally curl-ing up into the
air, and be-held through a blend-ing at-mo-sphere of blu-ish haze, showed
like the thou-sand cheer-ful chim-neys of some dense met-ro-polis, descried
of a balmy au-tum-nal morn-ing, by some horse-man on a height.

As march-ing armies ap-proach-ing an un-friendly de-file in the moun-tains,
ac-cel-er-ate their march, all eager-ness to place that per-il-ous pas-sage in
their rear, and once more ex-pand in com-par-at-ive se-cur-ity upon the
plain; even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hur-ry-ing for-ward
through the straits; gradu-ally con-tract-ing the wings of their
semi-circle, and swim-ming on, in one solid, but still cres-centic centre.

Crowding all sail the Pequod pressed after them; the har-poon-eers
hand-ling their weapons, and loudly cheer-ing from the heads of their yet
sus-pen-ded boats. If the wind only held, little doubt had they, that
chased through these Straits of Sunda, the vast host would only de-ploy
into the Ori-ental seas to wit-ness the cap-ture of not a few of their
num-ber. And who could tell whether, in that con-greg-ated cara-van, Moby
Dick him-self might not tem-por-ar-ily be swim-ming, like the wor-shipped
white-ele-phant in the coron-a-tion pro-ces-sion of the Sia-mese! So with
stun-sail piled on stun-sail, we sailed along, driv-ing these le-viath-ans
be-fore us; when, of a sud-den, the voice of Tasht-ego was heard, loudly
dir-ect-ing at-ten-tion to some-thing in our wake.

Cor-res-pond-ing to the cres-cent in our van, we be-held an-other in our
rear. It seemed formed of de-tached white va-pors, rising and fall-ing
some-thing like the spouts of the whales; only they did not so
com-pletely come and go; for they con-stantly hovered, without fi-nally
dis-ap-pear-ing. Lev-el-ling his glass at this sight, Ahab quickly re-volved
in his pivot-hole, cry-ing, “Aloft there, and rig whips and buck-ets to
wet the sails;—Malays, sir, and after us!”

As if too long lurk-ing be-hind the head-lands, till the Pequod should
fairly have entered the straits, these ras-cally Asi-at-ics were now in
hot pur-suit, to make up for their over-cau-tious delay. But when the
swift Pequod, with a fresh lead-ing wind, was her-self in hot chase; how
very kind of these tawny phil-an-throp-ists to as-sist in speed-ing her on
to her own chosen pur-suit,—mere rid-ing-whips and row-els to her, that
they were. As with glass un-der arm, Ahab to-and-fro paced the deck; in
his for-ward turn be-hold-ing the mon-sters he chased, and in the after one
the bloodthirsty pir-ates chas-ing _him_; some such fancy as the above
seemed his. And when he glanced upon the green walls of the wa-tery
de-file in which the ship was then sail-ing, and be-thought him that
through that gate lay the route to his ven-geance, and be-held, how that
through that same gate he was now both chas-ing and be-ing chased to his
deadly end; and not only that, but a herd of re-morse-less wild pir-ates
and in-hu-man athe-ist-ical dev-ils were in-fernally cheer-ing him on with
their curses;—when all these con-ceits had passed through his brain,
Ahab’s brow was left gaunt and ribbed, like the black sand beach after
some stormy tide has been gnaw-ing it, without be-ing able to drag the
firm thing from its place.

But thoughts like these troubled very few of the reck-less crew; and
when, after stead-ily drop-ping and drop-ping the pir-ates astern, the
Pequod at last shot by the vivid green Cock-a-too Point on the Su-matra
side, emer-ging at last upon the broad wa-ters bey-ond; then, the
har-poon-eers seemed more to grieve that the swift whales had been
gain-ing upon the ship, than to re-joice that the ship had so
vic-tori-ously gained upon the Malays. But still driv-ing on in the wake
of the whales, at length they seemed abat-ing their speed; gradu-ally the
ship neared them; and the wind now dy-ing away, word was passed to
spring to the boats. But no sooner did the herd, by some pre-sumed
won-der-ful in-stinct of the Sperm Whale, be-come no-ti-fied of the three
keels that were after them,—though as yet a mile in their rear,—than
they ral-lied again, and form-ing in close ranks and bat-talions, so that
their spouts all looked like flash-ing lines of stacked bay-on-ets, moved
on with re-doubled ve-lo-city.

Stripped to our shirts and draw-ers, we sprang to the white-ash, and
after sev-eral hours’ pulling were al-most dis-posed to re-nounce the
chase, when a gen-eral paus-ing com-mo-tion among the whales gave an-im-at-ing
token that they were now at last un-der the in-flu-ence of that strange
per-plex-ity of in-ert ir-res-ol-u-tion, which, when the fish-er-men per-ceive it
in the whale, they say he is gal-lied. The com-pact mar-tial columns in
which they had been hitherto rap-idly and stead-ily swim-ming, were now
broken up in one meas-ure-less rout; and like King Porus’ ele-phants in
the In-dian battle with Al-ex-an-der, they seemed go-ing mad with
con-sterna-tion. In all dir-ec-tions ex-pand-ing in vast ir-reg-u-lar circles,
and aim-lessly swim-ming hither and thither, by their short thick
spout-ings, they plainly be-trayed their dis-trac-tion of panic. This was
still more strangely evinced by those of their num-ber, who, com-pletely
para-lysed as it were, help-lessly floated like wa-ter-logged dis-mantled
ships on the sea. Had these Le-viath-ans been but a flock of simple
sheep, pur-sued over the pas-ture by three fierce wolves, they could not
pos-sibly have evinced such ex-cess-ive dis-may. But this oc-ca-sional
timid-ity is char-ac-ter-istic of al-most all herd-ing creatures. Though
band-ing to-gether in tens of thou-sands, the lion-maned buf-fa-loes of the
West have fled be-fore a sol-it-ary horse-man. Wit-ness, too, all hu-man
be-ings, how when her-ded to-gether in the sheep-fold of a theatre’s pit,
they will, at the slight-est alarm of fire, rush hel-ter-skel-ter for the
out-lets, crowding, tramp-ling, jam-ming, and re-morse-lessly dash-ing each
other to death. Best, there-fore, with-hold any amazement at the
strangely gal-lied whales be-fore us, for there is no folly of the beasts
of the earth which is not in-fin-itely out-done by the mad-ness of men.

Though many of the whales, as has been said, were in vi-ol-ent mo-tion,
yet it is to be ob-served that as a whole the herd neither ad-vanced nor
re-treated, but col-lect-ively re-mained in one place. As is cus-tom-ary in
those cases, the boats at once sep-ar-ated, each mak-ing for some one lone
whale on the out-skirts of the shoal. In about three minutes’ time,
Queequeg’s har-poon was flung; the stricken fish dar-ted blind-ing spray
in our faces, and then run-ning away with us like light, steered
straight for the heart of the herd. Though such a move-ment on the part
of the whale struck un-der such cir-cum-stances, is in no wise
un-pre-ced-en-ted; and in-deed is al-most al-ways more or less an-ti-cip-ated;
yet does it present one of the more per-il-ous vi-cis-situdes of the
fish-ery. For as the swift mon-ster drags you deeper and deeper into the
frantic shoal, you bid adieu to cir-cum-spect life and only ex-ist in a
de-li-ri-ous throb.

As, blind and deaf, the whale plunged for-ward, as if by sheer power of
speed to rid him-self of the iron leech that had fastened to him; as we
thus tore a white gash in the sea, on all sides men-aced as we flew, by
the crazed creatures to and fro rush-ing about us; our be-set boat was
like a ship mobbed by ice-isles in a tem-pest, and striv-ing to steer
through their com-plic-ated chan-nels and straits, know-ing not at what
mo-ment it may be locked in and crushed.

But not a bit daun-ted, Queequeg steered us man-fully; now sheer-ing off
from this mon-ster dir-ectly across our route in ad-vance; now edging away
from that, whose co-lossal flukes were sus-pen-ded over-head, while all the
time, Star-buck stood up in the bows, lance in hand, prick-ing out of our
way whatever whales he could reach by short darts, for there was no
time to make long ones. Nor were the oars-men quite idle, though their
wonted duty was now al-to-gether dis-pensed with. They chiefly at-ten-ded to
the shout-ing part of the busi-ness. “Out of the way, Com-modore!” cried
one, to a great dromedary that of a sud-den rose bod-ily to the sur-face,
and for an in-stant threatened to swamp us. “Hard down with your tail,
there!” cried a second to an-other, which, close to our gun-wale, seemed
calmly cool-ing him-self with his own fan-like ex-tremity.

All whale-boats carry cer-tain curi-ous con-triv-ances, ori-gin-ally in-ven-ted
by the Nan-tucket In-di-ans, called druggs. Two thick squares of wood of
equal size are stoutly clenched to-gether, so that they cross each
other’s grain at right angles; a line of con-sid-er-able length is then
at-tached to the middle of this block, and the other end of the line
be-ing looped, it can in a mo-ment be fastened to a har-poon. It is
chiefly among gal-lied whales that this drugg is used. For then, more
whales are close round you than you can pos-sibly chase at one time. But
sperm whales are not every day en-countered; while you may, then, you
must kill all you can. And if you can-not kill them all at once, you
must wing them, so that they can be af-ter-wards killed at your leis-ure.
Hence it is, that at times like these the drugg, comes into
re-quis-i-tion. Our boat was fur-nished with three of them. The first and
second were suc-cess-fully dar-ted, and we saw the whales stag-ger-ingly
run-ning off, fettered by the enorm-ous side-long res-ist-ance of the tow-ing
drugg. They were cramped like mal-efact-ors with the chain and ball. But
upon fling-ing the third, in the act of toss-ing over-board the clumsy
wooden block, it caught un-der one of the seats of the boat, and in an
in-stant tore it out and car-ried it away, drop-ping the oars-man in the
boat’s bot-tom as the seat slid from un-der him. On both sides the sea
came in at the wounded planks, but we stuffed two or three draw-ers and
shirts in, and so stopped the leaks for the time.

It had been next to im-possible to dart these drugged-har-poons, were it
not that as we ad-vanced into the herd, our whale’s way greatly
di-min-ished; moreover, that as we went still fur-ther and fur-ther from
the cir-cum-fer-ence of com-mo-tion, the dire-ful dis-orders seemed wan-ing. So
that when at last the jerking har-poon drew out, and the tow-ing whale
side-ways van-ished; then, with the taper-ing force of his part-ing
mo-mentum, we glided between two whales into the in-ner-most heart of the
shoal, as if from some moun-tain tor-rent we had slid into a se-rene
val-ley lake. Here the storms in the roar-ing glens between the out-er-most
whales, were heard but not felt. In this cent-ral ex-panse the sea
presen-ted that smooth satin-like sur-face, called a sleek, pro-duced by
the subtle mois-ture thrown off by the whale in his more quiet moods.
Yes, we were now in that en-chanted calm which they say lurks at the
heart of every com-mo-tion. And still in the dis-trac-ted dis-tance we
be-held the tu-mults of the outer con-cent-ric circles, and saw suc-cess-ive
pods of whales, eight or ten in each, swiftly go-ing round and round,
like mul-ti-plied spans of horses in a ring; and so closely shoulder to
shoulder, that a Tit-anic cir-cus-rider might eas-ily have over-arched the
middle ones, and so have gone round on their backs. Owing to the
dens-ity of the crowd of re-pos-ing whales, more im-me-di-ately sur-round-ing
the em-bayed axis of the herd, no pos-sible chance of es-cape was at
present af-forded us. We must watch for a breach in the liv-ing wall that
hemmed us in; the wall that had only ad-mit-ted us in or-der to shut us
up. Keep-ing at the centre of the lake, we were oc-ca-sion-ally vis-ited by
small tame cows and calves; the wo-men and chil-dren of this routed host.

Now, in-clus-ive of the oc-ca-sional wide in-ter-vals between the re-volving
outer circles, and in-clus-ive of the spaces between the vari-ous pods in
any one of those circles, the en-tire area at this junc-ture, em-braced by
the whole mul-ti-tude, must have con-tained at least two or three square
miles. At any rate—though in-deed such a test at such a time might be
de-cept-ive—spout-ings might be dis-covered from our low boat that seemed
play-ing up al-most from the rim of the ho-ri-zon. I men-tion this
cir-cum-stance, be-cause, as if the cows and calves had been pur-posely
locked up in this in-ner-most fold; and as if the wide ex-tent of the herd
had hitherto pre-ven-ted them from learn-ing the pre-cise cause of its
stop-ping; or, pos-sibly, be-ing so young, un-soph-ist-ic-ated, and every way
in-no-cent and in-ex-per-i-enced; how-ever it may have been, these smal-ler
whales—now and then vis-it-ing our be-calmed boat from the mar-gin of the
lake—evinced a won-drous fear-less-ness and con-fid-ence, or else a still
becharmed panic which it was im-possible not to mar-vel at. Like
house-hold dogs they came snuff-ling round us, right up to our gun-wales,
and touch-ing them; till it al-most seemed that some spell had sud-denly
do-mest-ic-ated them. Queequeg pat-ted their fore-heads; Star-buck scratched
their backs with his lance; but fear-ful of the con-sequences, for the
time re-frained from dart-ing it.

But far be-neath this won-drous world upon the sur-face, an-other and still
stranger world met our eyes as we gazed over the side. For, sus-pen-ded
in those wa-tery vaults, floated the forms of the nurs-ing moth-ers of the
whales, and those that by their enorm-ous girth seemed shortly to be-come
moth-ers. The lake, as I have hin-ted, was to a con-sid-er-able depth
ex-ceed-ingly trans-par-ent; and as hu-man in-fants while suck-ling will
calmly and fix-edly gaze away from the breast, as if lead-ing two
dif-fer-ent lives at the time; and while yet draw-ing mor-tal nour-ish-ment,
be still spir-itu-ally feast-ing upon some un-earthly re-min-is-cence;—even so
did the young of these whales seem look-ing up to-wards us, but not at
us, as if we were but a bit of Gulf-weed in their new-born sight.
Float-ing on their sides, the moth-ers also seemed quietly eye-ing us. One
of these little in-fants, that from cer-tain queer tokens seemed hardly a
day old, might have meas-ured some four-teen feet in length, and some six
feet in girth. He was a little frisky; though as yet his body seemed
scarce yet re-covered from that irk-some po-s-i-tion it had so lately
oc-cu-pied in the ma-ter-nal retic-ule; where, tail to head, and all ready
for the fi-nal spring, the un-born whale lies bent like a Tar-tar’s bow.
The del-ic-ate side-fins, and the palms of his flukes, still freshly
re-tained the plaited crumpled ap-pear-ance of a baby’s ears newly ar-rived
from for-eign parts.

“Line! line!” cried Queequeg, look-ing over the gun-wale; “him fast! him
fast!—Who line him! Who struck?—Two whale; one big, one little!”

“What ails ye, man?” cried Star-buck.

“Look-e here,” said Queequeg, point-ing down.

As when the stricken whale, that from the tub has reeled out hun-dreds
of fathoms of rope; as, after deep sound-ing, he floats up again, and
shows the slackened curl-ing line buoy-antly rising and spiralling
to-wards the air; so now, Star-buck saw long coils of the um-bil-ical cord
of Ma-dame Le-viathan, by which the young cub seemed still tethered to
its dam. Not sel-dom in the rapid vi-cis-situdes of the chase, this
nat-ural line, with the ma-ter-nal end loose, be-comes en-tangled with the
hempen one, so that the cub is thereby trapped. Some of the subtlest
secrets of the seas seemed di-vulged to us in this en-chanted pond. We
saw young Le-viathan amours in the deep.*

*The sperm whale, as with all other spe-cies of the Le-viathan, but
un-like most other fish, breeds in-dif-fer-ently at all sea-sons; after a
gest-a-tion which may prob-ably be set down at nine months, pro-du-cing but
one at a time; though in some few known in-stances giv-ing birth to an
Esau and Ja-cob:—a con-tin-gency provided for in suck-ling by two teats,
curi-ously situ-ated, one on each side of the anus; but the breasts
them-selves ex-tend up-wards from that. When by chance these pre-cious
parts in a nurs-ing whale are cut by the hunter’s lance, the mother’s
pour-ing milk and blood ri-vallingly dis-col-our the sea for rods. The milk
is very sweet and rich; it has been tasted by man; it might do well
with straw-ber-ries. When over-flow-ing with mu-tual es-teem, the whales
sa-lute _more hom-in-um_.

And thus, though sur-roun-ded by circle upon circle of con-sterna-tions and
af-frights, did these in-scrut-able creatures at the centre freely and
fear-lessly in-dulge in all peace-ful con-cern-ments; yea, se-renely rev-elled
in dal-li-ance and de-light. But even so, amid the tor-nadoed At-lantic of
my be-ing, do I my-self still for ever cent-rally dis-port in mute calm;
and while pon-der-ous plan-ets of un-wan-ing woe re-volve round me, deep down
and deep in-land there I still bathe me in eternal mild-ness of joy.

Mean-while, as we thus lay en-tranced, the oc-ca-sional sud-den frantic
spec-tacles in the dis-tance evinced the activ-ity of the other boats,
still en-gaged in drug-ging the whales on the fron-tier of the host; or
pos-sibly car-ry-ing on the war within the first circle, where abund-ance
of room and some con-veni-ent re-treats were af-forded them. But the sight
of the en-raged drugged whales now and then blindly dart-ing to and fro
across the circles, was noth-ing to what at last met our eyes. It is
some-times the cus-tom when fast to a whale more than com-monly power-ful
and alert, to seek to ham-string him, as it were, by sun-der-ing or
maim-ing his gi-gantic tail-ten-don. It is done by dart-ing a short-handled
cut-ting-spade, to which is at-tached a rope for haul-ing it back again. A
whale wounded (as we af-ter-wards learned) in this part, but not
ef-fec-tu-ally, as it seemed, had broken away from the boat, car-ry-ing
along with him half of the har-poon line; and in the ex-traordin-ary agony
of the wound, he was now dash-ing among the re-volving circles like the
lone moun-ted des-per-ado Arnold, at the battle of Saratoga, car-ry-ing
dis-may wherever he went.

But ag-on-iz-ing as was the wound of this whale, and an ap-palling
spec-tacle enough, any way; yet the pe-cu-liar hor-ror with which he seemed
to in-spire the rest of the herd, was ow-ing to a cause which at first
the in-ter-ven-ing dis-tance ob-scured from us. But at length we per-ceived
that by one of the un-ima-gin-able ac-ci-dents of the fish-ery, this whale
had be-come en-tangled in the har-poon-line that he towed; he had also run
away with the cut-ting-spade in him; and while the free end of the rope
at-tached to that weapon, had per-man-ently caught in the coils of the
har-poon-line round his tail, the cut-ting-spade it-self had worked loose
from his flesh. So that tor-men-ted to mad-ness, he was now churn-ing
through the wa-ter, vi-ol-ently flail-ing with his flex-ible tail, and
toss-ing the keen spade about him, wound-ing and mur-der-ing his own
com-rades.

This ter-rific ob-ject seemed to re-call the whole herd from their
sta-tion-ary fright. First, the whales form-ing the mar-gin of our lake
began to crowd a little, and tumble against each other, as if lif-ted by
half spent bil-lows from afar; then the lake it-self began faintly to
heave and swell; the sub-mar-ine bridal-cham-bers and nurs-er-ies van-ished;
in more and more con-tract-ing or-bits the whales in the more cent-ral
circles began to swim in thick-en-ing clusters. Yes, the long calm was
de-part-ing. A low ad-van-cing hum was soon heard; and then like to the
tu-mul-tu-ous masses of block-ice when the great river Hud-son breaks up in
Spring, the en-tire host of whales came tum-bling upon their in-ner
centre, as if to pile them-selves up in one com-mon moun-tain. In-stantly
Star-buck and Queequeg changed places; Star-buck tak-ing the stern.

“Oars! Oars!” he in-tensely whispered, seiz-ing the helm—“gripe your
oars, and clutch your souls, now! My God, men, stand by! Shove him off,
you Queequeg—the whale there!—prick him!—hit him! Stand up—stand up,
and stay so! Spring, men—pull, men; never mind their backs—scrape
them!—scrape away!”

The boat was now all but jammed between two vast black bulks, leav-ing a
nar-row Dard-anelles between their long lengths. But by des-per-ate
en-deavor we at last shot into a tem-por-ary open-ing; then giv-ing way
rap-idly, and at the same time earn-estly watch-ing for an-other out-let.
After many sim-ilar hair-breadth es-capes, we at last swiftly glided into
what had just been one of the outer circles, but now crossed by ran-dom
whales, all vi-ol-ently mak-ing for one centre. This lucky sal-va-tion was
cheaply pur-chased by the loss of Queequeg’s hat, who, while stand-ing in
the bows to prick the fu-git-ive whales, had his hat taken clean from his
head by the air-eddy made by the sud-den toss-ing of a pair of broad
flukes close by.

Ri-ot-ous and dis-ordered as the uni-ver-sal com-mo-tion now was, it soon
re-solved it-self into what seemed a sys-tem-atic move-ment; for hav-ing
clumped to-gether at last in one dense body, they then re-newed their
on-ward flight with aug-men-ted fleet-ness. Fur-ther pur-suit was use-less;
but the boats still lingered in their wake to pick up what drugged
whales might be dropped astern, and like-wise to se-cure one which Flask
had killed and waifed. The waif is a pennoned pole, two or three of
which are car-ried by every boat; and which, when ad-di-tional game is at
hand, are in-ser-ted up-right into the float-ing body of a dead whale, both
to mark its place on the sea, and also as token of prior pos-ses-sion,
should the boats of any other ship draw near.

The res-ult of this lower-ing was some-what il-lus-trat-ive of that saga-cious
say-ing in the Fish-ery,—the more whales the less fish. Of all the
drugged whales only one was cap-tured. The rest con-trived to es-cape for
the time, but only to be taken, as will here-after be seen, by some
other craft than the Pequod.


CHAPTER 88. Schools and School-mas-ters.

The pre-vi-ous chapter gave ac-count of an im-mense body or herd of Sperm
Whales, and there was also then given the prob-able cause in-du-cing those
vast ag-greg-a-tions.

Now, though such great bod-ies are at times en-countered, yet, as must
have been seen, even at the present day, small de-tached bands are
oc-ca-sion-ally ob-served, em-bra-cing from twenty to fifty in-di-vidu-als each.
Such bands are known as schools. They gen-er-ally are of two sorts; those
com-posed al-most en-tirely of fe-males, and those mus-ter-ing none but young
vig-or-ous males, or bulls, as they are fa-mil-iarly des-ig-nated.

In cava-lier at-tend-ance upon the school of fe-males, you in-vari-ably see a
male of full grown mag-nitude, but not old; who, upon any alarm, evinces
his gal-lantry by fall-ing in the rear and cov-er-ing the flight of his
ladies. In truth, this gen-tle-man is a lux-uri-ous Ot-to-man, swim-ming about
over the wa-tery world, sur-round-ingly ac-com-pan-ied by all the solaces and
en-dear-ments of the harem. The con-trast between this Ot-to-man and his
con-cu-bines is strik-ing; be-cause, while he is al-ways of the largest
le-viath-anic pro-por-tions, the ladies, even at full growth, are not more
than one-third of the bulk of an av-er-age-sized male. They are
com-par-at-ively del-ic-ate, in-deed; I dare say, not to ex-ceed half a dozen
yards round the waist. Never-the-less, it can-not be denied, that upon the
whole they are hered-it-ar-ily en-titled to _en bon point_.

It is very curi-ous to watch this harem and its lord in their in-dol-ent
ram-blings. Like fash-ion-ables, they are for ever on the move in
leis-urely search of vari-ety. You meet them on the Line in time for the
full flower of the Equat-orial feed-ing sea-son, hav-ing just re-turned,
per-haps, from spend-ing the sum-mer in the North-ern seas, and so cheat-ing
sum-mer of all un-pleas-ant wear-i-ness and warmth. By the time they have
lounged up and down the prom-en-ade of the Equator awhile, they start for
the Ori-ental wa-ters in an-ti-cip-a-tion of the cool sea-son there, and so
evade the other ex-cess-ive tem-per-at-ure of the year.

When se-renely ad-van-cing on one of these jour-neys, if any strange
sus-pi-cious sights are seen, my lord whale keeps a wary eye on his
in-ter-est-ing fam-ily. Should any un-war-rant-ably pert young Le-viathan
com-ing that way, pre-sume to draw con-fid-en-tially close to one of the
ladies, with what prodi-gious fury the Bashaw as-sails him, and chases
him away! High times, in-deed, if un-prin-cipled young rakes like him are
to be per-mit-ted to in-vade the sanc-tity of do-mestic bliss; though do
what the Bashaw will, he can-not keep the most no-tori-ous Lothario out of
his bed; for, alas! all fish bed in com-mon. As ashore, the ladies of-ten
cause the most ter-rible duels among their rival ad-mirers; just so with
the whales, who some-times come to deadly battle, and all for love. They
fence with their long lower jaws, some-times lock-ing them to-gether, and
so striv-ing for the su-prem-acy like elks that war-ringly in-ter-weave their
antlers. Not a few are cap-tured hav-ing the deep scars of these
en-coun-ters,—fur-rowed heads, broken teeth, scolloped fins; and in some
in-stances, wrenched and dis-lo-cated mouths.

But sup-pos-ing the in-vader of do-mestic bliss to be-take him-self away at
the first rush of the harem’s lord, then is it very di-vert-ing to watch
that lord. Gently he in-sinu-ates his vast bulk among them again and
rev-els there awhile, still in tan-tal-iz-ing vi-cin-ity to young Lothario,
like pi-ous So-lomon de-voutly wor-ship-ping among his thou-sand con-cu-bines.
Grant-ing other whales to be in sight, the fish-er-men will sel-dom give
chase to one of these Grand Turks; for these Grand Turks are too lav-ish
of their strength, and hence their unc-tu-ous-ness is small. As for the
sons and the daugh-ters they be-get, why, those sons and daugh-ters must
take care of them-selves; at least, with only the ma-ter-nal help. For
like cer-tain other om-ni-vor-ous rov-ing lov-ers that might be named, my
Lord Whale has no taste for the nurs-ery, how-ever much for the bower;
and so, be-ing a great trav-el-ler, he leaves his an-onym-ous ba-bies all
over the world; every baby an exotic. In good time, nev-er-the-less, as
the ar-dour of youth de-clines; as years and dumps in-crease; as
re-flec-tion lends her sol-emn pauses; in short, as a gen-eral las-sit-ude
over-takes the sated Turk; then a love of ease and vir-tue sup-plants the
love for maid-ens; our Ot-to-man enters upon the im-pot-ent, re-pent-ant,
ad-mon-it-ory stage of life, for-swears, dis-bands the harem, and grown to
an ex-em-plary, sulky old soul, goes about all alone among the me-ridi-ans
and par-al-lels say-ing his pray-ers, and warn-ing each young Le-viathan from
his amor-ous er-rors.

Now, as the harem of whales is called by the fish-er-men a school, so is
the lord and mas-ter of that school tech-nic-ally known as the
school-mas-ter. It is there-fore not in strict char-ac-ter, how-ever
ad-mir-ably satir-ical, that after go-ing to school him-self, he should then
go abroad in-cul-cat-ing not what he learned there, but the folly of it.
His title, school-mas-ter, would very nat-ur-ally seem de-rived from the
name be-stowed upon the harem it-self, but some have sur-mised that the
man who first thus en-titled this sort of Ot-to-man whale, must have read
the mem-oirs of Vidocq, and in-formed him-self what sort of a
coun-try-school-mas-ter that fam-ous French-man was in his younger days, and
what was the nature of those oc-cult les-sons he in-cul-cated into some of
his pu-pils.

The same se-cluded-ness and isol-a-tion to which the school-mas-ter whale
be-takes him-self in his ad-van-cing years, is true of all aged Sperm
Whales. Al-most uni-ver-sally, a lone whale—as a sol-it-ary Le-viathan is
called—proves an an-cient one. Like ven-er-able moss-bearded Daniel Boone,
he will have no one near him but Nature her-self; and her he takes to
wife in the wil-der-ness of wa-ters, and the best of wives she is, though
she keeps so many moody secrets.

The schools com-pos-ing none but young and vig-or-ous males, pre-vi-ously
men-tioned, of-fer a strong con-trast to the harem schools. For while
those fe-male whales are char-ac-ter-ist-ic-ally timid, the young males, or
forty-bar-rel-bulls, as they call them, are by far the most pug-na-cious
of all Le-viath-ans, and pro-ver-bi-ally the most dan-ger-ous to en-counter;
ex-cept-ing those won-drous grey-headed, grizzled whales, some-times met,
and these will fight you like grim fiends ex-as-per-ated by a penal gout.

The Forty-bar-rel-bull schools are lar-ger than the harem schools. Like a
mob of young col-legi-ans, they are full of fight, fun, and wicked-ness,
tum-bling round the world at such a reck-less, rol-lick-ing rate, that no
prudent un-der-writer would in-sure them any more than he would a ri-ot-ous
lad at Yale or Har-vard. They soon re-lin-quish this tur-bu-lence though,
and when about three-fourths grown, break up, and sep-ar-ately go about
in quest of set-tle-ments, that is, harems.

Another point of dif-fer-ence between the male and fe-male schools is
still more char-ac-ter-istic of the sexes. Say you strike a
Forty-bar-rel-bull—poor devil! all his com-rades quit him. But strike a
mem-ber of the harem school, and her com-pan-ions swim around her with
every token of con-cern, some-times linger-ing so near her and so long, as
them-selves to fall a prey.


CHAPTER 89. Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish.

The al-lu-sion to the waif and waif-poles in the last chapter but one,
ne-ces-sit-ates some ac-count of the laws and reg-u-la-tions of the whale
fish-ery, of which the waif may be deemed the grand sym-bol and badge.

It fre-quently hap-pens that when sev-eral ships are cruis-ing in com-pany,
a whale may be struck by one ves-sel, then es-cape, and be fi-nally killed
and cap-tured by an-other ves-sel; and herein are in-dir-ectly com-prised
many minor con-tin-gen-cies, all par-tak-ing of this one grand fea-ture. For
ex-ample,—after a weary and per-il-ous chase and cap-ture of a whale, the
body may get loose from the ship by reason of a vi-ol-ent storm; and
drift-ing far away to lee-ward, be re-taken by a second whaler, who, in a
calm, snugly tows it along-side, without risk of life or line. Thus the
most vex-a-tious and vi-ol-ent dis-putes would of-ten arise between the
fish-er-men, were there not some writ-ten or un-writ-ten, uni-ver-sal,
un-dis-puted law ap-plic-able to all cases.

Per-haps the only formal whal-ing code au-thor-ized by le-gis-lat-ive
en-act-ment, was that of Hol-land. It was de-creed by the States-Gen-eral in
A.D. 1695. But though no other na-tion has ever had any writ-ten whal-ing
law, yet the Amer-ican fish-er-men have been their own le-gis-lat-ors and
law-yers in this mat-ter. They have provided a sys-tem which for terse
com-pre-hens-ive-ness sur-passes Justinian’s Pandects and the By-laws of the
Chinese So-ci-ety for the Sup-pres-sion of Med-dling with other People’s
Busi-ness. Yes; these laws might be en-graven on a Queen Anne’s farth-ing,
or the barb of a har-poon, and worn round the neck, so small are they.

I. A Fast-Fish be-longs to the party fast to it.

II. A Loose-Fish is fair game for any-body who can soon-est catch it.

But what plays the mis-chief with this mas-terly code is the ad-mir-able
brev-ity of it, which ne-ces-sit-ates a vast volume of com-ment-ar-ies to
ex-pound it.

First: What is a Fast-Fish? Alive or dead a fish is tech-nic-ally fast,
when it is con-nec-ted with an oc-cu-pied ship or boat, by any me-dium at
all con-trol-lable by the oc-cu-pant or oc-cu-pants,—a mast, an oar, a
nine-inch cable, a tele-graph wire, or a strand of cob-web, it is all the
same. Like-wise a fish is tech-nic-ally fast when it bears a waif, or any
other re-cog-nised sym-bol of pos-ses-sion; so long as the party waif-ing it
plainly evince their abil-ity at any time to take it along-side, as well
as their in-ten-tion so to do.

These are sci-entific com-ment-ar-ies; but the com-ment-ar-ies of the whale-men
them-selves some-times con-sist in hard words and harder knocks—the
Coke-upon-Littleton of the fist. True, among the more up-right and
hon-or-able whale-men al-low-ances are al-ways made for pe-cu-liar cases, where
it would be an out-rageous moral in-justice for one party to claim
pos-ses-sion of a whale pre-vi-ously chased or killed by an-other party. But
oth-ers are by no means so scru-pu-lous.

Some fifty years ago there was a curi-ous case of whale-trover lit-ig-ated
in Eng-land, wherein the plaintiffs set forth that after a hard chase of
a whale in the North-ern seas; and when in-deed they (the plaintiffs) had
suc-ceeded in har-poon-ing the fish; they were at last, through peril of
their lives, ob-liged to for-sake not only their lines, but their boat
it-self. Ul-timately the de-fend-ants (the crew of an-other ship) came up
with the whale, struck, killed, seized, and fi-nally ap-pro-pri-ated it
be-fore the very eyes of the plaintiffs. And when those de-fend-ants were
re-mon-strated with, their cap-tain snapped his fin-gers in the plaintiffs’
teeth, and as-sured them that by way of dox-o-logy to the deed he had
done, he would now re-tain their line, har-poons, and boat, which had
re-mained at-tached to the whale at the time of the seizure. Where-fore
the plaintiffs now sued for the re-cov-ery of the value of their whale,
line, har-poons, and boat.

Mr. Er-skine was coun-sel for the de-fend-ants; Lord El-len-bor-ough was the
judge. In the course of the de-fence, the witty Er-skine went on to
il-lus-trate his po-s-i-tion, by al-lud-ing to a re-cent crim. con. case,
wherein a gen-tle-man, after in vain try-ing to bridle his wife’s
vi-cious-ness, had at last aban-doned her upon the seas of life; but in
the course of years, re-pent-ing of that step, he in-sti-tuted an ac-tion to
re-cover pos-ses-sion of her. Er-skine was on the other side; and he then
sup-por-ted it by say-ing, that though the gen-tle-man had ori-gin-ally
har-pooned the lady, and had once had her fast, and only by reason of
the great stress of her plunging vi-cious-ness, had at last aban-doned
her; yet aban-don her he did, so that she be-came a loose-fish; and
there-fore when a sub-sequent gen-tle-man re-har-pooned her, the lady then
be-came that sub-sequent gen-tle-man’s prop-erty, along with whatever
har-poon might have been found stick-ing in her.

Now in the present case Er-skine con-ten-ded that the ex-amples of the
whale and the lady were re-cip-roc-ally il-lus-trat-ive of each other.

These plead-ings, and the counter plead-ings, be-ing duly heard, the very
learned judge in set terms de-cided, to wit,—That as for the boat, he
awar-ded it to the plaintiffs, be-cause they had merely aban-doned it to
save their lives; but that with re-gard to the con-tro-ver-ted whale,
har-poons, and line, they be-longed to the de-fend-ants; the whale, be-cause
it was a Loose-Fish at the time of the fi-nal cap-ture; and the har-poons
and line be-cause when the fish made off with them, it (the fish)
ac-quired a prop-erty in those art-icles; and hence any-body who af-ter-wards
took the fish had a right to them. Now the de-fend-ants af-ter-wards took
the fish; ergo, the afore-said art-icles were theirs.

A com-mon man look-ing at this de-cision of the very learned Judge, might
pos-sibly ob-ject to it. But ploughed up to the primary rock of the
mat-ter, the two great prin-ciples laid down in the twin whal-ing laws
pre-vi-ously quoted, and ap-plied and elu-cid-ated by Lord El-len-bor-ough in
the above cited case; these two laws touch-ing Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish,
I say, will, on re-flec-tion, be found the fun-da-ment-als of all hu-man
jur-is-pru-dence; for not-with-stand-ing its com-plic-ated tracery of
sculp-ture, the Temple of the Law, like the Temple of the Phil-istines,
has but two props to stand on.

Is it not a say-ing in every one’s mouth, Posses-sion is half of the law:
that is, re-gard-less of how the thing came into pos-ses-sion? But of-ten
pos-ses-sion is the whole of the law. What are the sinews and souls of
Rus-sian serfs and Re-pub-lican slaves but Fast-Fish, whereof pos-ses-sion
is the whole of the law? What to the ra-pa-cious land-lord is the widow’s
last mite but a Fast-Fish? What is yon-der un-detec-ted vil-lain’s marble
man-sion with a door-plate for a waif; what is that but a Fast-Fish?
What is the ru-in-ous dis-count which Mor-de-cai, the broker, gets from poor
Woe-be-gone, the bank-rupt, on a loan to keep Woe-be-gone’s fam-ily from
star-va-tion; what is that ru-in-ous dis-count but a Fast-Fish? What is the
Arch-bishop of Save-soul’s in-come of £100,000 seized from the scant bread
and cheese of hun-dreds of thou-sands of broken-backed laborers (all sure
of heaven without any of Save-soul’s help) what is that glob-u-lar
£100,000 but a Fast-Fish? What are the Duke of Dun-der’s hered-it-ary
towns and ham-lets but Fast-Fish? What to that re-doubted har-poon-eer,
John Bull, is poor Ire-land, but a Fast-Fish? What to that apostolic
lan-cer, Brother Jonathan, is Texas but a Fast-Fish? And con-cern-ing all
these, is not Posses-sion the whole of the law?

But if the doc-trine of Fast-Fish be pretty gen-er-ally ap-plic-able, the
kindred doc-trine of Loose-Fish is still more widely so. That is
in-ter-na-tion-ally and uni-ver-sally ap-plic-able.

What was Amer-ica in 1492 but a Loose-Fish, in which Colum-bus struck the
Span-ish stand-ard by way of waif-ing it for his royal mas-ter and
mis-tress? What was Po-land to the Czar? What Greece to the Turk? What
In-dia to Eng-land? What at last will Mex-ico be to the Un-ited States? All
Loose-Fish.

What are the Rights of Man and the Liber-ties of the World but
Loose-Fish? What all men’s minds and opin-ions but Loose-Fish? What is
the prin-ciple of re-li-gious be-lief in them but a Loose-Fish? What to the
os-ten-ta-tious smug-gling verb-al-ists are the thoughts of thinkers but
Loose-Fish? What is the great globe it-self but a Loose-Fish? And what
are you, reader, but a Loose-Fish and a Fast-Fish, too?


CHAPTER 90. Heads or Tails.

“De balena vero suf-fi-cit, si rex ha-beat caput, et re-gina caudam.”
_Brac-ton, l. 3, c. 3._

Latin from the books of the Laws of Eng-land, which taken along with the
con-text, means, that of all whales cap-tured by any-body on the coast of
that land, the King, as Honor-ary Grand Har-poon-eer, must have the head,
and the Queen be re-spect-fully presen-ted with the tail. A di-vi-sion
which, in the whale, is much like halv-ing an apple; there is no
in-ter-me-di-ate re-mainder. Now as this law, un-der a mod-i-fied form, is to
this day in force in Eng-land; and as it of-fers in vari-ous re-spects a
strange an-om-aly touch-ing the gen-eral law of Fast and Loose-Fish, it is
here treated of in a sep-ar-ate chapter, on the same cour-teous prin-ciple
that prompts the Eng-lish rail-ways to be at the ex-pense of a sep-ar-ate
car, spe-cially re-served for the ac-com-mod-a-tion of roy-alty. In the first
place, in curi-ous proof of the fact that the above-men-tioned law is
still in force, I pro-ceed to lay be-fore you a cir-cum-stance that
happened within the last two years.

It seems that some hon-est mar-iners of Dover, or Sand-wich, or some one
of the Cinque Ports, had after a hard chase suc-ceeded in killing and
beach-ing a fine whale which they had ori-gin-ally descried afar off from
the shore. Now the Cinque Ports are par-tially or some-how un-der the
jur-is-dic-tion of a sort of po-lice-man or beadle, called a Lord Warden.
Hold-ing the of-fice dir-ectly from the crown, I be-lieve, all the royal
emolu-ments in-cid-ent to the Cinque Port ter-rit-or-ies be-come by as-sign-ment
his. By some writers this of-fice is called a sine-cure. But not so.
Be-cause the Lord Warden is busily em-ployed at times in fob-bing his
per-quis-ites; which are his chiefly by vir-tue of that same fob-bing of
them.

Now when these poor sun-burnt mar-iners, bare-footed, and with their
trowsers rolled high up on their eely legs, had wear-ily hauled their
fat fish high and dry, prom-ising them-selves a good £150 from the
pre-cious oil and bone; and in fantasy sip-ping rare tea with their
wives, and good ale with their cronies, upon the strength of their
re-spect-ive shares; up steps a very learned and most Chris-tian and
char-it-able gen-tle-man, with a copy of Black-stone un-der his arm; and
lay-ing it upon the whale’s head, he says—“Hands off! this fish, my
mas-ters, is a Fast-Fish. I seize it as the Lord Warden’s.” Upon this
the poor mar-iners in their re-spect-ful con-sterna-tion—so truly
Eng-lish—know-ing not what to say, fall to vig-or-ously scratch-ing their
heads all round; mean-while rue-fully glan-cing from the whale to the
stranger. But that did in no-wise mend the mat-ter, or at all soften the
hard heart of the learned gen-tle-man with the copy of Black-stone. At
length one of them, after long scratch-ing about for his ideas, made
bold to speak,

“Please, sir, who is the Lord Warden?”

“The Duke.”

“But the duke had noth-ing to do with tak-ing this fish?”

“It is his.”

“We have been at great trouble, and peril, and some ex-pense, and is all
that to go to the Duke’s be-ne-fit; we get-ting noth-ing at all for our
pains but our blisters?”

“It is his.”

“Is the Duke so very poor as to be forced to this des-per-ate mode of
get-ting a live-li-hood?”

“It is his.”

“I thought to re-lieve my old bed-rid-den mother by part of my share of
this whale.”

“It is his.”

“Won’t the Duke be con-tent with a quarter or a half?”

“It is his.”

In a word, the whale was seized and sold, and his Grace the Duke of
Wel-ling-ton re-ceived the money. Think-ing that viewed in some par-tic-u-lar
lights, the case might by a bare pos-sib-il-ity in some small de-gree be
deemed, un-der the cir-cum-stances, a rather hard one, an hon-est cler-gy-man
of the town re-spect-fully ad-dressed a note to his Grace, beg-ging him to
take the case of those un-for-tu-nate mar-iners into full con-sid-er-a-tion. To
which my Lord Duke in sub-stance replied (both let-ters were pub-lished)
that he had already done so, and re-ceived the money, and would be
ob-liged to the rev-er-end gen-tle-man if for the fu-ture he (the rev-er-end
gen-tle-man) would de-cline med-dling with other people’s busi-ness. Is this
the still mil-it-ant old man, stand-ing at the corners of the three
king-doms, on all hands co-er-cing alms of beg-gars?

It will read-ily be seen that in this case the al-leged right of the Duke
to the whale was a del-eg-ated one from the Sover-eign. We must needs
in-quire then on what prin-ciple the Sover-eign is ori-gin-ally in-ves-ted
with that right. The law it-self has already been set forth. But Plow-don
gives us the reason for it. Says Plow-don, the whale so caught be-longs
to the King and Queen, “be-cause of its su-per-ior ex-cel-lence.” And by the
sound-est com-ment-at-ors this has ever been held a co-gent ar-gu-ment in such
mat-ters.

But why should the King have the head, and the Queen the tail? A reason
for that, ye law-yers!

In his treat-ise on “Queen-Gold,” or Queen-pin-money, an old King’s Bench
au-thor, one Wil-liam Prynne, thus dis-cour-seth: “Ye tail is ye Queen’s,
that ye Queen’s ward-robe may be sup-plied with ye whale-bone.” Now this
was writ-ten at a time when the black limber bone of the Green-land or
Right whale was largely used in ladies’ bod-ices. But this same bone is
not in the tail; it is in the head, which is a sad mis-take for a
saga-cious law-yer like Prynne. But is the Queen a mer-maid, to be
presen-ted with a tail? An al-leg-or-ical mean-ing may lurk here.

There are two royal fish so styled by the Eng-lish law writers—the whale
and the stur-geon; both royal prop-erty un-der cer-tain lim-it-a-tions, and
nom-in-ally sup-ply-ing the tenth branch of the crown’s or-din-ary rev-enue. I
know not that any other au-thor has hin-ted of the mat-ter; but by
in-fer-ence it seems to me that the stur-geon must be di-vided in the same
way as the whale, the King re-ceiv-ing the highly dense and elastic head
pe-cu-liar to that fish, which, sym-bol-ic-ally re-garded, may pos-sibly be
hu-mor-ously groun-ded upon some pre-sumed con-geni-al-ity. And thus there
seems a reason in all things, even in law.


CHAPTER 91. The Pequod Meets The Rose-Bud.

“In vain it was to rake for Am-ber-griese in the paunch of this
Le-viathan, in-suf-fer-able fetor deny-ing not in-quiry.” _Sir T. Browne,
V.E._

It was a week or two after the last whal-ing scene re-coun-ted, and when
we were slowly sail-ing over a sleepy, va-pory, mid-day sea, that the
many noses on the Pequod’s deck proved more vi-gil-ant dis-cover-ers than
the three pairs of eyes aloft. A pe-cu-liar and not very pleas-ant smell
was smelt in the sea.

“I will bet some-thing now,” said Stubb, “that some-where here-abouts are
some of those drugged whales we tickled the other day. I thought they
would keel up be-fore long.”

Presently, the va-pors in ad-vance slid aside; and there in the dis-tance
lay a ship, whose furled sails be-tokened that some sort of whale must
be along-side. As we glided nearer, the stranger showed French col-ours
from his peak; and by the ed-dy-ing cloud of vul-ture sea-fowl that
circled, and hovered, and swooped around him, it was plain that the
whale along-side must be what the fish-er-men call a blas-ted whale, that
is, a whale that has died un-mo-les-ted on the sea, and so floated an
un-ap-pro-pri-ated corpse. It may well be con-ceived, what an un-sa-vory odor
such a mass must ex-hale; worse than an Assyr-ian city in the plague,
when the liv-ing are in-com-pet-ent to bury the de-par-ted. So in-tol-er-able
in-deed is it re-garded by some, that no cu-pid-ity could per-suade them to
moor along-side of it. Yet are there those who will still do it;
not-with-stand-ing the fact that the oil ob-tained from such sub-jects is of
a very in-ferior qual-ity, and by no means of the nature of
at-tar-of-rose.

Com-ing still nearer with the ex-pir-ing breeze, we saw that the French-man
had a second whale along-side; and this second whale seemed even more of
a nose-gay than the first. In truth, it turned out to be one of those
prob-lem-at-ical whales that seem to dry up and die with a sort of
prodi-gious dys-pep-sia, or in-di-ges-tion; leav-ing their de-funct bod-ies
al-most en-tirely bank-rupt of any-thing like oil. Never-the-less, in the
proper place we shall see that no know-ing fish-er-man will ever turn up
his nose at such a whale as this, how-ever much he may shun blas-ted
whales in gen-eral.

The Pequod had now swept so nigh to the stranger, that Stubb vowed he
re-cog-nised his cut-ting spade-pole en-tangled in the lines that were
knot-ted round the tail of one of these whales.

“There’s a pretty fel-low, now,” he ban-ter-ingly laughed, stand-ing in the
ship’s bows, “there’s a jackal for ye! I well know that these Crap-poes
of French-men are but poor dev-ils in the fish-ery; some-times lower-ing
their boats for break-ers, mis-tak-ing them for Sperm Whale spouts; yes,
and some-times sail-ing from their port with their hold full of boxes of
tal-low candles, and cases of snuffers, fore-see-ing that all the oil they
will get won’t be enough to dip the Cap-tain’s wick into; aye, we all
know these things; but look ye, here’s a Crappo that is con-tent with
our leav-ings, the drugged whale there, I mean; aye, and is con-tent too
with scrap-ing the dry bones of that other pre-cious fish he has there.
Poor devil! I say, pass round a hat, some one, and let’s make him a
present of a little oil for dear char-ity’s sake. For what oil he’ll get
from that drugged whale there, wouldn’t be fit to burn in a jail; no,
not in a con-demned cell. And as for the other whale, why, I’ll agree to
get more oil by chop-ping up and try-ing out these three masts of ours,
than he’ll get from that bundle of bones; though, now that I think of
it, it may con-tain some-thing worth a good deal more than oil; yes,
am-ber-gris. I won-der now if our old man has thought of that. It’s worth
try-ing. Yes, I’m for it;” and so say-ing he star-ted for the
quarter-deck.

By this time the faint air had be-come a com-plete calm; so that whether
or no, the Pequod was now fairly en-trapped in the smell, with no hope
of es-cap-ing ex-cept by its breez-ing up again. Is-su-ing from the cabin,
Stubb now called his boat’s crew, and pulled off for the stranger.
Draw-ing across her bow, he per-ceived that in ac-cord-ance with the
fanci-ful French taste, the up-per part of her stem-piece was carved in
the like-ness of a huge droop-ing stalk, was painted green, and for
thorns had cop-per spikes pro-ject-ing from it here and there; the whole
ter-min-at-ing in a sym-met-rical fol-ded bulb of a bright red col-our. Upon
her head boards, in large gilt let-ters, he read “Bouton de
Rose,”—Rose-but-ton, or Rose-bud; and this was the ro-mantic name of this
aro-matic ship.

Though Stubb did not un-der-stand the _Bouton_ part of the in-scrip-tion,
yet the word _rose_, and the bulbous fig-ure-head put to-gether,
suf-fi-ciently ex-plained the whole to him.

“A wooden rose-bud, eh?” he cried with his hand to his nose, “that will
do very well; but how like all cre-ation it smells!”

Now in or-der to hold dir-ect com-mu-nic-a-tion with the people on deck, he
had to pull round the bows to the star-board side, and thus come close
to the blas-ted whale; and so talk over it.

Ar-rived then at this spot, with one hand still to his nose, he
bawled—“Bouton-de-Rose, ahoy! are there any of you Bouton-de-Roses that
speak Eng-lish?”

“Yes,” re-joined a Guern-sey-man from the bul-warks, who turned out to be
the chief-mate.

“Well, then, my Bouton-de-Rose-bud, have you seen the White Whale?”

“_What_ whale?”

“The _White_ Whale—a Sperm Whale—Moby Dick, have ye seen him?

“Never heard of such a whale. Cach-alot Blanche! White Whale—no.”

“Very good, then; good bye now, and I’ll call again in a minute.”

Then rap-idly pulling back to-wards the Pequod, and see-ing Ahab lean-ing
over the quarter-deck rail await-ing his re-port, he moul-ded his two
hands into a trum-pet and shouted—“No, Sir! No!” Upon which Ahab
re-tired, and Stubb re-turned to the French-man.

He now per-ceived that the Guern-sey-man, who had just got into the
chains, and was us-ing a cut-ting-spade, had slung his nose in a sort of
bag.

“What’s the mat-ter with your nose, there?” said Stubb. “Broke it?”

“I wish it was broken, or that I didn’t have any nose at all!” answered
the Guern-sey-man, who did not seem to rel-ish the job he was at very
much. “But what are you hold-ing _y-ours_ for?”

“Oh, noth-ing! It’s a wax nose; I have to hold it on. Fine day, ain’t
it? Air rather gardenny, I should say; throw us a bunch of posies, will
ye, Bouton-de-Rose?”

“What in the devil’s name do you want here?” roared the Guern-sey-man,
fly-ing into a sud-den pas-sion.

“Oh! keep cool—cool? yes, that’s the word! why don’t you pack those
whales in ice while you’re work-ing at ’em? But jok-ing aside, though; do
you know, Rose-bud, that it’s all non-sense try-ing to get any oil out of
such whales? As for that dried up one, there, he hasn’t a gill in his
whole car-case.”

“I know that well enough; but, d’ye see, the Cap-tain here won’t be-lieve
it; this is his first voy-age; he was a Co-logne man-u-fac-turer be-fore. But
come aboard, and may-hap he’ll be-lieve you, if he won’t me; and so I’ll
get out of this dirty scrape.”

“Anything to ob-lige ye, my sweet and pleas-ant fel-low,” re-joined Stubb,
and with that he soon moun-ted to the deck. There a queer scene
presen-ted it-self. The sail-ors, in tas-selled caps of red worsted, were
get-ting the heavy tackles in read-i-ness for the whales. But they worked
rather slow and talked very fast, and seemed in any-thing but a good
hu-mor. All their noses up-wardly pro-jec-ted from their faces like so many
jib-booms. Now and then pairs of them would drop their work, and run up
to the mast-head to get some fresh air. Some think-ing they would catch
the plague, dipped oakum in coal-tar, and at in-ter-vals held it to their
nos-trils. Oth-ers hav-ing broken the stems of their pipes al-most short
off at the bowl, were vig-or-ously puff-ing to-bacco-smoke, so that it
con-stantly filled their ol-factor-ies.

Stubb was struck by a shower of out-cries and ana-themas pro-ceed-ing from
the Cap-tain’s round-house abaft; and look-ing in that dir-ec-tion saw a
fiery face thrust from be-hind the door, which was held ajar from
within. This was the tor-men-ted sur-geon, who, after in vain
re-mon-strat-ing against the pro-ceed-ings of the day, had be-taken him-self
to the Cap-tain’s round-house (_cab-in-et_ he called it) to avoid the
pest; but still, could not help yelling out his en-treat-ies and
in-dig-na-tions at times.

Mark-ing all this, Stubb ar-gued well for his scheme, and turn-ing to the
Guern-sey-man had a little chat with him, dur-ing which the stranger mate
ex-pressed his de-test-a-tion of his Cap-tain as a con-ceited ig-nora-mus, who
had brought them all into so un-sa-vory and un-prof-it-able a pickle.
Sound-ing him care-fully, Stubb fur-ther per-ceived that the Guern-sey-man
had not the slight-est sus-pi-cion con-cern-ing the am-ber-gris. He there-fore
held his peace on that head, but oth-er-wise was quite frank and
con-fid-en-tial with him, so that the two quickly con-cocted a little plan
for both cir-cum-vent-ing and sat-ir-iz-ing the Cap-tain, without his at all
dream-ing of dis-trust-ing their sin-cer-ity. Ac-cord-ing to this little plan
of theirs, the Guern-sey-man, un-der cover of an in-ter-preter’s of-fice,
was to tell the Cap-tain what he pleased, but as com-ing from Stubb; and
as for Stubb, he was to ut-ter any non-sense that should come up-per-most
in him dur-ing the in-ter-view.

By this time their destined vic-tim ap-peared from his cabin. He was a
small and dark, but rather del-ic-ate look-ing man for a sea-cap-tain, with
large whiskers and mous-tache, how-ever; and wore a red cot-ton vel-vet
vest with watch-seals at his side. To this gen-tle-man, Stubb was now
po-litely in-tro-duced by the Guern-sey-man, who at once os-ten-ta-tiously put
on the as-pect of in-ter-pret-ing between them.

“What shall I say to him first?” said he.

“Why,” said Stubb, eye-ing the vel-vet vest and the watch and seals, “you
may as well be-gin by telling him that he looks a sort of ba-by-ish to me,
though I don’t pre-tend to be a judge.”

“He says, Mon-sieur,” said the Guern-sey-man, in French, turn-ing to his
cap-tain, “that only yes-ter-day his ship spoke a ves-sel, whose cap-tain
and chief-mate, with six sail-ors, had all died of a fever caught from a
blas-ted whale they had brought along-side.”

Upon this the cap-tain star-ted, and eagerly de-sired to know more.

“What now?” said the Guern-sey-man to Stubb.

“Why, since he takes it so easy, tell him that now I have eyed him
care-fully, I’m quite cer-tain that he’s no more fit to com-mand a
whale-ship than a St. Jago mon-key. In fact, tell him from me he’s a
ba-boon.”

“He vows and de-clares, Mon-sieur, that the other whale, the dried one,
is far more deadly than the blas-ted one; in fine, Mon-sieur, he con-jures
us, as we value our lives, to cut loose from these fish.”

In-stantly the cap-tain ran for-ward, and in a loud voice com-manded his
crew to de-sist from hoist-ing the cut-ting-tackles, and at once cast
loose the cables and chains con-fin-ing the whales to the ship.

“What now?” said the Guern-sey-man, when the Cap-tain had re-turned to
them.

“Why, let me see; yes, you may as well tell him now that—that—in fact,
tell him I’ve diddled him, and (aside to him-self) per-haps some-body
else.”

“He says, Mon-sieur, that he’s very happy to have been of any ser-vice to
us.”

Hear-ing this, the cap-tain vowed that they were the grate-ful parties
(mean-ing him-self and mate) and con-cluded by in-vit-ing Stubb down into
his cabin to drink a bottle of Bordeaux.

“He wants you to take a glass of wine with him,” said the in-ter-preter.

“Thank him heart-ily; but tell him it’s against my prin-ciples to drink
with the man I’ve diddled. In fact, tell him I must go.”

“He says, Mon-sieur, that his prin-ciples won’t ad-mit of his drink-ing;
but that if Mon-sieur wants to live an-other day to drink, then Mon-sieur
had best drop all four boats, and pull the ship away from these whales,
for it’s so calm they won’t drift.”

By this time Stubb was over the side, and get-ting into his boat, hailed
the Guern-sey-man to this ef-fect,—that hav-ing a long tow-line in his
boat, he would do what he could to help them, by pulling out the
lighter whale of the two from the ship’s side. While the French-man’s
boats, then, were en-gaged in tow-ing the ship one way, Stubb
be-ne-vol-ently towed away at his whale the other way, os-ten-ta-tiously
slack-ing out a most un-usu-ally long tow-line.

Presently a breeze sprang up; Stubb feigned to cast off from the whale;
hoist-ing his boats, the French-man soon in-creased his dis-tance, while
the Pequod slid in between him and Stubb’s whale. Whereupon Stubb
quickly pulled to the float-ing body, and hail-ing the Pequod to give
no-tice of his in-ten-tions, at once pro-ceeded to reap the fruit of his
un-right-eous cun-ning. Seiz-ing his sharp boat-spade, he com-menced an
ex-cav-a-tion in the body, a little be-hind the side fin. You would al-most
have thought he was dig-ging a cel-lar there in the sea; and when at
length his spade struck against the gaunt ribs, it was like turn-ing up
old Ro-man tiles and pot-tery bur-ied in fat Eng-lish loam. His boat’s crew
were all in high ex-cite-ment, eagerly help-ing their chief, and look-ing
as anxious as gold-hunters.

And all the time num-ber-less fowls were diving, and duck-ing, and
scream-ing, and yelling, and fight-ing around them. Stubb was be-gin-ning
to look dis-ap-poin-ted, es-pe-cially as the hor-rible nose-gay in-creased,
when sud-denly from out the very heart of this plague, there stole a
faint stream of per-fume, which flowed through the tide of bad smells
without be-ing ab-sorbed by it, as one river will flow into and then
along with an-other, without at all blend-ing with it for a time.

“I have it, I have it,” cried Stubb, with de-light, strik-ing some-thing
in the sub-ter-ranean re-gions, “a purse! a purse!”

Drop-ping his spade, he thrust both hands in, and drew out hand-fuls of
some-thing that looked like ripe Wind-sor soap, or rich mottled old
cheese; very unc-tu-ous and sa-vory withal. You might eas-ily dent it with
your thumb; it is of a hue between yel-low and ash col-our. And this,
good friends, is am-ber-gris, worth a gold guinea an ounce to any
drug-gist. Some six hand-fuls were ob-tained; but more was un-avoid-ably
lost in the sea, and still more, per-haps, might have been se-cured were
it not for im-pa-tient Ahab’s loud com-mand to Stubb to de-sist, and come
on board, else the ship would bid them good bye.


CHAPTER 92. Am-ber-gris.

Now this am-ber-gris is a very curi-ous sub-stance, and so im-port-ant as an
art-icle of com-merce, that in 1791 a cer-tain Nan-tucket-born Cap-tain
Coffin was ex-amined at the bar of the Eng-lish House of Com-mons on that
sub-ject. For at that time, and in-deed un-til a com-par-at-ively late day,
the pre-cise ori-gin of am-ber-gris re-mained, like am-ber it-self, a prob-lem
to the learned. Though the word am-ber-gris is but the French com-pound
for grey am-ber, yet the two sub-stances are quite dis-tinct. For am-ber,
though at times found on the sea-coast, is also dug up in some far
in-land soils, whereas am-ber-gris is never found ex-cept upon the sea.
Besides, am-ber is a hard, trans-par-ent, brittle, odor-less sub-stance,
used for mouth-pieces to pipes, for beads and or-na-ments; but am-ber-gris
is soft, waxy, and so highly fra-grant and spicy, that it is largely
used in per-fumery, in pas-tiles, pre-cious candles, hair-powders, and
po-matum. The Turks use it in cook-ing, and also carry it to Mecca, for
the same pur-pose that frankin-cense is car-ried to St. Peter’s in Rome.
Some wine mer-chants drop a few grains into claret, to fla-vor it.

Who would think, then, that such fine ladies and gen-tle-men should
re-gale them-selves with an es-sence found in the in-glori-ous bowels of a
sick whale! Yet so it is. By some, am-ber-gris is sup-posed to be the
cause, and by oth-ers the ef-fect, of the dys-pep-sia in the whale. How to
cure such a dys-pep-sia it were hard to say, un-less by ad-min-is-ter-ing
three or four boat loads of Brandreth’s pills, and then run-ning out of
harm’s way, as laborers do in blast-ing rocks.

I have for-got-ten to say that there were found in this am-ber-gris,
cer-tain hard, round, bony plates, which at first Stubb thought might be
sail-ors’ trowsers but-tons; but it af-ter-wards turned out that they were
noth-ing more than pieces of small squid bones em-balmed in that man-ner.

Now that the in-cor-rup-tion of this most fra-grant am-ber-gris should be
found in the heart of such de-cay; is this noth-ing? Be-think thee of that
say-ing of St. Paul in Cor-inthi-ans, about cor-rup-tion and in-cor-rup-tion;
how that we are sown in dis-honor, but raised in glory. And like-wise
call to mind that say-ing of Paracelsus about what it is that maketh the
best musk. Also for-get not the strange fact that of all things of
ill-sa-vor, Co-logne-wa-ter, in its rudi-mental man-u-fac-tur-ing stages, is
the worst.

I should like to con-clude the chapter with the above ap-peal, but
can-not, ow-ing to my anxi-ety to re-pel a charge of-ten made against
whale-men, and which, in the es-tim-a-tion of some already biased minds,
might be con-sidered as in-dir-ectly sub-stan-ti-ated by what has been said
of the French-man’s two whales. Else-where in this volume the slan-der-ous
as-per-sion has been dis-proved, that the vo-ca-tion of whal-ing is
through-out a slat-ternly, un-tidy busi-ness. But there is an-other thing to
re-but. They hint that all whales al-ways smell bad. Now how did this
odi-ous stigma ori-gin-ate?

I opine, that it is plainly trace-able to the first ar-rival of the
Green-land whal-ing ships in Lon-don, more than two cen-tur-ies ago. Be-cause
those whale-men did not then, and do not now, try out their oil at sea
as the South-ern ships have al-ways done; but cut-ting up the fresh
blub-ber in small bits, thrust it through the bung holes of large casks,
and carry it home in that man-ner; the short-ness of the sea-son in those
Icy Seas, and the sud-den and vi-ol-ent storms to which they are ex-posed,
for-bid-ding any other course. The con-sequence is, that upon break-ing
into the hold, and un-load-ing one of these whale cemeter-ies, in the
Green-land dock, a sa-vor is given forth some-what sim-ilar to that arising
from ex-cav-at-ing an old city grave-yard, for the found-a-tions of a
Ly-ing-in Hos-pital.

I partly sur-mise also, that this wicked charge against whalers may be
like-wise im-puted to the ex-ist-ence on the coast of Green-land, in former
times, of a Dutch vil-lage called Schmer-en-burgh or Smeer-en-berg, which
lat-ter name is the one used by the learned Fogo Von Slack, in his great
work on Smells, a text-book on that sub-ject. As its name im-ports
(smeer, fat; berg, to put up), this vil-lage was foun-ded in or-der to
af-ford a place for the blub-ber of the Dutch whale fleet to be tried
out, without be-ing taken home to Hol-land for that pur-pose. It was a
col-lec-tion of fur-naces, fat-kettles, and oil sheds; and when the works
were in full op-er-a-tion cer-tainly gave forth no very pleas-ant sa-vor. But
all this is quite dif-fer-ent with a South Sea Sperm Whaler; which in a
voy-age of four years per-haps, after com-pletely filling her hold with
oil, does not, per-haps, con-sume fifty days in the busi-ness of boil-ing
out; and in the state that it is casked, the oil is nearly scent-less.
The truth is, that liv-ing or dead, if but de-cently treated, whales as a
spe-cies are by no means creatures of ill odor; nor can whale-men be
re-cog-nised, as the people of the middle ages af-fected to de-tect a Jew
in the com-pany, by the nose. Nor in-deed can the whale pos-sibly be
oth-er-wise than fra-grant, when, as a gen-eral thing, he en-joys such high
health; tak-ing abund-ance of ex-er-cise; al-ways out of doors; though, it
is true, sel-dom in the open air. I say, that the mo-tion of a Sperm
Whale’s flukes above wa-ter dis-penses a per-fume, as when a musk-scen-ted
lady rustles her dress in a warm par-lor. What then shall I liken the
Sperm Whale to for fra-grance, con-sid-er-ing his mag-nitude? Must it not be
to that fam-ous ele-phant, with jew-elled tusks, and redol-ent with myrrh,
which was led out of an In-dian town to do honor to Al-ex-an-der the Great?


CHAPTER 93. The Cast-away.

It was but some few days after en-coun-ter-ing the French-man, that a most
sig-ni-fic-ant event be-fell the most in-sig-ni-fic-ant of the Pequod’s crew;
an event most lam-ent-able; and which ended in provid-ing the some-times
madly merry and pre-des-tin-ated craft with a liv-ing and ever ac-com-pa-ny-ing
proph-ecy of whatever shattered se-quel might prove her own.

Now, in the whale ship, it is not every one that goes in the boats.
Some few hands are re-served called ship-keep-ers, whose province it is
to work the ves-sel while the boats are pur-su-ing the whale. As a gen-eral
thing, these ship-keep-ers are as hardy fel-lows as the men com-pris-ing
the boats’ crews. But if there hap-pen to be an un-duly slender, clumsy,
or timor-ous wight in the ship, that wight is cer-tain to be made a
ship-keeper. It was so in the Pequod with the little negro Pip-pin by
nick-name, Pip by ab-bre-vi-ation. Poor Pip! ye have heard of him be-fore;
ye must re-mem-ber his tam-bour-ine on that dra-matic mid-night, so
gloomy-jolly.

In outer as-pect, Pip and Dough-Boy made a match, like a black pony and
a white one, of equal de-vel-op-ments, though of dis-sim-ilar col-our, driven
in one ec-cent-ric span. But while hap-less Dough-Boy was by nature dull
and tor-pid in his in-tel-lects, Pip, though over tender-hearted, was at
bot-tom very bright, with that pleas-ant, gen-ial, jolly bright-ness
pe-cu-liar to his tribe; a tribe, which ever en-joy all hol-i-days and
fest-iv-it-ies with finer, freer rel-ish than any other race. For blacks,
the year’s cal-en-dar should show naught but three hun-dred and sixty-five
Fourth of Julys and New Year’s Days. Nor smile so, while I write that
this little black was bril-liant, for even black-ness has its bril-liancy;
be-hold yon lus-trous ebony, pan-elled in king’s cab-in-ets. But Pip loved
life, and all life’s peace-able se-cur-it-ies; so that the panic-strik-ing
busi-ness in which he had some-how un-ac-count-ably be-come en-trapped, had
most sadly blurred his bright-ness; though, as ere long will be seen,
what was thus tem-por-ar-ily sub-dued in him, in the end was destined to be
lur-idly il-lumined by strange wild fires, that fic-ti-tiously showed him
off to ten times the nat-ural lustre with which in his nat-ive Tol-land
County in Con-necti-cut, he had once en-livened many a fid-dler’s frolic on
the green; and at me-lodi-ous even-tide, with his gay ha-ha! had turned
the round ho-ri-zon into one star-belled tam-bour-ine. So, though in the
clear air of day, sus-pen-ded against a blue-veined neck, the
pure-watered dia-mond drop will health-ful glow; yet, when the cun-ning
jew-eller would show you the dia-mond in its most im-press-ive lustre, he
lays it against a gloomy ground, and then lights it up, not by the sun,
but by some un-nat-ural gases. Then come out those fiery ef-ful-gences,
in-fernally su-perb; then the evil-blaz-ing dia-mond, once the di-vinest
sym-bol of the crys-tal skies, looks like some crown-jewel stolen from
the King of Hell. But let us to the story.

It came to pass, that in the am-ber-gris af-fair Stubb’s after-oars-man
chanced so to sprain his hand, as for a time to be-come quite maimed;
and, tem-por-ar-ily, Pip was put into his place.

The first time Stubb lowered with him, Pip evinced much nervous-ness;
but hap-pily, for that time, es-caped close con-tact with the whale; and
there-fore came off not al-to-gether dis-cred-it-ably; though Stubb ob-serving
him, took care, af-ter-wards, to ex-hort him to cher-ish his cour-ageous-ness
to the ut-most, for he might of-ten find it need-ful.

Now upon the second lower-ing, the boat paddled upon the whale; and as
the fish re-ceived the dar-ted iron, it gave its cus-tom-ary rap, which
happened, in this in-stance, to be right un-der poor Pip’s seat. The
in-vol-un-tary con-sterna-tion of the mo-ment caused him to leap, paddle in
hand, out of the boat; and in such a way, that part of the slack whale
line com-ing against his chest, he breasted it over-board with him, so as
to be-come en-tangled in it, when at last plump-ing into the wa-ter. That
in-stant the stricken whale star-ted on a fierce run, the line swiftly
straightened; and presto! poor Pip came all foam-ing up to the chocks of
the boat, re-morse-lessly dragged there by the line, which had taken
sev-eral turns around his chest and neck.

Tasht-ego stood in the bows. He was full of the fire of the hunt. He
hated Pip for a pol-troon. Sn-atch-ing the boat-knife from its sheath, he
sus-pen-ded its sharp edge over the line, and turn-ing to-wards Stubb,
ex-claimed in-ter-rog-at-ively, “Cut?” Mean-time Pip’s blue, choked face
plainly looked, Do, for God’s sake! All passed in a flash. In less than
half a minute, this en-tire thing happened.

“Damn him, cut!” roared Stubb; and so the whale was lost and Pip was
saved.

So soon as he re-covered him-self, the poor little negro was as-sailed by
yells and ex-ec-ra-tions from the crew. Tran-quilly per-mit-ting these
ir-reg-u-lar curs-ings to evap-or-ate, Stubb then in a plain, busi-ness-like,
but still half hu-mor-ous man-ner, cursed Pip of-fi-cially; and that done,
un-of-fi-cially gave him much whole-some ad-vice. The sub-stance was, Never
jump from a boat, Pip, ex-cept—but all the rest was in-def-in-ite, as the
sound-est ad-vice ever is. Now, in gen-eral, _Stick to the boat_, is your
true motto in whal-ing; but cases will some-times hap-pen when _Leap from
the boat_, is still bet-ter. Moreover, as if per-ceiv-ing at last that if
he should give un-di-luted con-scien-tious ad-vice to Pip, he would be
leav-ing him too wide a mar-gin to jump in for the fu-ture; Stubb sud-denly
dropped all ad-vice, and con-cluded with a per-emp-tory com-mand, “Stick to
the boat, Pip, or by the Lord, I won’t pick you up if you jump; mind
that. We can’t af-ford to lose whales by the likes of you; a whale would
sell for thirty times what you would, Pip, in Alabama. Bear that in
mind, and don’t jump any more.” Hereby per-haps Stubb in-dir-ectly hin-ted,
that though man loved his fel-low, yet man is a money-mak-ing an-imal,
which propensity too of-ten in-ter-feres with his be-ne-vol-ence.

But we are all in the hands of the Gods; and Pip jumped again. It was
un-der very sim-ilar cir-cum-stances to the first per-form-ance; but this
time he did not breast out the line; and hence, when the whale star-ted
to run, Pip was left be-hind on the sea, like a hur-ried trav-el-ler’s
trunk. Alas! Stubb was but too true to his word. It was a beau-ti-ful,
bounteous, blue day; the spangled sea calm and cool, and flatly
stretch-ing away, all round, to the ho-ri-zon, like gold-beater’s skin
hammered out to the ex-tremest. Bob-bing up and down in that sea, Pip’s
ebon head showed like a head of cloves. No boat-knife was lif-ted when
he fell so rap-idly astern. Stubb’s in-ex-or-able back was turned upon him;
and the whale was winged. In three minutes, a whole mile of shore-less
ocean was between Pip and Stubb. Out from the centre of the sea, poor
Pip turned his crisp, curl-ing, black head to the sun, an-other lonely
cast-away, though the lofti-est and the bright-est.

Now, in calm weather, to swim in the open ocean is as easy to the
prac-tised swim-mer as to ride in a spring-car-riage ashore. But the aw-ful
lone-some-ness is in-tol-er-able. The in-tense con-cen-tra-tion of self in the
middle of such a heart-less im-mens-ity, my God! who can tell it? Mark,
how when sail-ors in a dead calm bathe in the open sea—mark how closely
they hug their ship and only coast along her sides.

But had Stubb really aban-doned the poor little negro to his fate? No;
he did not mean to, at least. Be-cause there were two boats in his wake,
and he sup-posed, no doubt, that they would of course come up to Pip
very quickly, and pick him up; though, in-deed, such con-sid-er-a-tions
to-wards oars-men jeop-ard-ized through their own timid-ity, is not al-ways
mani-fes-ted by the hunters in all sim-ilar in-stances; and such in-stances
not un-fre-quently oc-cur; al-most in-vari-ably in the fish-ery, a cow-ard, so
called, is marked with the same ruth-less de-test-a-tion pe-cu-liar to
mil-it-ary navies and armies.

But it so happened, that those boats, without see-ing Pip, sud-denly
spy-ing whales close to them on one side, turned, and gave chase; and
Stubb’s boat was now so far away, and he and all his crew so in-tent
upon his fish, that Pip’s ringed ho-ri-zon began to ex-pand around him
miser-ably. By the merest chance the ship it-self at last res-cued him;
but from that hour the little negro went about the deck an idiot; such,
at least, they said he was. The sea had jeer-ingly kept his fi-nite body
up, but drowned the in-fin-ite of his soul. Not drowned en-tirely, though.
Rather car-ried down alive to won-drous depths, where strange shapes of
the un-warped primal world glided to and fro be-fore his pass-ive eyes;
and the miser-mer-man, Wis-dom, re-vealed his hoarded heaps; and among the
joy-ous, heart-less, ever-ju-ven-ile etern-it-ies, Pip saw the mul-ti-tudin-ous,
God-om-ni-present, coral in-sects, that out of the firm-a-ment of wa-ters
heaved the co-lossal orbs. He saw God’s foot upon the treadle of the
loom, and spoke it; and there-fore his ship-mates called him mad. So
man’s in-san-ity is heaven’s sense; and wan-der-ing from all mor-tal reason,
man comes at last to that ce-les-tial thought, which, to reason, is
ab-surd and frantic; and weal or woe, feels then un-com-prom-ised,
in-dif-fer-ent as his God.

For the rest, blame not Stubb too hardly. The thing is com-mon in that
fish-ery; and in the se-quel of the nar-rat-ive, it will then be seen what
like aban-don-ment be-fell my-self.


CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly pur-chased, was duly brought to the
Pequod’s side, where all those cut-ting and hoist-ing op-er-a-tions
pre-vi-ously de-tailed, were reg-u-larly gone through, even to the bal-ing of
the Heidel-burgh Tun, or Case.

While some were oc-cu-pied with this lat-ter duty, oth-ers were em-ployed in
drag-ging away the lar-ger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and
when the proper time ar-rived, this same sperm was care-fully ma-nip-u-lated
ere go-ing to the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crys-tal-lized to such a de-gree, that when, with
sev-eral oth-ers, I sat down be-fore a large Con-stantine’s bath of it, I
found it strangely con-creted into lumps, here and there rolling about
in the li-quid part. It was our busi-ness to squeeze these lumps back
into fluid. A sweet and unc-tu-ous duty! No won-der that in old times this
sperm was such a fa-vour-ite cos-metic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener!
such a softener! such a de-li-cious mo-li-fier! After hav-ing my hands in it
for only a few minutes, my fin-gers felt like eels, and began, as it
were, to ser-pent-ine and spir-al-ise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bit-ter
ex-er-tion at the wind-lass; un-der a blue tran-quil sky; the ship un-der
in-dol-ent sail, and glid-ing so se-renely along; as I bathed my hands
among those soft, gentle glob-ules of in-filt-rated tis-sues, woven al-most
within the hour; as they richly broke to my fin-gers, and dis-charged all
their op-u-lence, like fully ripe grapes their wine; as I snuffed up that
un-con-tam-in-ated aroma,—lit-er-ally and truly, like the smell of spring
vi-ol-ets; I de-clare to you, that for the time I lived as in a musky
meadow; I for-got all about our hor-rible oath; in that in-ex-press-ible
sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I al-most began to credit
the old Paracelsan su-per-sti-tion that sperm is of rare vir-tue in
al-lay-ing the heat of an-ger; while bathing in that bath, I felt di-vinely
free from all ill-will, or petu-lance, or malice, of any sort
what-so-ever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morn-ing long; I squeezed that sperm
till I my-self al-most melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a
strange sort of in-san-ity came over me; and I found my-self un-wit-tingly
squeez-ing my co-laborers’ hands in it, mis-tak-ing their hands for the
gentle glob-ules. Such an abound-ing, af-fec-tion-ate, friendly, lov-ing
feel-ing did this avoca-tion be-get; that at last I was con-tinu-ally
squeez-ing their hands, and look-ing up into their eyes sen-ti-ment-ally; as
much as to say,—Oh! my dear fel-low be-ings, why should we longer cher-ish
any so-cial acerbit-ies, or know the slight-est ill-hu-mor or envy! Come;
let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze ourselves into
each other; let us squeeze ourselves uni-ver-sally into the very milk and
sperm of kind-ness.

Would that I could keep squeez-ing that sperm for ever! For now, since
by many pro-longed, re-peated ex-per-i-ences, I have per-ceived that in all
cases man must even-tu-ally lower, or at least shift, his con-ceit of
at-tain-able fe-li-city; not pla-cing it any-where in the in-tel-lect or the
fancy; but in the wife, the heart, the bed, the table, the saddle, the
fireside, the coun-try; now that I have per-ceived all this, I am ready
to squeeze case etern-ally. In thoughts of the vis-ions of the night, I
saw long rows of an-gels in para-dise, each with his hands in a jar of
sper-ma-ceti.

Now, while dis-cours-ing of sperm, it be-hooves to speak of other things
akin to it, in the busi-ness of pre-par-ing the sperm whale for the
try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is ob-tained from the taper-ing
part of the fish, and also from the thicker por-tions of his flukes. It
is tough with con-gealed ten-dons—a wad of muscle—but still con-tains some
oil. After be-ing severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut
into port-able ob-longs ere go-ing to the min-cer. They look much like
blocks of Berkshire marble.

Plum-pud-ding is the term be-stowed upon cer-tain frag-ment-ary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there ad-her-ing to the blanket of blub-ber, and
of-ten par-ti-cip-at-ing to a con-sid-er-able de-gree in its unc-tu-ous-ness. It is
a most re-fresh-ing, con-vivial, beau-ti-ful ob-ject to be-hold. As its name
im-ports, it is of an ex-ceed-ingly rich, mottled tint, with a be-streaked
snowy and golden ground, dot-ted with spots of the deep-est crim-son and
purple. It is plums of ru-bies, in pic-tures of cit-ron. Spite of reason,
it is hard to keep your-self from eat-ing it. I con-fess, that once I
stole be-hind the fore-mast to try it. It tasted some-thing as I should
con-ceive a royal cut-let from the thigh of Louis le Gros might have
tasted, sup-pos-ing him to have been killed the first day after the
ven-ison sea-son, and that par-tic-u-lar ven-ison sea-son con-tem-por-ary with an
un-usu-ally fine vin-tage of the vine-yards of Cham-pagne.

There is an-other sub-stance, and a very sin-gu-lar one, which turns up in
the course of this busi-ness, but which I feel it to be very puzz-ling
ad-equately to de-scribe. It is called slobgol-lion; an ap-pel-la-tion
ori-ginal with the whale-men, and even so is the nature of the sub-stance.
It is an in-ef-fably oozy, stringy af-fair, most fre-quently found in the
tubs of sperm, after a pro-longed squeez-ing, and sub-sequent de-cant-ing. I
hold it to be the won-drously thin, rup-tured mem-branes of the case,
co-ales-cing.

Gurry, so called, is a term prop-erly be-long-ing to right whale-men, but
some-times in-cid-ent-ally used by the sperm fish-er-men. It des-ig-nates the
dark, glu-tin-ous sub-stance which is scraped off the back of the
Green-land or right whale, and much of which cov-ers the decks of those
in-ferior souls who hunt that ig-noble Le-viathan.

Nip-pers. Strictly this word is not in-di-gen-ous to the whale’s
vocab-u-lary. But as ap-plied by whale-men, it be-comes so. A whale-man’s
nip-per is a short firm strip of tendin-ous stuff cut from the taper-ing
part of Le-viathan’s tail: it av-er-ages an inch in thick-ness, and for the
rest, is about the size of the iron part of a hoe. Edge-wise moved along
the oily deck, it op-er-ates like a leath-ern squil-gee; and by name-less
bland-ish-ments, as of ma-gic, al-lures along with it all im-pur-it-ies.

But to learn all about these re-con-dite mat-ters, your best way is at
once to des-cend into the blub-ber-room, and have a long talk with its
in-mates. This place has pre-vi-ously been men-tioned as the re-cept-acle for
the blanket-pieces, when stript and hois-ted from the whale. When the
proper time ar-rives for cut-ting up its con-tents, this apart-ment is a
scene of ter-ror to all tyros, es-pe-cially by night. On one side, lit by
a dull lan-tern, a space has been left clear for the work-men. They
gen-er-ally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaff-man and a spade-man. The
whal-ing-pike is sim-ilar to a frig-ate’s board-ing-weapon of the same
name. The gaff is some-thing like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the
gaff-man hooks on to a sheet of blub-ber, and strives to hold it from
slip-ping, as the ship pitches and lurches about. Mean-while, the
spade-man stands on the sheet it-self, per-pen-dic-u-larly chop-ping it into
the port-able horse-pieces. This spade is sharp as hone can make it; the
spa-de-man’s feet are shoe-less; the thing he stands on will some-times
ir-res-ist-ibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If he cuts off one of
his own toes, or one of his as-sist-ants’, would you be very much
as-ton-ished? Toes are scarce among vet-eran blub-ber-room men.


CHAPTER 95. The Cas-sock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a cer-tain junc-ture of this
post-mortem-iz-ing of the whale; and had you strolled for-ward nigh the
wind-lass, pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small
curi-os-ity a very strange, en-ig-mat-ical ob-ject, which you would have seen
there, ly-ing along length-wise in the lee scup-pers. Not the won-drous
cistern in the whale’s huge head; not the prodigy of his un-hinged lower
jaw; not the mir-acle of his sym-met-rical tail; none of these would so
sur-prise you, as half a glimpse of that un-ac-count-able cone,—longer than
a Ken-tuckian is tall, nigh a foot in dia-meter at the base, and
jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And an idol, in-deed, it
is; or, rather, in old times, its like-ness was. Such an idol as that
found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
wor-ship-ping which, King Asa, her son, did de-pose her, and des-troyed the
idol, and burnt it for an ab-om-in-a-tion at the brook Ked-ron, as darkly
set forth in the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the min-cer, who now comes along, and
as-sisted by two al-lies, heav-ily backs the gran-dis-simus, as the mar-iners
call it, and with bowed shoulders, stag-gers off with it as if he were a
gren-adier car-ry-ing a dead com-rade from the field. Ex-tend-ing it upon the
fore-castle deck, he now pro-ceeds cyl-indric-ally to re-move its dark pelt,
as an African hunter the pelt of a boa. This done he turns the pelt
in-side out, like a pan-ta-loon leg; gives it a good stretch-ing, so as
al-most to double its dia-meter; and at last hangs it, well spread, in
the rig-ging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when re-mov-ing some
three feet of it, to-wards the poin-ted ex-tremity, and then cut-ting two
slits for arm-holes at the other end, he length-wise slips him-self
bod-ily into it. The min-cer now stands be-fore you in-ves-ted in the full
ca-non-ic-als of his call-ing. Im-me-morial to all his or-der, this
in-vest-it-ure alone will ad-equately pro-tect him, while em-ployed in the
pe-cu-liar func-tions of his of-fice.

That of-fice con-sists in min-cing the horse-pieces of blub-ber for the
pots; an op-er-a-tion which is con-duc-ted at a curi-ous wooden horse,
planted end-wise against the bul-warks, and with a ca-pa-cious tub be-neath
it, into which the minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt
orator’s desk. Ar-rayed in de-cent black; oc-cupy-ing a con-spicu-ous pul-pit;
in-tent on bible leaves; what a can-did-ate for an arch-bish-op-ric, what a
lad for a Pope were this min-cer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the in-vari-able cry from the mates
to the min-cer. It en-joins him to be care-ful, and cut his work into as
thin slices as pos-sible, inas-much as by so do-ing the busi-ness of
boil-ing out the oil is much ac-cel-er-ated, and its quant-ity con-sid-er-ably
in-creased, be-sides per-haps im-prov-ing it in qual-ity.


CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hois-ted boats, an Amer-ican whaler is out-wardly
dis-tin-guished by her try-works. She presents the curi-ous an-om-aly of the
most solid ma-sonry join-ing with oak and hemp in con-sti-tut-ing the
com-pleted ship. It is as if from the open field a brick-kiln were
trans-por-ted to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the fore-mast and main-mast, the most
roomy part of the deck. The tim-bers be-neath are of a pe-cu-liar strength,
fit-ted to sus-tain the weight of an al-most solid mass of brick and
mor-tar, some ten feet by eight square, and five in height. The
found-a-tion does not pen-et-rate the deck, but the ma-sonry is firmly
se-cured to the sur-face by pon-der-ous knees of iron bra-cing it on all
sides, and screw-ing it down to the tim-bers. On the flanks it is cased
with wood, and at top com-pletely covered by a large, slop-ing, battened
hatch-way. Re-mov-ing this hatch we ex-pose the great try-pots, two in
num-ber, and each of sev-eral bar-rels’ ca-pa-city. When not in use, they
are kept re-mark-ably clean. So-me-times they are pol-ished with soap-stone
and sand, till they shine within like sil-ver punch-bowls. Dur-ing the
night-watches some cyn-ical old sail-ors will crawl into them and coil
them-selves away there for a nap. While em-ployed in pol-ish-ing them—one
man in each pot, side by side—many con-fid-en-tial com-mu-nic-a-tions are
car-ried on, over the iron lips. It is a place also for pro-found
math-em-at-ical med-it-a-tion. It was in the left hand try-pot of the Pequod,
with the soap-stone di-li-gently circ-ling round me, that I was first
in-dir-ectly struck by the re-mark-able fact, that in geo-metry all bod-ies
glid-ing along the cyc-loid, my soap-stone for ex-ample, will des-cend from
any point in pre-cisely the same time.

Re-mov-ing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare
ma-sonry of that side is ex-posed, pen-et-rated by the two iron mouths of
the fur-naces, dir-ectly un-der-neath the pots. These mouths are fit-ted
with heavy doors of iron. The in-tense heat of the fire is pre-ven-ted
from com-mu-nic-at-ing it-self to the deck, by means of a shal-low reser-voir
ex-tend-ing un-der the en-tire in-closed sur-face of the works. By a tun-nel
in-ser-ted at the rear, this reser-voir is kept re-plen-ished with wa-ter as
fast as it evap-or-ates. There are no ex-ternal chim-neys; they open dir-ect
from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a mo-ment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were
first star-ted on this present voy-age. It be-longed to Stubb to over-see
the busi-ness.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the
works.” This was an easy thing, for the car-penter had been thrust-ing
his shav-ings into the fur-nace through-out the pas-sage. Here be it said
that in a whal-ing voy-age the first fire in the try-works has to be fed
for a time with wood. After that no wood is used, ex-cept as a means of
quick ig-ni-tion to the staple fuel. In a word, after be-ing tried out,
the crisp, shriv-elled blub-ber, now called scraps or frit-ters, still
con-tains con-sid-er-able of its unc-tu-ous prop-er-ties. These frit-ters feed
the flames. Like a pleth-oric burn-ing mar-tyr, or a self-con-sum-ing
mis-an-thrope, once ig-nited, the whale sup-plies his own fuel and burns by
his own body. Would that he con-sumed his own smoke! for his smoke is
hor-rible to in-hale, and in-hale it you must, and not only that, but you
must live in it for the time. It has an un-speak-able, wild, Hin-doo odor
about it, such as may lurk in the vi-cin-ity of fu-ner-eal pyres. It smells
like the left wing of the day of judg-ment; it is an ar-gu-ment for the
pit.

By mid-night the works were in full op-er-a-tion. We were clear from the
car-case; sail had been made; the wind was freshen-ing; the wild ocean
dark-ness was in-tense. But that dark-ness was licked up by the fierce
flames, which at in-ter-vals forked forth from the sooty flues, and
il-lu-min-ated every lofty rope in the rig-ging, as with the famed Greek
fire. The burn-ing ship drove on, as if re-morse-lessly com-mis-sioned to
some venge-ful deed. So the pitch and sul-phur-freighted brigs of the
bold Hy-dri-ote, Canaris, is-su-ing from their mid-night har-bors, with broad
sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turk-ish frig-ates, and
fol-ded them in con-flag-ra-tions.

The hatch, re-moved from the top of the works, now af-forded a wide
hearth in front of them. Stand-ing on this were the Tartarean shapes of
the pa-gan har-poon-eers, al-ways the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge
pronged poles they pitched hiss-ing masses of blub-ber into the scald-ing
pots, or stirred up the fires be-neath, till the snaky flames dar-ted,
curl-ing, out of the doors to catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled
away in sul-len heaps. To every pitch of the ship there was a pitch of
the boil-ing oil, which seemed all eager-ness to leap into their faces.
Op-pos-ite the mouth of the works, on the fur-ther side of the wide wooden
hearth, was the wind-lass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here lounged the
watch, when not oth-er-wise em-ployed, look-ing into the red heat of the
fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny
fea-tures, now all be-grimed with smoke and sweat, their mat-ted beards,
and the con-trast-ing bar-baric bril-liancy of their teeth, all these were
strangely re-vealed in the ca-pri-cious em-blazon-ings of the works. As they
nar-rated to each other their un-holy ad-ven-tures, their tales of ter-ror
told in words of mirth; as their un-civ-il-ized laughter forked up-wards
out of them, like the flames from the fur-nace; as to and fro, in their
front, the har-poon-eers wildly ges-tic-u-lated with their huge pronged
forks and dip-pers; as the wind howled on, and the sea leaped, and the
ship groaned and dived, and yet stead-fastly shot her red hell fur-ther
and fur-ther into the black-ness of the sea and the night, and scorn-fully
champed the white bone in her mouth, and vi-ciously spat round her on
all sides; then the rush-ing Pequod, freighted with sav-ages, and laden
with fire, and burn-ing a corpse, and plunging into that black-ness of
dark-ness, seemed the ma-ter-ial coun-ter-part of her mono-ma-niac com-mander’s
soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours si-lently
guided the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that
in-ter-val, in dark-ness my-self, I but the bet-ter saw the red-ness, the
mad-ness, the ghast-li-ness of oth-ers. The con-tinual sight of the fiend
shapes be-fore me, caper-ing half in smoke and half in fire, these at
last begat kindred vis-ions in my soul, so soon as I began to yield to
that un-ac-count-able drowsi-ness which ever would come over me at a
mid-night helm.

But that night, in par-tic-u-lar, a strange (and ever since in-ex-plic-able)
thing oc-curred to me. Start-ing from a brief stand-ing sleep, I was
hor-ribly con-scious of some-thing fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller
smote my side, which leaned against it; in my ears was the low hum of
sails, just be-gin-ning to shake in the wind; I thought my eyes were
open; I was half con-scious of put-ting my fin-gers to the lids and
mech-an-ic-ally stretch-ing them still fur-ther apart. But, spite of all
this, I could see no com-pass be-fore me to steer by; though it seemed
but a minute since I had been watch-ing the card, by the steady bin-nacle
lamp il-lu-min-at-ing it. Noth-ing seemed be-fore me but a jet gloom, now and
then made ghastly by flashes of red-ness. Up-per-most was the im-pres-sion,
that whatever swift, rush-ing thing I stood on was not so much bound to
any haven ahead as rush-ing from all havens astern. A stark, be-wildered
feel-ing, as of death, came over me. Con-vuls-ively my hands grasped the
tiller, but with the crazy con-ceit that the tiller was, some-how, in
some en-chanted way, in-ver-ted. My God! what is the mat-ter with me?
thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had turned my-self about, and was
front-ing the ship’s stern, with my back to her prow and the com-pass. In
an in-stant I faced back, just in time to pre-vent the ves-sel from fly-ing
up into the wind, and very prob-ably cap-siz-ing her. How glad and how
grate-ful the re-lief from this un-nat-ural hal-lu-cin-a-tion of the night, and
the fatal con-tin-gency of be-ing brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy
hand on the helm! Turn not thy back to the com-pass; ac-cept the first
hint of the hitch-ing tiller; be-lieve not the ar-ti-fi-cial fire, when its
red-ness makes all things look ghastly. To-mor-row, in the nat-ural sun,
the skies will be bright; those who glared like dev-ils in the fork-ing
flames, the morn will show in far other, at least gentler, re-lief; the
glor-i-ous, golden, glad sun, the only true lamp—all oth-ers but li-ars!

Never-the-less the sun hides not Vir-ginia’s Dis-mal Swamp, nor Rome’s
ac-cursed Cam-pagna, nor wide Sa-hara, nor all the mil-lions of miles of
deserts and of griefs be-neath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean,
which is the dark side of this earth, and which is two thirds of this
earth. So, there-fore, that mor-tal man who hath more of joy than sor-row
in him, that mor-tal man can-not be true—not true, or un-developed. With
books the same. The truest of all men was the Man of Sor-rows, and the
truest of all books is So-lomon’s, and Ec-cle-si-astes is the fine hammered
steel of woe. “All is van-ity.” ALL. This wil-ful world hath not got hold
of un-chris-tian So-lomon’s wis-dom yet. But he who dodges hos-pit-als and
jails, and walks fast cross-ing grave-yards, and would rather talk of
op-eras than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pas-cal, Rousseau, poor dev-ils
all of sick men; and through-out a care-free life-time swears by Ra-belais
as passing wise, and there-fore jolly;—not that man is fit-ted to sit
down on tomb-stones, and break the green damp mould with un-fathom-ably
won-drous So-lomon.

But even So-lomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
un-der-stand-ing shall re-main” (_i.e._, even while liv-ing) “in the
con-greg-a-tion of the dead.” Give not thy-self up, then, to fire, lest it
in-vert thee, deaden thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wis-dom
that is woe; but there is a woe that is mad-ness. And there is a
Cat-skill eagle in some souls that can alike dive down into the black-est
gorges, and soar out of them again and be-come in-vis-ible in the sunny
spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the gorge, that gorge is
in the moun-tains; so that even in his low-est swoop the moun-tain eagle
is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though they soar.


CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you des-cen-ded from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s
fore-castle, where the off duty watch were sleep-ing, for one single
mo-ment you would have al-most thought you were stand-ing in some
il-lu-min-ated shrine of can-on-ized kings and coun-sel-lors. There they lay
in their tri-an-gu-lar oaken vaults, each mar-iner a chis-elled mute-ness; a
score of lamps flash-ing upon his hooded eyes.

In mer-chant-men, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of
queens. To dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in
dark-ness to his pal-let, this is his usual lot. But the whale-man, as he
seeks the food of light, so he lives in light. He makes his berth an
Alad-din’s lamp, and lays him down in it; so that in the pitch-i-est night
the ship’s black hull still houses an il-lu-min-a-tion.

See with what en-tire free-dom the whale-man takes his hand-ful of
lamps—of-ten but old bottles and vi-als, though—to the cop-per cooler at
the try-works, and re-plen-ishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He
burns, too, the purest of oil, in its un-man-u-fac-tured, and, there-fore,
un-viti-ated state; a fluid un-known to solar, lunar, or as-tral
con-triv-ances ashore. It is sweet as early grass but-ter in April. He
goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its fresh-ness and
genu-ine-ness, even as the trav-el-ler on the prairie hunts up his own
sup-per of game.


CHAPTER 98. Stow-ing Down and Clear-ing Up.

Already has it been re-lated how the great le-viathan is afar off
descried from the mast-head; how he is chased over the wa-tery moors,
and slaughtered in the val-leys of the deep; how he is then towed
along-side and be-headed; and how (on the prin-ciple which en-titled the
heads-man of old to the gar-ments in which the be-headed was killed) his
great pad-ded sur-tout be-comes the prop-erty of his ex-e-cu-tioner; how, in
due time, he is con-demned to the pots, and, like Shad-rach, Me-shach, and
Abed-nego, his sper-ma-ceti, oil, and bone pass un-scathed through the
fire;—but now it re-mains to con-clude the last chapter of this part of
the de-scrip-tion by re-hears-ing—singing, if I may—the ro-mantic pro-ceed-ing
of de-cant-ing off his oil into the casks and strik-ing them down into the
hold, where once again le-viathan re-turns to his nat-ive pro-fundit-ies,
slid-ing along be-neath the sur-face as be-fore; but, alas! never more to
rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is re-ceived into the
six-bar-rel casks; and while, per-haps, the ship is pitch-ing and rolling
this way and that in the mid-night sea, the enorm-ous casks are slewed
round and headed over, end for end, and some-times per-il-ously scoot
across the slip-pery deck, like so many land slides, till at last
man-handled and stayed in their course; and all round the hoops, rap,
rap, go as many ham-mers as can play upon them, for now, _ex of-fi-cio_,
every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the
great hatch-ways are un-sealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open,
and down go the casks to their fi-nal rest in the sea. This done, the
hatches are re-placed, and her-met-ic-ally closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fish-ery, this is per-haps one of the most re-mark-able
in-cid-ents in all the busi-ness of whal-ing. One day the planks stream
with fresh-ets of blood and oil; on the sac-red quarter-deck enorm-ous
masses of the whale’s head are pro-fanely piled; great rusty casks lie
about, as in a brew-ery yard; the smoke from the try-works has be-sooted
all the bul-warks; the mar-iners go about suf-fused with unc-tu-ous-ness; the
en-tire ship seems great le-viathan him-self; while on all hands the din
is deaf-en-ing.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this
self-same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works,
you would all but swear you trod some si-lent mer-chant ves-sel, with a
most scru-pu-lously neat com-mander. The un-man-u-fac-tured sperm oil
pos-sesses a sin-gu-larly cleans-ing vir-tue. This is the reason why the
decks never look so white as just after what they call an af-fair of
oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps of the whale, a
po-tent lye is read-ily made; and whenever any ad-hes-ive-ness from the back
of the whale re-mains cling-ing to the side, that lye quickly
ex-term-in-ates it. Hands go di-li-gently along the bul-warks, and with
buck-ets of wa-ter and rags re-store them to their full tidi-ness. The soot
is brushed from the lower rig-ging. All the nu-mer-ous im-ple-ments which
have been in use are like-wise faith-fully cleansed and put away. The
great hatch is scrubbed and placed upon the try-works, com-pletely
hid-ing the pots; every cask is out of sight; all tackles are coiled in
un-seen nooks; and when by the com-bined and sim-ul-tan-eous in-dustry of
al-most the en-tire ship’s com-pany, the whole of this con-scien-tious duty
is at last con-cluded, then the crew them-selves pro-ceed to their own
ablu-tions; shift them-selves from top to toe; and fi-nally is-sue to the
im-macu-late deck, fresh and all aglow, as bride-grooms new-leaped from
out the dain-ti-est Hol-land.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and
hu-mor-ously dis-course of par-lors, so-fas, car-pets, and fine cam-brics;
pro-pose to mat the deck; think of hav-ing hanging to the top; ob-ject not
to tak-ing tea by moon-light on the piazza of the fore-castle. To hint to
such mus-ked mar-iners of oil, and bone, and blub-ber, were little short
of au-da-city. They know not the thing you dis-tantly al-lude to. Away, and
bring us nap-kins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men in-tent
on spy-ing out more whales, which, if caught, in-fal-libly will again soil
the old oaken fur-niture, and drop at least one small grease-spot
some-where. Yes; and many is the time, when, after the severest
un-in-ter-rup-ted labors, which know no night; con-tinu-ing straight through
for ninety-six hours; when from the boat, where they have swelled their
wrists with all day row-ing on the Line,—they only step to the deck to
carry vast chains, and heave the heavy wind-lass, and cut and slash,
yea, and in their very sweat-ings to be smoked and burned anew by the
com-bined fires of the equat-orial sun and the equat-orial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have fi-nally be-stirred them-selves
to cleanse the ship, and make a spot-less dairy room of it; many is the
time the poor fel-lows, just but-ton-ing the necks of their clean frocks,
are startled by the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to
fight an-other whale, and go through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my
friends, but this is man-killing! Yet this is life. For hardly have we
mor-tals by long toil-ings ex-trac-ted from this world’s vast bulk its
small but valu-able sperm; and then, with weary pa-tience, cleansed
ourselves from its de-file-ments, and learned to live here in clean
tab-er-nacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when—_There she
blows!_—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other
world, and go through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the met-em-psy-chosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two
thou-sand years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with
thee along the Per-uvian coast last voy-age—and, fool-ish as I am, taught
thee, a green simple boy, how to splice a rope!


CHAPTER 99. The Doub-loon.

Ere now it has been re-lated how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck,
tak-ing reg-u-lar turns at either limit, the bin-nacle and main-mast; but in
the mul-ti-pli-city of other things re-quir-ing nar-ra-tion it has not been
ad-ded how that some-times in these walks, when most plunged in his mood,
he was wont to pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely
eye-ing the par-tic-u-lar ob-ject be-fore him. When he hal-ted be-fore the
bin-nacle, with his glance fastened on the poin-ted needle in the
com-pass, that glance shot like a javelin with the poin-ted in-tens-ity of
his pur-pose; and when re-sum-ing his walk he again paused be-fore the
main-mast, then, as the same riv-eted glance fastened upon the riv-eted
gold coin there, he still wore the same as-pect of nailed firm-ness, only
dashed with a cer-tain wild long-ing, if not hope-ful-ness.

But one morn-ing, turn-ing to pass the doub-loon, he seemed to be newly
at-trac-ted by the strange fig-ures and in-scrip-tions stamped on it, as
though now for the first time be-gin-ning to in-ter-pret for him-self in
some mono-ma-niac way whatever sig-ni-fic-ance might lurk in them. And some
cer-tain sig-ni-fic-ance lurks in all things, else all things are little
worth, and the round world it-self but an empty cipher, ex-cept to sell
by the cart-load, as they do hills about Bo-ston, to fill up some mor-ass
in the Milky Way.

Now this doub-loon was of purest, vir-gin gold, raked some-where out of
the heart of gor-geous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands,
the head-wa-ters of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst
all the rusti-ness of iron bolts and the ver-di-gris of cop-per spikes,
yet, un-touch-able and im-macu-late to any foul-ness, it still pre-served its
Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst a ruth-less crew and every hour
passed by ruth-less hands, and through the livelong nights shrouded with
thick dark-ness which might cover any pil-fer-ing ap-proach, nev-er-the-less
every sun-rise found the doub-loon where the sun-set left it last. For it
was set apart and sanc-ti-fied to one awe-strik-ing end; and how-ever
wan-ton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mar-iners revered it as
the white whale’s talis-man. So-me-times they talked it over in the weary
watch by night, won-der-ing whose it was to be at last, and whether he
would ever live to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South Amer-ica are as medals of the sun
and tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and vol-ca-noes; sun’s
disks and stars; ec-lipt-ics, horns-of-plenty, and rich ban-ners wav-ing,
are in lux-uri-ant pro-fu-sion stamped; so that the pre-cious gold seems
al-most to de-rive an ad-ded pre-cious-ness and en-han-cing glor-ies, by
passing through those fancy mints, so Span-ishly po-etic.

It so chanced that the doub-loon of the Pequod was a most wealthy
ex-ample of these things. On its round bor-der it bore the let-ters,
REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR: QUITO. So this bright coin came from a coun-try
planted in the middle of the world, and be-neath the great equator, and
named after it; and it had been cast mid-way up the Andes, in the
un-wan-ing clime that knows no au-tumn. Zoned by those let-ters you saw the
like-ness of three Andes’ sum-mits; from one a flame; a tower on an-other;
on the third a crow-ing cock; while arch-ing over all was a seg-ment of
the par-ti-tioned zo-diac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabal-ist-ics, and the key-stone sun en-ter-ing the equi-noc-tial point at
Libra.

Be-fore this equat-orial coin, Ahab, not un-ob-served by oth-ers, was now
paus-ing.

“There’s some-thing ever egot-ist-ical in moun-tain-tops and towers, and
all other grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as
Lu-ci-fer. The firm tower, that is Ahab; the vol-cano, that is Ahab; the
cour-ageous, the un-daun-ted, and vic-tori-ous fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all
are Ahab; and this round gold is but the im-age of the rounder globe,
which, like a ma-gi-cian’s glass, to each and every man in turn but
mir-rors back his own mys-ter-i-ous self. Great pains, small gains for
those who ask the world to solve them; it can-not solve it-self. Me-thinks
now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equi-nox! and but six months be-fore he wheeled out
of a former equi-nox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born
in throes, ’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So
be it, then! Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fin-gers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must
have left their mould-ings there since yes-ter-day,” mur-mured Star-buck to
him-self, lean-ing against the bul-warks. “The old man seems to read
Belshaz-zar’s aw-ful writ-ing. I have never marked the coin in-spect-ingly.
He goes be-low; let me read. A dark val-ley between three mighty,
heaven-abid-ing peaks, that al-most seem the Trin-ity, in some faint
earthly sym-bol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us round; and over
all our gloom, the sun of Right-eous-ness still shines a beacon and a
hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil;
but if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to
cheer. Yet, oh, the great sun is no fix-ture; and if, at mid-night, we
would fain snatch some sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain!
This coin speaks wisely, mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will
quit it, lest Truth shake me falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” so-li-lo-quized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s
been twig-ging it; and there goes Star-buck from the same, and both with
faces which I should say might be some-where within nine fathoms long.
And all from look-ing at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on
Negro Hill or in Cor-laer’s Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere
spend-ing it. Humph! in my poor, in-sig-ni-fic-ant opin-ion, I re-gard this as
queer. I have seen doub-loons be-fore now in my voy-agings; your doub-loons
of old Spain, your doub-loons of Peru, your doub-loons of Chili, your
doub-loons of Bolivia, your doub-loons of Po-payan; with plenty of gold
moidores and pis-toles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter joes. What
then should there be in this doub-loon of the Equator that is so killing
won-der-ful? By Gol-conda! let me read it once. Hal-loa! here’s signs and
won-ders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zo-diac, and what my al-manac be-low calls ditto. I’ll get the al-manac and
as I have heard dev-ils can be raised with Daboll’s arith-metic, I’ll try
my hand at rais-ing a mean-ing out of these queer cur-vicues here with the
Mas-sachu-setts cal-en-dar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and
won-ders; and the sun, he’s al-ways among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they
are—here they go—all alive:—Aries, or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and
Ji-mimi! here’s Gemini him-self, or the Twins. Well; the sun he wheels
among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just cross-ing the threshold
between two of twelve sit-ting-rooms all in a ring. Book! you lie there;
the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do to give us the
bare words and facts, but we come in to sup-ply the thoughts. That’s my
small ex-per-i-ence, so far as the Mas-sachu-setts cal-en-dar, and Bowditch’s
nav-ig-ator, and Daboll’s arith-metic go. Signs and won-ders, eh? Pity if
there is noth-ing won-der-ful in signs, and sig-ni-fic-ant in won-ders!
There’s a clue some-where; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it!
Look you, Doub-loon, your zo-diac here is the life of man in one round
chapter; and now I’ll read it off, straight out of the book. Come,
Al-man-ack! To be-gin: there’s Aries, or the Ram—lech-er-ous dog, he be-gets
us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the first thing; then Gemini,
or the Twins—that is, Vir-tue and Vice; we try to reach Vir-tue, when lo!
comes Can-cer the Crab, and drags us back; and here, go-ing from Vir-tue,
Leo, a roar-ing Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce bites and
surly dabs with his paw; we es-cape, and hail Virgo, the Vir-gin! that’s
our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—hap-pi-ness weighed and found want-ing; and while we
are very sad about that, Lord! how we sud-denly jump, as Scor-pio, or the
Scor-pion, stings us in the rear; we are cur-ing the wound, when whang
come the ar-rows all round; Sa-git-tarius, or the Archer, is amus-ing
him-self. As we pluck out the shafts, stand aside! here’s the
bat-ter-ing-ram, Capri-cornus, or the Goat; full tilt, he comes rush-ing,
and head-long we are tossed; when Aquar-ius, or the Water-bearer, pours
out his whole de-luge and drowns us; and to wind up with Pisces, or the
Fishes, we sleep. There’s a ser-mon now, writ in high heaven, and the
sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jol-lily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and
so, alow here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu,
Doub-loon! But stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the
try-works, now, and let’s hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s
be-fore it; he’ll out with some-thing presently. So, so; he’s be-gin-ning.”

“I see noth-ing here, but a round thing made of gold, and who-ever raises
a cer-tain whale, this round thing be-longs to him. So, what’s all this
star-ing been about? It is worth six-teen dol-lars, that’s true; and at
two cents the ci-gar, that’s nine hun-dred and sixty ci-gars. I won’t
smoke dirty pipes like Stubb, but I like ci-gars, and here’s nine
hun-dred and sixty of them; so here goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or fool-ish, now; if it be really wise it has a
fool-ish look to it; yet, if it be really fool-ish, then has it a sort of
wi-seish look to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old
hearse-driver, he must have been, that is, be-fore he took to the sea.
He luffs up be-fore the doub-loon; hal-loa, and goes round on the other
side of the mast; why, there’s a horse-shoe nailed on that side; and
now he’s back again; what does that mean? Hark! he’s mut-ter-ing—voice
like an old worn-out cof-fee-mill. Prick ears, and listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when
the sun stands in some one of these signs. I’ve stud-ied signs, and know
their marks; they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch
in Copen-ha-gen. Now, in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe
sign; for there it is, right op-pos-ite the gold. And what’s the
horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe sign—the roar-ing and
de-vour-ing lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to think of thee.”

“There’s an-other ren-der-ing now; but still one text. All sorts of men in
one kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all
tat-too-ing—looks like the signs of the Zo-diac him-self. What says the
Can-ni-bal? As I live he’s com-par-ing notes; look-ing at his thigh bone;
thinks the sun is in the thigh, or in the calf, or in the bowels, I
sup-pose, as the old wo-men talk Sur-geon’s Astro-nomy in the back coun-try.
And by Jove, he’s found some-thing there in the vi-cin-ity of his thigh—I
guess it’s Sa-git-tarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t know what to make
of the doub-loon; he takes it for an old but-ton off some king’s
trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedal-lah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual.
What does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the
sign and bows him-self; there is a sun on the coin—fire wor-ship-per,
de-pend upon it. Ho! more and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would
he had died, or I; he’s half hor-rible to me. He too has been watch-ing
all of these in-ter-pret-ers—my-self in-cluded—and look now, he comes to
read, with that un-earthly idiot face. Stand away again and hear him.
Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been study-ing Mur-ray’s Gram-mar! Im-prov-ing his mind,
poor fel-low! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s get-ting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a
crow, es-pe-cially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw!
caw! caw! caw! caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There
he stands; two bones stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more
poked into the sleeves of an old jacket.”

“Won-der if he means me?—com-pli-ment-ary!—poor lad!—I could go hang
my-self. Any way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vi-cin-ity. I can stand
the rest, for they have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my
san-ity. So, so, I leave him mut-ter-ing.”

“Here’s the ship’s na-vel, this doub-loon here, and they are all on fire
to un-screw it. But, un-screw your na-vel, and what’s the con-sequence?
Then again, if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s
nailed to the mast it’s a sign that things grow des-per-ate. Ha, ha! old
Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father,
in old Tol-land county, cut down a pine tree once, and found a sil-ver
ring grown over in it; some old dar-key’s wed-ding ring. How did it get
there? And so they’ll say in the re-sur-rec-tion, when they come to fish
up this old mast, and find a doub-loon lodged in it, with bed-ded oysters
for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the pre-cious, pre-cious, gold! the
green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
black-ber-ry-ing. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey,
hey, Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”


CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

The Pequod, of Nan-tucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of Lon-don.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hail-ing a ship show-ing Eng-lish col-ours,
bear-ing down un-der the stern. Trum-pet to mouth, the old man was
stand-ing in his hois-ted quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly re-vealed to
the stranger cap-tain, who was care-lessly re-clin-ing in his own boat’s
bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly, good-natured, fine-look-ing man, of
sixty or there-abouts, dressed in a spa-cious round-about, that hung round
him in fes-toons of blue pi-lot-cloth; and one empty arm of this jacket
streamed be-hind him like the broidered arm of a hus-sar’s sur-coat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and with-draw-ing it from the folds that had hid-den it,
he held up a white arm of sperm whale bone, ter-min-at-ing in a wooden
head like a mal-let.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, im-petu-ously, and toss-ing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quit-ting his little craft, he and his
crew were dropped to the wa-ter, and were soon along-side of the
stranger. But here a curi-ous dif-fi-culty presen-ted it-self. In the
ex-cite-ment of the mo-ment, Ahab had for-got-ten that since the loss of his
leg he had never once stepped on board of any ves-sel at sea but his
own, and then it was al-ways by an in-geni-ous and very handy mech-an-ical
con-triv-ance pe-cu-liar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be rigged and
shipped in any other ves-sel at a mo-ment’s warn-ing. Now, it is no very
easy mat-ter for any-body—ex-cept those who are al-most hourly used to it,
like whale-men—to clam-ber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea;
for the great swells now lift the boat high up to-wards the bul-warks,
and then in-stant-an-eously drop it half way down to the kel-son. So,
de-prived of one leg, and the strange ship of course be-ing al-to-gether
un-sup-plied with the kindly in-ven-tion, Ahab now found him-self ab-jectly
re-duced to a clumsy lands-man again; hope-lessly eye-ing the un-cer-tain
change-ful height he could hardly hope to at-tain.

It has be-fore been hin-ted, per-haps, that every little un-to-ward
cir-cum-stance that be-fell him, and which in-dir-ectly sprang from his
luck-less mis-hap, al-most in-vari-ably ir-rit-ated or ex-as-per-ated Ahab. And
in the present in-stance, all this was heightened by the sight of the
two of-ficers of the strange ship, lean-ing over the side, by the
per-pen-dic-u-lar lad-der of nailed cleets there, and swinging to-wards him a
pair of taste-fully-or-na-men-ted man-ropes; for at first they did not seem
to be-think them that a one-legged man must be too much of a cripple to
use their sea ban-nis-ters. But this awk-ward-ness only las-ted a minute,
be-cause the strange cap-tain, ob-serving at a glance how af-fairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heav-ing there! Jump, boys, and swing
over the cut-ting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale along-side a day or two
pre-vi-ous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive
curved blub-ber-hook, now clean and dry, was still at-tached to the end.
This was quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once com-pre-hend-ing it all,
slid his sol-it-ary thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sit-ting
in the fluke of an an-chor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then
giv-ing the word, held him-self fast, and at the same time also helped to
hoist his own weight, by pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the run-ning
parts of the tackle. Soon he was care-fully swung in-side the high
bul-warks, and gently landed upon the cap-stan head. With his ivory arm
frankly thrust forth in wel-come, the other cap-tain ad-vanced, and Ahab,
put-ting out his ivory leg, and cross-ing the ivory arm (like two
sword-fish blades) cried out in his wal-rus way, “Aye, aye, hearty! let
us shake bones to-gether!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see
the White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Eng-lish-man, point-ing his ivory arm to-wards
the East, and tak-ing a rue-ful sight along it, as if it had been a
tele-scope; “there I saw him, on the Line, last sea-son.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now slid-ing down from
the cap-stan, and rest-ing on the Eng-lish-man’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,”
began the Eng-lish-man. “I was ig-nor-ant of the White Whale at that time.
Well, one day we lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat
fastened to one of them; a reg-u-lar cir-cus horse he was, too, that went
milling and milling round so, that my boat’s crew could only trim dish,
by sit-ting all their sterns on the outer gun-wale. Presently up breaches
from the bot-tom of the sea a boun-cing great whale, with a milky-white
head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, sud-denly let-ting out his sus-pen-ded
breath.

“And har-poons stick-ing in near his star-board fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine—_my_ irons,” cried Ahab, ex-ult-ingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Eng-lish-man, good-hu-moredly. “Well,
this old great-grand-father, with the white head and hump, runs all
afoam into the pod, and goes to snap-ping furi-ously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know
him.”

“How it was ex-actly,” con-tin-ued the one-armed com-mander, “I do not
know; but in bit-ing the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there
some-how; but we didn’t know it then; so that when we af-ter-wards pulled
on the line, bounce we came plump on to his hump! in-stead of the other
whale’s; that went off to wind-ward, all fluk-ing. See-ing how mat-ters
stood, and what a noble great whale it was—the noblest and biggest I
ever saw, sir, in my life—I re-solved to cap-ture him, spite of the
boil-ing rage he seemed to be in. And think-ing the hap-haz-ard line would
get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw (for I have a
devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); see-ing all this, I
say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mount-top’s here (by the
way, Cap-tain—Mount-top; Mount-top—the cap-tain);—as I was say-ing, I jumped
into Mount-top’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gun-wale and gun-wale with
mine, then; and snatch-ing the first har-poon, let this old
great-grand-father have it. But, Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls
alive, man—the next in-stant, in a jiff, I was blind as a bat—both eyes
out—all be-fogged and bedeadened with black foam—the whale’s tail
loom-ing straight up out of it, per-pen-dic-u-lar in the air, like a marble
steeple. No use stern-ing all, then; but as I was grop-ing at mid-day,
with a blind-ing sun, all crown-jew-els; as I was grop-ing, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it over-board—down comes the tail like a Lima
tower, cut-ting my boat in two, leav-ing each half in splin-ters; and,
flukes first, the white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was
all chips. We all struck out. To es-cape his ter-rible flail-ings, I
seized hold of my har-poon-pole stick-ing in him, and for a mo-ment clung
to that like a suck-ing fish. But a comb-ing sea dashed me off, and at
the same in-stant, the fish, tak-ing one good dart for-wards, went down
like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron tow-ing along near
me caught me here” (clap-ping his hand just be-low his shoulder); “yes,
caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s flames, I was
think-ing; when, when, all of a sud-den, thank the good God, the barb
ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my
arm—came out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gen-tle-man there
will tell you the rest (by the way, cap-tain—Dr. Bun-ger, ship’s sur-geon:
Bun-ger, my lad,—the cap-tain). Now, Bun-ger boy, spin your part of the
yarn.”

The pro-fes-sional gen-tle-man thus fa-mil-iarly poin-ted out, had been all
the time stand-ing near them, with noth-ing spe-cific vis-ible, to de-note
his gen-tle-manly rank on board. His face was an ex-ceed-ingly round but
sober one; he was dressed in a faded blue wool-len frock or shirt, and
patched trowsers; and had thus far been di-vid-ing his at-ten-tion between
a marling-spike he held in one hand, and a pill-box held in the other,
oc-ca-sion-ally cast-ing a crit-ical glance at the ivory limbs of the two
crippled cap-tains. But, at his su-per-ior’s in-tro-duc-tion of him to Ahab,
he po-litely bowed, and straight-way went on to do his cap-tain’s bid-ding.

“It was a shock-ing bad wound,” began the whale-sur-geon; “and, tak-ing my
ad-vice, Cap-tain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” in-ter-rup-ted the one-armed
cap-tain, ad-dress-ing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the north-ward, to get out of the blaz-ing
hot weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat
up with him nights; was very severe with him in the mat-ter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the pa-tient him-self; then sud-denly
al-ter-ing his voice, “Drink-ing hot rum tod-dies with me every night, till
he couldn’t see to put on the band-ages; and send-ing me to bed, half
seas over, about three o’clock in the morn-ing. Oh, ye stars! he sat up
with me in-deed, and was very severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher,
and very di-etet-ic-ally severe, is Dr. Bun-ger. (Bun-ger, you dog, laugh
out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a pre-cious jolly ras-cal.) But, heave
ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept alive by any other
man.”

“My cap-tain, you must have ere this per-ceived, re-spec-ted sir”—said the
im-per-turb-able godly-look-ing Bun-ger, slightly bow-ing to Ahab—“is apt to
be fa-cetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But
I may as well say—en passant, as the French re-mark—that I my-self—that
is to say, Jack Bun-ger, late of the rev-er-end clergy—am a strict total
ab-stin-ence man; I never drink—”

“Water!” cried the cap-tain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to
him; fresh wa-ter throws him into the hy-dro-phobia; but go on—go on with
the arm story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the sur-geon, coolly. “I was about ob-serving,
sir, be-fore Cap-tain Boomer’s fa-cetious in-ter-rup-tion, that spite of my
best and severest en-deavors, the wound kept get-ting worse and worse;
the truth was, sir, it was as ugly gap-ing wound as sur-geon ever saw;
more than two feet and sev-eral inches long. I meas-ured it with the lead
line. In short, it grew black; I knew what was threatened, and off it
came. But I had no hand in ship-ping that ivory arm there; that thing is
against all rule”—point-ing at it with the marling-spike—“that is the
cap-tain’s work, not mine; he ordered the car-penter to make it; he had
that club-ham-mer there put to the end, to knock some one’s brains out
with, I sup-pose, as he tried mine once. He flies into diabol-ical
pas-sions some-times. Do ye see this dent, sir”—re-mov-ing his hat, and
brush-ing aside his hair, and ex-pos-ing a bowl-like cav-ity in his skull,
but which bore not the slight-est scarry trace, or any token of ever
hav-ing been a wound—“Well, the cap-tain there will tell you how that
came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the cap-tain, “but his mother did; he was born with
it. Oh, you sol-emn rogue, you—you Bun-ger! was there ever such an-other
Bun-ger in the wa-tery world? Bun-ger, when you die, you ought to die in
pickle, you dog; you should be pre-served to fu-ture ages, you ras-cal.”

“What be-came of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
im-pa-tiently listen-ing to this by-play between the two Eng-lish-men.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed cap-tain, “oh, yes! Well; after he soun-ded, we
didn’t see him again for some time; in fact, as I be-fore hin-ted, I
didn’t then know what whale it was that had served me such a trick,
till some time af-ter-wards, when com-ing back to the Line, we heard about
Moby Dick—as some call him—and then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without
this other arm? And I’m think-ing Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he
swal-lows.”

“Well, then,” in-ter-rup-ted Bun-ger, “give him your left arm for bait to
get the right. Do you know, gen-tle-men”—very gravely and math-em-at-ic-ally
bow-ing to each Cap-tain in suc-ces-sion—“Do you know, gen-tle-men, that the
di-gest-ive or-gans of the whale are so in-scrut-ably con-struc-ted by Div-ine
Provid-ence, that it is quite im-possible for him to com-pletely di-gest
even a man’s arm? And he knows it too. So that what you take for the
White Whale’s malice is only his awk-ward-ness. For he never means to
swal-low a single limb; he only thinks to ter-rify by feints. But
some-times he is like the old jug-gling fel-low, formerly a pa-tient of
mine in Ceylon, that mak-ing be-lieve swal-low jack-knives, once upon a
time let one drop into him in good earn-est, and there it stayed for a
twelve-month or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in
small tacks, d’ye see. No pos-sible way for him to di-gest that
jack-knife, and fully in-cor-por-ate it into his gen-eral bod-ily sys-tem.
Yes, Cap-tain Boomer, if you are quick enough about it, and have a mind
to pawn one arm for the sake of the priv-ilege of giv-ing de-cent burial
to the other, why in that case the arm is yours; only let the whale
have an-other chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bun-ger,” said the Eng-lish Cap-tain, “he’s wel-come to the
arm he has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to
an-other one. No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once,
and that has sat-is-fied me. There would be great glory in killing him, I
know that; and there is a ship-load of pre-cious sperm in him, but, hark
ye, he’s best let alone; don’t you think so, Cap-tain?”—glan-cing at the
ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let
alone, that ac-cursed thing is not al-ways what least al-lures. He’s all a
mag-net! How long since thou saw’st him last? Which way head-ing?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bun-ger, stoop-ingly
walk-ing round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuff-ing; “this man’s
blood—bring the ther-mo-meter!—it’s at the boil-ing point!—his pulse makes
these planks beat!—sir!”—tak-ing a lan-cet from his pocket, and draw-ing
near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dash-ing him against the bul-warks—“Man the boat!
Which way head-ing?”

“Good God!” cried the Eng-lish Cap-tain, to whom the ques-tion was put.
“What’s the mat-ter? He was head-ing east, I think.—Is your Cap-tain
crazy?” whis-per-ing Fedal-lah.

But Fedal-lah, put-ting a fin-ger on his lip, slid over the bul-warks to
take the boat’s steer-ing oar, and Ahab, swinging the cut-ting-tackle
to-wards him, com-manded the ship’s sail-ors to stand by to lower.

In a mo-ment he was stand-ing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men
were spring-ing to their oars. In vain the Eng-lish Cap-tain hailed him.
With back to the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own,
Ahab stood up-right till along-side of the Pequod.


CHAPTER 101. The Decanter.

Ere the Eng-lish ship fades from sight, be it set down here, that she
hailed from Lon-don, and was named after the late Samuel Enderby,
mer-chant of that city, the ori-ginal of the fam-ous whal-ing house of
Enderby & Sons; a house which in my poor whale-man’s opin-ion, comes not
far be-hind the united royal houses of the Tu-dors and Bour-bons, in point
of real his-tor-ical in-terest. How long, prior to the year of our Lord
1775, this great whal-ing house was in ex-ist-ence, my nu-mer-ous
fish-doc-u-ments do not make plain; but in that year (1775) it fit-ted out
the first Eng-lish ships that ever reg-u-larly hunted the Sperm Whale;
though for some score of years pre-vi-ous (ever since 1726) our vali-ant
Coffins and Maceys of Nan-tucket and the Vine-yard had in large fleets
pur-sued that Le-viathan, but only in the North and South At-lantic: not
else-where. Be it dis-tinctly re-cor-ded here, that the Nan-tuck-eters were
the first among man-kind to har-poon with civ-il-ized steel the great Sperm
Whale; and that for half a cen-tury they were the only people of the
whole globe who so har-pooned him.

In 1778, a fine ship, the Amelia, fit-ted out for the ex-press pur-pose,
and at the sole charge of the vig-or-ous Enderbys, boldly roun-ded Cape
Horn, and was the first among the na-tions to lower a whale-boat of any
sort in the great South Sea. The voy-age was a skil-ful and lucky one;
and re-turn-ing to her berth with her hold full of the pre-cious sperm,
the Amelia’s ex-ample was soon fol-lowed by other ships, Eng-lish and
Amer-ican, and thus the vast Sperm Whale grounds of the Pa-cific were
thrown open. But not con-tent with this good deed, the in-defatig-able
house again be-stirred it-self: Samuel and all his Sons—how many, their
mother only knows—and un-der their im-me-di-ate aus-pices, and partly, I
think, at their ex-pense, the Brit-ish gov-ern-ment was in-duced to send the
sloop-of-war Rat-tler on a whal-ing voy-age of dis-cov-ery into the South
Sea. Com-manded by a naval Post-Cap-tain, the Rat-tler made a rat-tling
voy-age of it, and did some ser-vice; how much does not ap-pear. But this
is not all. In 1819, the same house fit-ted out a dis-cov-ery whale ship
of their own, to go on a tast-ing cruise to the re-mote wa-ters of Japan.
That ship—well called the “Syren”—made a noble ex-per-i-mental cruise; and
it was thus that the great Japan-ese Whal-ing Ground first be-came
gen-er-ally known. The Syren in this fam-ous voy-age was com-manded by a
Cap-tain Coffin, a Nan-tuck-eter.

All honor to the Ender-bies, there-fore, whose house, I think, ex-ists to
the present day; though doubt-less the ori-ginal Samuel must long ago
have slipped his cable for the great South Sea of the other world.

The ship named after him was worthy of the honor, be-ing a very fast
sailer and a noble craft every way. I boarded her once at mid-night
some-where off the Patago-nian coast, and drank good flip down in the
fore-castle. It was a fine gam we had, and they were all trumps—every
soul on board. A short life to them, and a jolly death. And that fine
gam I had—long, very long after old Ahab touched her planks with his
ivory heel—it minds me of the noble, solid, Saxon hos-pit-al-ity of that
ship; and may my par-son for-get me, and the devil re-mem-ber me, if I ever
lose sight of it. Flip? Did I say we had flip? Yes, and we flipped it
at the rate of ten gal-lons the hour; and when the squall came (for it’s
squally off there by Patago-nia), and all hands—vis-it-ors and all—were
called to reef top-sails, we were so top-heavy that we had to swing each
other aloft in bowlines; and we ig-nor-antly furled the skirts of our
jack-ets into the sails, so that we hung there, reefed fast in the
howl-ing gale, a warn-ing ex-ample to all drunken tars. However, the masts
did not go over-board; and by and by we scrambled down, so sober, that
we had to pass the flip again, though the sav-age salt spray burst-ing
down the fore-castle scuttle, rather too much di-luted and pickled it to
my taste.

The beef was fine—tough, but with body in it. They said it was
bull-beef; oth-ers, that it was dromedary beef; but I do not know, for
cer-tain, how that was. They had dump-lings too; small, but sub-stan-tial,
sym-met-ric-ally glob-u-lar, and in-des-truct-ible dump-lings. I fan-cied that
you could feel them, and roll them about in you after they were
swal-lowed. If you stooped over too far for-ward, you risked their
pitch-ing out of you like bil-liard-balls. The bread—but that couldn’t be
helped; be-sides, it was an anti-scor-bu-tic; in short, the bread
con-tained the only fresh fare they had. But the fore-castle was not very
light, and it was very easy to step over into a dark corner when you
ate it. But all in all, tak-ing her from truck to helm, con-sid-er-ing the
di-men-sions of the cook’s boil-ers, in-clud-ing his own live parch-ment
boil-ers; fore and aft, I say, the Samuel Enderby was a jolly ship; of
good fare and plenty; fine flip and strong; crack fel-lows all, and
cap-ital from boot heels to hat-band.

But why was it, think ye, that the Samuel Enderby, and some other
Eng-lish whalers I know of—not all though—were such fam-ous, hos-pit-able
ships; that passed round the beef, and the bread, and the can, and the
joke; and were not soon weary of eat-ing, and drink-ing, and laugh-ing? I
will tell you. The abound-ing good cheer of these Eng-lish whalers is
mat-ter for his-tor-ical re-search. Nor have I been at all spar-ing of
his-tor-ical whale re-search, when it has seemed needed.

The Eng-lish were pre-ceded in the whale fish-ery by the Hol-landers,
Zeal-anders, and Danes; from whom they de-rived many terms still ex-tant
in the fish-ery; and what is yet more, their fat old fash-ions, touch-ing
plenty to eat and drink. For, as a gen-eral thing, the Eng-lish
mer-chant-ship scrimps her crew; but not so the Eng-lish whaler. Hence,
in the Eng-lish, this thing of whal-ing good cheer is not nor-mal and
nat-ural, but in-cid-ental and par-tic-u-lar; and, there-fore, must have some
spe-cial ori-gin, which is here poin-ted out, and will be still fur-ther
elu-cid-ated.

Dur-ing my re-searches in the Le-viath-anic his-tor-ies, I stumbled upon an
an-cient Dutch volume, which, by the musty whal-ing smell of it, I knew
must be about whalers. The title was, “Dan Coop-man,” where-fore I
con-cluded that this must be the in-valu-able mem-oirs of some Am-s-ter-dam
cooper in the fish-ery, as every whale ship must carry its cooper. I was
re-in-forced in this opin-ion by see-ing that it was the pro-duc-tion of one
“Fitz Swack-ham-mer.” But my friend Dr. Snod-head, a very learned man,
pro-fessor of Low Dutch and High Ger-man in the col-lege of Santa Claus
and St. Pott’s, to whom I handed the work for trans-la-tion, giv-ing him a
box of sperm candles for his trouble—this same Dr. Snod-head, so soon as
he spied the book, as-sured me that “Dan Coop-man” did not mean “The
Cooper,” but “The Mer-chant.” In short, this an-cient and learned Low
Dutch book treated of the com-merce of Hol-land; and, among other
sub-jects, con-tained a very in-ter-est-ing ac-count of its whale fish-ery.
And in this chapter it was, headed, “Smeer,” or “Fat,” that I found a
long de-tailed list of the out-fits for the lar-ders and cel-lars of 180
sail of Dutch whale-men; from which list, as trans-lated by Dr. Snod-head,
I tran-scribe the fol-low-ing:

400,000 lbs. of beef. 60,000 lbs. Fries-land pork. 150,000 lbs. of stock
fish. 550,000 lbs. of bis-cuit. 72,000 lbs. of soft bread. 2,800 fir-kins
of but-ter. 20,000 lbs. Texel & Ley-den cheese. 144,000 lbs. cheese
(prob-ably an in-ferior art-icle). 550 ankers of Geneva. 10,800 bar-rels of
beer.

Most stat-ist-ical tables are parch-ingly dry in the read-ing; not so in
the present case, how-ever, where the reader is flooded with whole
pipes, bar-rels, quarts, and gills of good gin and good cheer.

At the time, I de-voted three days to the stu-di-ous di-gest-ing of all this
beer, beef, and bread, dur-ing which many pro-found thoughts were
in-cid-ent-ally sug-ges-ted to me, cap-able of a tran-scend-ental and Platonic
ap-plic-a-tion; and, fur-ther-more, I com-piled sup-ple-ment-ary tables of my
own, touch-ing the prob-able quant-ity of stock-fish, etc., con-sumed by
every Low Dutch har-poon-eer in that an-cient Green-land and Spitzber-gen
whale fish-ery. In the first place, the amount of but-ter, and Texel and
Ley-den cheese con-sumed, seems amaz-ing. I im-pute it, though, to their
nat-ur-ally unc-tu-ous natures, be-ing rendered still more unc-tu-ous by the
nature of their vo-ca-tion, and es-pe-cially by their pur-su-ing their game
in those fri-gid Polar Seas, on the very coasts of that Esquimaux
coun-try where the con-vivial nat-ives pledge each other in bump-ers of
train oil.

The quant-ity of beer, too, is very large, 10,800 bar-rels. Now, as those
po-lar fish-er-ies could only be pro-sec-uted in the short sum-mer of that
cli-mate, so that the whole cruise of one of these Dutch whale-men,
in-clud-ing the short voy-age to and from the Spitzber-gen sea, did not
much ex-ceed three months, say, and reck-on-ing 30 men to each of their
fleet of 180 sail, we have 5,400 Low Dutch sea-men in all; there-fore, I
say, we have pre-cisely two bar-rels of beer per man, for a twelve weeks’
al-low-ance, ex-clus-ive of his fair pro-por-tion of that 550 ankers of gin.
Now, whether these gin and beer har-poon-eers, so fuddled as one might
fancy them to have been, were the right sort of men to stand up in a
boat’s head, and take good aim at fly-ing whales; this would seem
some-what im-prob-able. Yet they did aim at them, and hit them too. But
this was very far North, be it re-membered, where beer agrees well with
the con-sti-tu-tion; upon the Equator, in our south-ern fish-ery, beer would
be apt to make the har-poon-eer sleepy at the mast-head and boozy in his
boat; and griev-ous loss might en-sue to Nan-tucket and New Bed-ford.

But no more; enough has been said to show that the old Dutch whalers of
two or three cen-tur-ies ago were high liv-ers; and that the Eng-lish
whalers have not neg-lected so ex-cel-lent an ex-ample. For, say they, when
cruis-ing in an empty ship, if you can get noth-ing bet-ter out of the
world, get a good din-ner out of it, at least. And this emp-ties the
de-canter.


CHAPTER 102. A Bower in the Ar-sa-cides.

Hitherto, in de-script-ively treat-ing of the Sperm Whale, I have chiefly
dwelt upon the mar-vels of his outer as-pect; or sep-ar-ately and in de-tail
upon some few in-terior struc-tural fea-tures. But to a large and thor-ough
sweep-ing com-pre-hen-sion of him, it be-hooves me now to un-but-ton him still
fur-ther, and un-tag-ging the points of his hose, un-buck-ling his garters,
and cast-ing loose the hooks and the eyes of the joints of his in-ner-most
bones, set him be-fore you in his ul-ti-matum; that is to say, in his
un-con-di-tional skel-eton.

But how now, Ish-mael? How is it, that you, a mere oars-man in the
fish-ery, pre-tend to know aught about the sub-ter-ranean parts of the
whale? Did eru-dite Stubb, moun-ted upon your cap-stan, de-liver lec-tures
on the ana-tomy of the Ceta-cea; and by help of the wind-lass, hold up a
spe-ci-men rib for ex-hib-i-tion? Ex-plain thy-self, Ish-mael. Can you land a
full-grown whale on your deck for ex-am-in-a-tion, as a cook dishes a
roast-pig? Surely not. A ver-it-able wit-ness have you hitherto been,
Ish-mael; but have a care how you seize the priv-ilege of Jo-nah alone;
the priv-ilege of dis-cours-ing upon the joists and beams; the rafters,
ridge-pole, sleep-ers, and un-der-pin-nings, mak-ing up the frame-work of
le-viathan; and be-like of the tal-low-vats, dairy-rooms, but-ter-ies, and
cheeser-ies in his bowels.

I con-fess, that since Jo-nah, few whale-men have pen-et-rated very far
be-neath the skin of the adult whale; nev-er-the-less, I have been blessed
with an op-por-tun-ity to dis-sect him in mini-ature. In a ship I be-longed
to, a small cub Sperm Whale was once bod-ily hois-ted to the deck for his
poke or bag, to make sheaths for the barbs of the har-poons, and for the
heads of the lances. Think you I let that chance go, without us-ing my
boat-hatchet and jack-knife, and break-ing the seal and read-ing all the
con-tents of that young cub?

And as for my ex-act know-ledge of the bones of the le-viathan in their
gi-gantic, full grown de-vel-op-ment, for that rare know-ledge I am in-debted
to my late royal friend Tran-quo, king of Tranque, one of the Ar-sa-cides.
For be-ing at Tranque, years ago, when at-tached to the trad-ing-ship Dey
of Al-gi-ers, I was in-vited to spend part of the Ar-sa-cidean hol-i-days with
the lord of Tranque, at his re-tired palm villa at Pu-pella; a sea-side
glen not very far dis-tant from what our sail-ors called Bam-boo-Town, his
cap-ital.

Among many other fine qual-it-ies, my royal friend Tran-quo, be-ing gif-ted
with a de-vout love for all mat-ters of bar-baric vertu, had brought
to-gether in Pu-pella whatever rare things the more in-geni-ous of his
people could in-vent; chiefly carved woods of won-der-ful devices,
chis-elled shells, in-laid spears, costly paddles, aro-matic ca-noes; and
all these dis-trib-uted among whatever nat-ural won-ders, the
won-der-freighted, trib-ute-ren-der-ing waves had cast upon his shores.

Chief among these lat-ter was a great Sperm Whale, which, after an
un-usu-ally long ra-ging gale, had been found dead and stran-ded, with his
head against a co-coa-nut tree, whose plumage-like, tufted droop-ings
seemed his verd-ant jet. When the vast body had at last been stripped of
its fathom-deep en-fold-ings, and the bones be-come dust dry in the sun,
then the skel-eton was care-fully trans-por-ted up the Pu-pella glen, where
a grand temple of lordly palms now sheltered it.

The ribs were hung with trophies; the ver-tebræ were carved with
Ar-sa-cidean an-nals, in strange hiero-glyph-ics; in the skull, the priests
kept up an un-ex-tin-guished aro-matic flame, so that the mys-tic head again
sent forth its va-pory spout; while, sus-pen-ded from a bough, the
ter-rific lower jaw vi-brated over all the de-votees, like the hair-hung
sword that so af-frighted Damocles.

It was a won-drous sight. The wood was green as mosses of the Icy Glen;
the trees stood high and haughty, feel-ing their liv-ing sap; the
in-dus-tri-ous earth be-neath was as a weaver’s loom, with a gor-geous
car-pet on it, whereof the ground-vine tendrils formed the warp and
woof, and the liv-ing flowers the fig-ures. All the trees, with all their
laden branches; all the shrubs, and ferns, and grasses; the
mes-sage-car-ry-ing air; all these un-ceas-ingly were act-ive. Through the
la-cings of the leaves, the great sun seemed a fly-ing shuttle weav-ing
the un-wear-ied ver-dure. Oh, busy weaver! un-seen weaver!—pause!—one
word!—whither flows the fab-ric? what palace may it deck? where-fore all
these cease-less toil-ings? Speak, weaver!—stay thy hand!—but one single
word with thee! Nay—the shuttle flies—the fig-ures float from forth the
loom; the freshet-rush-ing car-pet for ever slides away. The weaver-god,
he weaves; and by that weav-ing is he deafened, that he hears no mor-tal
voice; and by that hum-ming, we, too, who look on the loom are deafened;
and only when we es-cape it shall we hear the thou-sand voices that speak
through it. For even so it is in all ma-ter-ial factor-ies. The spoken
words that are in-aud-ible among the fly-ing spindles; those same words
are plainly heard without the walls, burst-ing from the opened
case-ments. Thereby have vil-lain-ies been de-tec-ted. Ah, mor-tal! then, be
heed-ful; for so, in all this din of the great world’s loom, thy
subtlest think-ings may be over-heard afar.

Now, amid the green, life-rest-less loom of that Ar-sa-cidean wood, the
great, white, wor-shipped skel-eton lay loun-ging—a gi-gantic idler! Yet,
as the ever-woven verd-ant warp and woof in-ter-mixed and hummed around
him, the mighty idler seemed the cun-ning weaver; him-self all woven over
with the vines; every month as-sum-ing greener, fresher ver-dure; but
him-self a skel-eton. Life fol-ded Death; Death trel-lised Life; the grim
god wived with youth-ful Life, and begat him curly-headed glor-ies.

Now, when with royal Tran-quo I vis-ited this won-drous whale, and saw the
skull an al-tar, and the ar-ti-fi-cial smoke as-cend-ing from where the real
jet had is-sued, I mar-velled that the king should re-gard a chapel as an
ob-ject of vertu. He laughed. But more I mar-velled that the priests
should swear that smoky jet of his was genu-ine. To and fro I paced
be-fore this skel-eton—brushed the vines aside—broke through the ribs—and
with a ball of Ar-sa-cidean twine, wandered, ed-died long amid its many
wind-ing, shaded colon-nades and ar-bours. But soon my line was out; and
fol-low-ing it back, I emerged from the open-ing where I entered. I saw no
liv-ing thing within; naught was there but bones.

Cut-ting me a green meas-ur-ing-rod, I once more dived within the
skel-eton. From their ar-row-slit in the skull, the priests per-ceived me
tak-ing the alti-tude of the fi-nal rib, “How now!” they shouted; “Dar’st
thou meas-ure this our god! That’s for us.” “Aye, priests—well, how long
do ye make him, then?” But hereupon a fierce con-test rose among them,
con-cern-ing feet and inches; they cracked each other’s sconces with
their yard-sticks—the great skull echoed—and seiz-ing that lucky chance,
I quickly con-cluded my own ad-meas-ure-ments.

These ad-meas-ure-ments I now pro-pose to set be-fore you. But first, be it
re-cor-ded, that, in this mat-ter, I am not free to ut-ter any fan-cied
meas-ure-ment I please. Be-cause there are skel-eton au-thor-it-ies you can
refer to, to test my ac-cur-acy. There is a Le-viath-anic Mu-seum, they tell
me, in Hull, Eng-land, one of the whal-ing ports of that coun-try, where
they have some fine spe-ci-mens of fin-backs and other whales. Like-wise,
I have heard that in the mu-seum of Manchester, in New Hamp-shire, they
have what the pro-pri-et-ors call “the only per-fect spe-ci-men of a
Green-land or River Whale in the Un-ited States.” Moreover, at a place in
York-shire, Eng-land, Bur-ton Con-stable by name, a cer-tain Sir Clif-ford
Con-stable has in his pos-ses-sion the skel-eton of a Sperm Whale, but of
mod-er-ate size, by no means of the full-grown mag-nitude of my friend
King Tran-quo’s.

In both cases, the stran-ded whales to which these two skel-et-ons
be-longed, were ori-gin-ally claimed by their pro-pri-et-ors upon sim-ilar
grounds. King Tran-quo seiz-ing his be-cause he wanted it; and Sir
Clif-ford, be-cause he was lord of the sei-gnor-ies of those parts. Sir
Clif-ford’s whale has been ar-tic-u-lated through-out; so that, like a great
chest of draw-ers, you can open and shut him, in all his bony
cav-it-ies—spread out his ribs like a gi-gantic fan—and swing all day upon
his lower jaw. Locks are to be put upon some of his trap-doors and
shut-ters; and a foot-man will show round fu-ture vis-it-ors with a bunch of
keys at his side. Sir Clif-ford thinks of char-ging two-pence for a peep
at the whis-per-ing gal-lery in the spinal column; three-pence to hear the
echo in the hol-low of his cere-bel-lum; and six-pence for the un-ri-valled
view from his fore-head.

The skel-eton di-men-sions I shall now pro-ceed to set down are copied
ver-batim from my right arm, where I had them tat-tooed; as in my wild
wan-der-ings at that period, there was no other se-cure way of pre-serving
such valu-able stat-ist-ics. But as I was crowded for space, and wished
the other parts of my body to re-main a blank page for a poem I was then
com-pos-ing—at least, what un-tat-tooed parts might re-main—I did not
trouble my-self with the odd inches; nor, in-deed, should inches at all
enter into a con-genial ad-meas-ure-ment of the whale.


CHAPTER 103. Meas-ure-ment of The Whale’s Ske-l-eton.

In the first place, I wish to lay be-fore you a par-tic-u-lar, plain
state-ment, touch-ing the liv-ing bulk of this le-viathan, whose skel-eton
we are briefly to ex-hibit. Such a state-ment may prove use-ful here.

Ac-cord-ing to a care-ful cal-cu-la-tion I have made, and which I partly base
upon Cap-tain Scoresby’s es-tim-ate, of sev-enty tons for the largest sized
Green-land whale of sixty feet in length; ac-cord-ing to my care-ful
cal-cu-la-tion, I say, a Sperm Whale of the largest mag-nitude, between
eighty-five and ninety feet in length, and some-thing less than forty
feet in its fullest cir-cum-fer-ence, such a whale will weigh at least
ninety tons; so that, reck-on-ing thir-teen men to a ton, he would
con-sid-er-ably out-weigh the com-bined pop-u-la-tion of a whole vil-lage of one
thou-sand one hun-dred in-hab-it-ants.

Think you not then that brains, like yoked cattle, should be put to
this le-viathan, to make him at all budge to any lands-man’s ima-gin-a-tion?

Hav-ing already in vari-ous ways put be-fore you his skull, spout-hole,
jaw, teeth, tail, fore-head, fins, and divers other parts, I shall now
simply point out what is most in-ter-est-ing in the gen-eral bulk of his
un-ob-struc-ted bones. But as the co-lossal skull em-braces so very large a
pro-por-tion of the en-tire ex-tent of the skel-eton; as it is by far the
most com-plic-ated part; and as noth-ing is to be re-peated con-cern-ing it
in this chapter, you must not fail to carry it in your mind, or un-der
your arm, as we pro-ceed, oth-er-wise you will not gain a com-plete no-tion
of the gen-eral struc-ture we are about to view.

In length, the Sperm Whale’s skel-eton at Tranque meas-ured sev-enty-two
feet; so that when fully in-ves-ted and ex-ten-ded in life, he must have
been ninety feet long; for in the whale, the skel-eton loses about one
fifth in length com-pared with the liv-ing body. Of this sev-enty-two
feet, his skull and jaw com-prised some twenty feet, leav-ing some fifty
feet of plain back-bone. At-tached to this back-bone, for some-thing less
than a third of its length, was the mighty cir-cu-lar bas-ket of ribs
which once en-closed his vi-tals.

To me this vast ivory-ribbed chest, with the long, un-re-lieved spine,
ex-tend-ing far away from it in a straight line, not a little re-sembled
the hull of a great ship new-laid upon the stocks, when only some
twenty of her na-ked bow-ribs are in-ser-ted, and the keel is oth-er-wise,
for the time, but a long, dis-con-nec-ted tim-ber.

The ribs were ten on a side. The first, to be-gin from the neck, was
nearly six feet long; the second, third, and fourth were each
suc-cess-ively longer, till you came to the cli-max of the fifth, or one
of the middle ribs, which meas-ured eight feet and some inches. From
that part, the re-main-ing ribs di-min-ished, till the tenth and last only
spanned five feet and some inches. In gen-eral thick-ness, they all bore
a seemly cor-res-pond-ence to their length. The middle ribs were the most
arched. In some of the Ar-sa-cides they are used for beams whereon to lay
foot-path bridges over small streams.

In con-sid-er-ing these ribs, I could not but be struck anew with the
cir-cum-stance, so vari-ously re-peated in this book, that the skel-eton of
the whale is by no means the mould of his in-ves-ted form. The largest of
the Tranque ribs, one of the middle ones, oc-cu-pied that part of the
fish which, in life, is greatest in depth. Now, the greatest depth of
the in-ves-ted body of this par-tic-u-lar whale must have been at least
six-teen feet; whereas, the cor-res-pond-ing rib meas-ured but little more
than eight feet. So that this rib only con-veyed half of the true no-tion
of the liv-ing mag-nitude of that part. Besides, for some way, where I
now saw but a na-ked spine, all that had been once wrapped round with
tons of ad-ded bulk in flesh, muscle, blood, and bowels. Still more, for
the ample fins, I here saw but a few dis-ordered joints; and in place of
the weighty and majestic, but bone-less flukes, an ut-ter blank!

How vain and fool-ish, then, thought I, for timid un-trav-elled man to try
to com-pre-hend aright this won-drous whale, by merely por-ing over his
dead at-ten-u-ated skel-eton, stretched in this peace-ful wood. No. Only in
the heart of quick-est per-ils; only when within the ed-dy-ings of his
angry flukes; only on the pro-found un-boun-ded sea, can the fully
in-ves-ted whale be truly and liv-ingly found out.

But the spine. For that, the best way we can con-sider it is, with a
crane, to pile its bones high up on end. No speedy en-ter-prise. But now
it’s done, it looks much like Pom-pey’s Pil-lar.

There are forty and odd ver-tebræ in all, which in the skel-eton are not
locked to-gether. They mostly lie like the great knobbed blocks on a
Gothic spire, form-ing solid courses of heavy ma-sonry. The largest, a
middle one, is in width some-thing less than three feet, and in depth
more than four. The smal-lest, where the spine tapers away into the
tail, is only two inches in width, and looks some-thing like a white
bil-liard-ball. I was told that there were still smal-ler ones, but they
had been lost by some little can-ni-bal urchins, the priest’s chil-dren,
who had stolen them to play marbles with. Thus we see how that the
spine of even the hugest of liv-ing things tapers off at last into
simple child’s play.


CHAPTER 104. The Fossil Whale.

From his mighty bulk the whale af-fords a most con-genial theme whereon
to en-large, amp-lify, and gen-er-ally ex-pa-ti-ate. Would you, you could not
com-press him. By good rights he should only be treated of in im-per-ial
fo-lio. Not to tell over again his fur-longs from spir-acle to tail, and
the yards he meas-ures about the waist; only think of the gi-gantic
in-vol-u-tions of his in-test-ines, where they lie in him like great cables
and hawsers coiled away in the sub-ter-ranean or-lop-deck of a
line-of-battle-ship.

Since I have un-der-taken to man-handle this Le-viathan, it be-hooves me to
ap-prove my-self om-ni-sciently ex-haust-ive in the en-ter-prise; not
over-look-ing the minutest sem-inal germs of his blood, and spin-ning him
out to the ut-ter-most coil of his bowels. Hav-ing already de-scribed him
in most of his present hab-it-at-ory and ana-tom-ical pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies, it now
re-mains to mag-nify him in an archæo-lo-gical, fos-silifer-ous, and
antedi-lu-vian point of view. Ap-plied to any other creature than the
Le-viathan—to an ant or a flea—such portly terms might justly be deemed
un-war-rant-ably grandi-loquent. But when Le-viathan is the text, the case
is altered. Fain am I to stag-ger to this em-prise un-der the weight-i-est
words of the dic-tion-ary. And here be it said, that whenever it has been
con-veni-ent to con-sult one in the course of these dis-ser-ta-tions, I have
in-vari-ably used a huge quarto edi-tion of John-son, ex-pressly pur-chased
for that pur-pose; be-cause that fam-ous lex-ico-grapher’s un-com-mon per-sonal
bulk more fit-ted him to com-pile a lex-icon to be used by a whale au-thor
like me.

One of-ten hears of writers that rise and swell with their sub-ject,
though it may seem but an or-din-ary one. How, then, with me, writ-ing of
this Le-viathan? Un-con-sciously my chiro-graphy ex-pands into plac-ard
cap-it-als. Give me a condor’s quill! Give me Ve-suvius’ crater for an
ink-stand! Friends, hold my arms! For in the mere act of pen-ning my
thoughts of this Le-viathan, they weary me, and make me faint with their
out-reach-ing com-pre-hens-ive-ness of sweep, as if to in-clude the whole
circle of the sci-ences, and all the gen-er-a-tions of whales, and men, and
mas-to-dons, past, present, and to come, with all the re-volving pan-or-a-mas
of em-pire on earth, and through-out the whole uni-verse, not ex-clud-ing
its sub-urbs. Such, and so mag-ni-fy-ing, is the vir-tue of a large and
lib-eral theme! We ex-pand to its bulk. To pro-duce a mighty book, you
must choose a mighty theme. No great and en-dur-ing volume can ever be
writ-ten on the flea, though many there be who have tried it.

Ere en-ter-ing upon the sub-ject of Fossil Whales, I present my
cre-den-tials as a geo-lo-gist, by stat-ing that in my mis-cel-laneous time I
have been a stone-ma-son, and also a great dig-ger of ditches, canals and
wells, wine-vaults, cel-lars, and cisterns of all sorts. Like-wise, by
way of pre-lim-in-ary, I de-sire to re-mind the reader, that while in the
earlier geo-lo-gical strata there are found the fossils of mon-sters now
al-most com-pletely ex-tinct; the sub-sequent rel-ics dis-covered in what are
called the Ter-tiary form-a-tions seem the con-nect-ing, or at any rate
in-ter-cep-ted links, between the an-ti-chron-ical creatures, and those whose
re-mote pos-ter-ity are said to have entered the Ark; all the Fossil
Whales hitherto dis-covered be-long to the Ter-tiary period, which is the
last pre-ced-ing the su-per-fi-cial form-a-tions. And though none of them
pre-cisely an-swer to any known spe-cies of the present time, they are yet
suf-fi-ciently akin to them in gen-eral re-spects, to jus-tify their tak-ing
rank as Ceta-cean fossils.

Detached broken fossils of pre-ad-am-ite whales, frag-ments of their bones
and skel-et-ons, have within thirty years past, at vari-ous in-ter-vals,
been found at the base of the Alps, in Lom-bardy, in France, in Eng-land,
in Scot-land, and in the States of Louisi-ana, Mis-sis-sippi, and Alabama.
Among the more curi-ous of such re-mains is part of a skull, which in the
year 1779 was dis-in-terred in the Rue Dauphine in Paris, a short street
open-ing al-most dir-ectly upon the palace of the Tuiler-ies; and bones
dis-in-terred in ex-cav-at-ing the great docks of Ant-werp, in Na-po-leon’s
time. Cuvier pro-nounced these frag-ments to have be-longed to some
ut-terly un-known Le-viath-anic spe-cies.

But by far the most won-der-ful of all Ceta-cean rel-ics was the al-most
com-plete vast skel-eton of an ex-tinct mon-ster, found in the year 1842,
on the plant-a-tion of Judge Cre-agh, in Alabama. The awe-stricken
cred-u-lous slaves in the vi-cin-ity took it for the bones of one of the
fallen an-gels. The Alabama doc-tors de-clared it a huge rep-tile, and
be-stowed upon it the name of Basilo-saurus. But some spe-ci-men bones of
it be-ing taken across the sea to Owen, the Eng-lish An-a-tom-ist, it turned
out that this al-leged rep-tile was a whale, though of a de-par-ted
spe-cies. A sig-ni-fic-ant il-lus-tra-tion of the fact, again and again
re-peated in this book, that the skel-eton of the whale fur-nishes but
little clue to the shape of his fully in-ves-ted body. So Owen
re-christened the mon-ster Zeug-lodon; and in his pa-per read be-fore the
Lon-don Geolo-gical So-ci-ety, pro-nounced it, in sub-stance, one of the most
ex-traordin-ary creatures which the muta-tions of the globe have blot-ted
out of ex-ist-ence.

When I stand among these mighty Le-viathan skel-et-ons, skulls, tusks,
jaws, ribs, and ver-tebræ, all char-ac-ter-ized by par-tial re-semb-lances to
the ex-ist-ing breeds of sea-mon-sters; but at the same time bear-ing on
the other hand sim-ilar af-fin-it-ies to the an-ni-hil-ated an-ti-chron-ical
Le-viath-ans, their in-cal-cul-able seni-ors; I am, by a flood, borne back to
that won-drous period, ere time it-self can be said to have be-gun; for
time began with man. Here Saturn’s grey chaos rolls over me, and I
ob-tain dim, shud-der-ing glimpses into those Polar etern-it-ies; when
wedged bas-tions of ice pressed hard upon what are now the Trop-ics; and
in all the 25,000 miles of this world’s cir-cum-fer-ence, not an
in-hab-it-able hand’s breadth of land was vis-ible. Then the whole world
was the whale’s; and, king of cre-ation, he left his wake along the
present lines of the Andes and the Him-malehs. Who can show a ped-i-gree
like Le-viathan? Ahab’s har-poon had shed older blood than the Pharaoh’s.
Meth-u-se-lah seems a school-boy. I look round to shake hands with Shem. I
am hor-ror-struck at this ante-mo-saic, un-sourced ex-ist-ence of the
un-speak-able ter-rors of the whale, which, hav-ing been be-fore all time,
must needs ex-ist after all hu-mane ages are over.

But not alone has this Le-viathan left his pre-ad-am-ite traces in the
ste-reo-type plates of nature, and in lime-stone and marl be-queathed his
an-cient bust; but upon Egyp-tian tab-lets, whose an-tiquity seems to claim
for them an al-most fos-silifer-ous char-ac-ter, we find the un-mis-tak-able
print of his fin. In an apart-ment of the great temple of Denderah, some
fifty years ago, there was dis-covered upon the gran-ite ceil-ing a
sculp-tured and painted plan-i-sphere, abound-ing in cen-taurs, griffins,
and dol-phins, sim-ilar to the grot-esque fig-ures on the ce-les-tial globe
of the mod-erns. Glid-ing among them, old Le-viathan swam as of yore; was
there swim-ming in that plan-i-sphere, cen-tur-ies be-fore So-lomon was
cradled.

Nor must there be omit-ted an-other strange at-test-a-tion of the an-tiquity
of the whale, in his own os-seous post-di-lu-vian real-ity, as set down by
the ven-er-able John Leo, the old Bar-bary trav-el-ler.

“Not far from the Sea-side, they have a Temple, the Rafters and Beams
of which are made of Whale-Bones; for Whales of a mon-strous size are
of-ten-times cast up dead upon that shore. The Com-mon People ima-gine,
that by a secret Power be-stowed by God upon the Temple, no Whale can
pass it without im-me-di-ate death. But the truth of the Mat-ter is, that
on either side of the Temple, there are Rocks that shoot two Miles into
the Sea, and wound the Whales when they light upon ’em. They keep a
Whale’s Rib of an in-cred-ible length for a Mir-acle, which ly-ing upon the
Ground with its con-vex part up-per-most, makes an Arch, the Head of which
can-not be reached by a Man upon a Camel’s Back. This Rib (says John
Leo) is said to have layn there a hun-dred Years be-fore I saw it. Their
His-tor-i-ans af-firm, that a Prophet who proph-esy’d of Maho-met, came from
this Temple, and some do not stand to as-sert, that the Prophet Jo-nas
was cast forth by the Whale at the Base of the Temple.”

In this Afric Temple of the Whale I leave you, reader, and if you be a
Nan-tuck-eter, and a whale-man, you will si-lently wor-ship there.


CHAPTER 105. Does the Whale’s Mag-nitude Dimin-ish?—Will He Per-ish?

Inas-much, then, as this Le-viathan comes flounder-ing down upon us from
the head-wa-ters of the Etern-it-ies, it may be fitly in-quired, whether,
in the long course of his gen-er-a-tions, he has not de-gen-er-ated from the
ori-ginal bulk of his sires.

But upon in-vest-ig-a-tion we find, that not only are the whales of the
present day su-per-ior in mag-nitude to those whose fossil re-mains are
found in the Ter-tiary sys-tem (em-bra-cing a dis-tinct geo-lo-gical period
prior to man), but of the whales found in that Ter-tiary sys-tem, those
be-long-ing to its lat-ter form-a-tions ex-ceed in size those of its earlier
ones.

Of all the pre-ad-am-ite whales yet ex-humed, by far the largest is the
Alabama one men-tioned in the last chapter, and that was less than
sev-enty feet in length in the skel-eton. Whereas, we have already seen,
that the tape-meas-ure gives sev-enty-two feet for the skel-eton of a
large sized mod-ern whale. And I have heard, on whale-men’s au-thor-ity,
that Sperm Whales have been cap-tured near a hun-dred feet long at the
time of cap-ture.

But may it not be, that while the whales of the present hour are an
ad-vance in mag-nitude upon those of all pre-vi-ous geo-lo-gical peri-ods; may
it not be, that since Adam’s time they have de-gen-er-ated?

As-suredly, we must con-clude so, if we are to credit the ac-counts of
such gen-tle-men as Pliny, and the an-cient nat-ur-al-ists gen-er-ally. For
Pliny tells us of whales that em-braced acres of liv-ing bulk, and
Aldrovan-dus of oth-ers which meas-ured eight hun-dred feet in length—Rope
Walks and Thames Tun-nels of Whales! And even in the days of Banks and
Solan-der, Cooke’s nat-ur-al-ists, we find a Dan-ish mem-ber of the Academy
of Sciences set-ting down cer-tain Ice-land Whales (rey-dan-sis-kur, or
Wrinkled Bel-lies) at one hun-dred and twenty yards; that is, three
hun-dred and sixty feet. And Lacépède, the French nat-ur-al-ist, in his
elab-or-ate his-tory of whales, in the very be-gin-ning of his work (page
3), sets down the Right Whale at one hun-dred metres, three hun-dred and
twenty-eight feet. And this work was pub-lished so late as A.D. 1825.

But will any whale-man be-lieve these stor-ies? No. The whale of to-day is
as big as his an-cest-ors in Pliny’s time. And if ever I go where Pliny
is, I, a whale-man (more than he was), will make bold to tell him so.
Be-cause I can-not un-der-stand how it is, that while the Egyp-tian mum-mies
that were bur-ied thou-sands of years be-fore even Pliny was born, do not
meas-ure so much in their coffins as a mod-ern Ken-tuckian in his socks;
and while the cattle and other an-im-als sculp-tured on the old-est
Egyp-tian and Nineveh tab-lets, by the re-l-at-ive pro-por-tions in which they
are drawn, just as plainly prove that the high-bred, stall-fed, prize
cattle of Smith-field, not only equal, but far ex-ceed in mag-nitude the
fat-test of Pharaoh’s fat kine; in the face of all this, I will not
ad-mit that of all an-im-als the whale alone should have de-gen-er-ated.

But still an-other in-quiry re-mains; one of-ten agit-ated by the more
re-con-dite Nan-tuck-eters. Whether ow-ing to the al-most om-ni-scient
look-outs at the mast-heads of the whale-ships, now pen-et-rat-ing even
through Behring’s straits, and into the re-motest secret draw-ers and
lock-ers of the world; and the thou-sand har-poons and lances dar-ted along
all con-tin-ental coasts; the moot point is, whether Le-viathan can long
en-dure so wide a chase, and so re-morse-less a havoc; whether he must not
at last be ex-term-in-ated from the wa-ters, and the last whale, like the
last man, smoke his last pipe, and then him-self evap-or-ate in the fi-nal
puff.

Com-par-ing the humped herds of whales with the humped herds of buf-falo,
which, not forty years ago, over-spread by tens of thou-sands the
prair-ies of Illinois and Mis-souri, and shook their iron manes and
scowled with their thun-der-clot-ted brows upon the sites of pop-u-lous
river-cap-it-als, where now the po-lite broker sells you land at a dol-lar
an inch; in such a com-par-ison an ir-res-ist-ible ar-gu-ment would seem
fur-nished, to show that the hunted whale can-not now es-cape speedy
ex-tinc-tion.

But you must look at this mat-ter in every light. Though so short a
period ago—not a good life-time—the census of the buf-falo in Illinois
ex-ceeded the census of men now in Lon-don, and though at the present day
not one horn or hoof of them re-mains in all that re-gion; and though the
cause of this won-drous ex-term-in-a-tion was the spear of man; yet the far
dif-fer-ent nature of the whale-hunt per-emp-tor-ily for-bids so in-glori-ous
an end to the Le-viathan. Forty men in one ship hunt-ing the Sperm Whales
for forty-eight months think they have done ex-tremely well, and thank
God, if at last they carry home the oil of forty fish. Whereas, in the
days of the old Ca-na-dian and In-dian hunters and trap-pers of the West,
when the far west (in whose sun-set suns still rise) was a wil-der-ness
and a vir-gin, the same num-ber of moc-casined men, for the same num-ber of
months, moun-ted on horse in-stead of sail-ing in ships, would have slain
not forty, but forty thou-sand and more buf-fa-loes; a fact that, if need
were, could be stat-ist-ic-ally stated.

Nor, con-sidered aright, does it seem any ar-gu-ment in fa-vour of the
gradual ex-tinc-tion of the Sperm Whale, for ex-ample, that in former
years (the lat-ter part of the last cen-tury, say) these Le-viath-ans, in
small pods, were en-countered much of-tener than at present, and, in
con-sequence, the voy-ages were not so pro-longed, and were also much more
re-mu-ner-at-ive. Be-cause, as has been else-where no-ticed, those whales,
in-flu-enced by some views to safety, now swim the seas in im-mense
cara-vans, so that to a large de-gree the scattered sol-it-ar-ies, yokes,
and pods, and schools of other days are now ag-greg-ated into vast but
widely sep-ar-ated, un-fre-quent armies. That is all. And equally
fal-la-cious seems the con-ceit, that be-cause the so-called whale-bone
whales no longer haunt many grounds in former years abound-ing with
them, hence that spe-cies also is de-clin-ing. For they are only be-ing
driven from promon-tory to cape; and if one coast is no longer en-livened
with their jets, then, be sure, some other and re-moter strand has been
very re-cently startled by the un-fa-mil-iar spec-tacle.

Fur-ther-more: con-cern-ing these last men-tioned Le-viath-ans, they have two
firm fort-resses, which, in all hu-man prob-ab-il-ity, will for ever re-main
im-preg-nable. And as upon the in-va-sion of their val-leys, the frosty
Swiss have re-treated to their moun-tains; so, hunted from the sa-van-nas
and glades of the middle seas, the whale-bone whales can at last re-sort
to their Polar cit-adels, and diving un-der the ul-ti-mate glassy bar-ri-ers
and walls there, come up among icy fields and floes; and in a charmed
circle of ever-last-ing Decem-ber, bid de-fi-ance to all pur-suit from man.

But as per-haps fifty of these whale-bone whales are har-pooned for one
cach-alot, some philo-soph-ers of the fore-castle have con-cluded that this
pos-it-ive havoc has already very ser-i-ously di-min-ished their bat-talions.
But though for some time past a num-ber of these whales, not less than
13,000, have been an-nu-ally slain on the nor’ west coast by the
Amer-ic-ans alone; yet there are con-sid-er-a-tions which render even this
cir-cum-stance of little or no ac-count as an op-pos-ing ar-gu-ment in this
mat-ter.

Nat-ural as it is to be some-what in-cred-u-lous con-cern-ing the pop-u-lous-ness
of the more enorm-ous creatures of the globe, yet what shall we say to
Harto, the his-tor-ian of Goa, when he tells us that at one hunt-ing the
King of Siam took 4,000 ele-phants; that in those re-gions ele-phants are
nu-mer-ous as droves of cattle in the tem-per-ate climes. And there seems
no reason to doubt that if these ele-phants, which have now been hunted
for thou-sands of years, by Semira-mis, by Porus, by Han-ni-bal, and by all
the suc-cess-ive mon-archs of the East—if they still sur-vive there in
great num-bers, much more may the great whale out-last all hunt-ing, since
he has a pas-ture to ex-pa-ti-ate in, which is pre-cisely twice as large as
all Asia, both Amer-icas, Europe and Africa, New Hol-land, and all the
Isles of the sea com-bined.

Moreover: we are to con-sider, that from the pre-sumed great longev-ity of
whales, their prob-ably at-tain-ing the age of a cen-tury and more,
there-fore at any one period of time, sev-eral dis-tinct adult gen-er-a-tions
must be con-tem-por-ary. And what that is, we may soon gain some idea of,
by ima-gin-ing all the grave-yards, cemeter-ies, and fam-ily vaults of
cre-ation yield-ing up the live bod-ies of all the men, wo-men, and
chil-dren who were alive sev-enty-five years ago; and adding this
count-less host to the present hu-man pop-u-la-tion of the globe.

Where-fore, for all these things, we ac-count the whale im-mor-tal in his
spe-cies, how-ever per-ish-able in his in-di-vidu-al-ity. He swam the seas
be-fore the con-tin-ents broke wa-ter; he once swam over the site of the
Tuiler-ies, and Wind-sor Castle, and the Krem-lin. In Noah’s flood he
des-pised Noah’s Ark; and if ever the world is to be again flooded, like
the Neth-er-lands, to kill off its rats, then the eternal whale will
still sur-vive, and rear-ing upon the top-most crest of the equat-orial
flood, spout his frothed de-fi-ance to the skies.


CHAPTER 106. Ahab’s Leg.

The pre-cip-it-at-ing man-ner in which Cap-tain Ahab had quit-ted the Samuel
Enderby of Lon-don, had not been un-at-ten-ded with some small vi-ol-ence to
his own per-son. He had lighted with such en-ergy upon a thwart of his
boat that his ivory leg had re-ceived a half-splin-ter-ing shock. And when
after gain-ing his own deck, and his own pivot-hole there, he so
vehe-mently wheeled round with an ur-gent com-mand to the steers-man (it
was, as ever, some-thing about his not steer-ing in-flex-ibly enough);
then, the already shaken ivory re-ceived such an ad-di-tional twist and
wrench, that though it still re-mained en-tire, and to all ap-pear-ances
lusty, yet Ahab did not deem it en-tirely trust-worthy.

And, in-deed, it seemed small mat-ter for won-der, that for all his
per-vad-ing, mad reck-less-ness, Ahab did at times give care-ful heed to the
con-di-tion of that dead bone upon which he partly stood. For it had not
been very long prior to the Pequod’s sail-ing from Nan-tucket, that he
had been found one night ly-ing prone upon the ground, and in-sens-ible;
by some un-known, and seem-ingly in-ex-plic-able, un-ima-gin-able cas-u-alty, his
ivory limb hav-ing been so vi-ol-ently dis-placed, that it had stake-wise
smit-ten, and all but pierced his groin; nor was it without ex-treme
dif-fi-culty that the ag-on-iz-ing wound was en-tirely cured.

Nor, at the time, had it failed to enter his mono-ma-niac mind, that all
the an-guish of that then present suf-fer-ing was but the dir-ect is-sue of
a former woe; and he too plainly seemed to see, that as the most
pois-on-ous rep-tile of the marsh per-petu-ates his kind as in-ev-it-ably as
the sweetest song-ster of the grove; so, equally with every fe-li-city,
all miser-able events do nat-ur-ally be-get their like. Yea, more than
equally, thought Ahab; since both the an-ces-try and pos-ter-ity of Grief
go fur-ther than the an-ces-try and pos-ter-ity of Joy. For, not to hint of
this: that it is an in-fer-ence from cer-tain ca-nonic teach-ings, that
while some nat-ural en-joy-ments here shall have no chil-dren born to them
for the other world, but, on the con-trary, shall be fol-lowed by the
joy-child-less-ness of all hell’s des-pair; whereas, some guilty mor-tal
miser-ies shall still fer-tilely be-get to them-selves an etern-ally
pro-gress-ive pro-geny of griefs bey-ond the grave; not at all to hint of
this, there still seems an in-equal-ity in the deeper ana-lysis of the
thing. For, thought Ahab, while even the highest earthly fe-li-cit-ies
ever have a cer-tain un-sig-ni-fy-ing pet-ti-ness lurk-ing in them, but, at
bot-tom, all heart-woes, a mys-tic sig-ni-fic-ance, and, in some men, an
archangelic grandeur; so do their di-li-gent tra-cings-out not be-lie the
ob-vi-ous de-duc-tion. To trail the gene-a-lo-gies of these high mor-tal
miser-ies, car-ries us at last among the source-less pri-mo-gen-it-ures of the
gods; so that, in the face of all the glad, hay-mak-ing suns, and soft
cym-balling, round har-vest-moons, we must needs give in to this: that
the gods them-selves are not for ever glad. The in-ef-face-able, sad
birth-mark in the brow of man, is but the stamp of sor-row in the
sign-ers.

Un-wit-tingly here a secret has been di-vulged, which per-haps might more
prop-erly, in set way, have been dis-closed be-fore. With many other
par-tic-u-lars con-cern-ing Ahab, al-ways had it re-mained a mys-tery to some,
why it was, that for a cer-tain period, both be-fore and after the
sail-ing of the Pequod, he had hid-den him-self away with such
Grand-Lama-like ex-clus-ive-ness; and, for that one in-ter-val, sought
speech-less refuge, as it were, among the marble sen-ate of the dead.
Cap-tain Peleg’s bruited reason for this thing ap-peared by no means
ad-equate; though, in-deed, as touch-ing all Ahab’s deeper part, every
rev-el-a-tion par-took more of sig-ni-fic-ant dark-ness than of ex-plan-at-ory
light. But, in the end, it all came out; this one mat-ter did, at least.
That dire-ful mis-hap was at the bot-tom of his tem-por-ary re-cluse-ness. And
not only this, but to that ever-con-tract-ing, drop-ping circle ashore,
who, for any reason, pos-sessed the priv-ilege of a less banned ap-proach
to him; to that timid circle the above hin-ted cas-u-alty—re-main-ing, as it
did, moodily un-ac-coun-ted for by Ahab—in-ves-ted it-self with ter-rors, not
en-tirely un-de-r-ived from the land of spir-its and of wails. So that,
through their zeal for him, they had all con-spired, so far as in them
lay, to muffle up the know-ledge of this thing from oth-ers; and hence it
was, that not till a con-sid-er-able in-ter-val had elapsed, did it
tran-spire upon the Pequod’s decks.

But be all this as it may; let the un-seen, am-bigu-ous synod in the air,
or the vin-dict-ive princes and po-tentates of fire, have to do or not
with earthly Ahab, yet, in this present mat-ter of his leg, he took
plain prac-tical pro-ced-ures;—he called the car-penter.

And when that func-tion-ary ap-peared be-fore him, he bade him without
delay set about mak-ing a new leg, and dir-ec-ted the mates to see him
sup-plied with all the studs and joists of jaw-ivory (Sperm Whale) which
had thus far been ac-cu-mu-lated on the voy-age, in or-der that a care-ful
se-lec-tion of the stoutest, clearest-grained stuff might be se-cured.
This done, the car-penter re-ceived or-ders to have the leg com-pleted that
night; and to provide all the fit-tings for it, in-de-pend-ent of those
per-tain-ing to the dis-trus-ted one in use. Moreover, the ship’s forge was
ordered to be hois-ted out of its tem-por-ary idle-ness in the hold; and,
to ac-cel-er-ate the af-fair, the black-smith was com-manded to pro-ceed at
once to the for-ging of whatever iron con-triv-ances might be needed.


CHAPTER 107. The Car-penter.

Seat thy-self sul-tan-ic-ally among the moons of Saturn, and take high
ab-strac-ted man alone; and he seems a won-der, a grandeur, and a woe. But
from the same point, take man-kind in mass, and for the most part, they
seem a mob of un-ne-ces-sary du-plic-ates, both con-tem-por-ary and hered-it-ary.
But most humble though he was, and far from fur-nish-ing an ex-ample of
the high, hu-mane ab-strac-tion; the Pequod’s car-penter was no du-plic-ate;
hence, he now comes in per-son on this stage.

Like all sea-go-ing ship car-penters, and more es-pe-cially those be-long-ing
to whal-ing ves-sels, he was, to a cer-tain off-handed, prac-tical ex-tent,
alike ex-per-i-enced in nu-mer-ous trades and call-ings col-lat-eral to his
own; the car-penter’s pur-suit be-ing the an-cient and out-branch-ing trunk
of all those nu-mer-ous han-di-crafts which more or less have to do with
wood as an aux-il-i-ary ma-ter-ial. But, be-sides the ap-plic-a-tion to him of
the gen-eric re-mark above, this car-penter of the Pequod was sin-gu-larly
ef-fi-cient in those thou-sand name-less mech-an-ical emer-gen-cies con-tinu-ally
re-cur-ring in a large ship, upon a three or four years’ voy-age, in
un-civ-il-ized and far-dis-tant seas. For not to speak of his read-i-ness in
or-din-ary du-ties:—re-pair-ing stove boats, sprung spars, re-form-ing the
shape of clumsy-bladed oars, in-sert-ing bull’s eyes in the deck, or new
tree-nails in the side planks, and other mis-cel-laneous mat-ters more
dir-ectly per-tain-ing to his spe-cial busi-ness; he was moreover
un-hes-it-at-ingly ex-pert in all man-ner of con-flict-ing aptitudes, both
use-ful and ca-pri-cious.

The one grand stage where he en-acted all his vari-ous parts so man-i-fold,
was his vice-bench; a long rude pon-der-ous table fur-nished with sev-eral
vices, of dif-fer-ent sizes, and both of iron and of wood. At all times
ex-cept when whales were along-side, this bench was se-curely lashed
athwart-ships against the rear of the Try-works.

A be-lay-ing pin is found too large to be eas-ily in-ser-ted into its hole:
the car-penter claps it into one of his ever-ready vices, and
straight-way files it smal-ler. A lost land-bird of strange plumage
strays on board, and is made a cap-tive: out of clean shaved rods of
right-whale bone, and cross-beams of sperm whale ivory, the car-penter
makes a pa-goda-look-ing cage for it. An oars-man sprains his wrist: the
car-penter con-cocts a sooth-ing lo-tion. Stubb longed for ver-mil-lion stars
to be painted upon the blade of his every oar; screw-ing each oar in his
big vice of wood, the car-penter sym-met-ric-ally sup-plies the
con-stel-la-tion. A sailor takes a fancy to wear shark-bone ear-rings: the
car-penter drills his ears. Another has the toothache: the car-penter out
pin-cers, and clap-ping one hand upon his bench bids him be seated there;
but the poor fel-low un-man-age-ably winces un-der the un-con-cluded
op-er-a-tion; whirl-ing round the handle of his wooden vice, the car-penter
signs him to clap his jaw in that, if he would have him draw the tooth.

Thus, this car-penter was pre-pared at all points, and alike in-dif-fer-ent
and without re-spect in all. Teeth he ac-coun-ted bits of ivory; heads he
deemed but top-blocks; men them-selves he lightly held for cap-stans. But
while now upon so wide a field thus vari-ously ac-com-plished and with
such live-li-ness of ex-pert-ness in him, too; all this would seem to ar-gue
some un-com-mon vi-va-city of in-tel-li-gence. But not pre-cisely so. For
noth-ing was this man more re-mark-able, than for a cer-tain im-per-sonal
stolid-ity as it were; im-per-sonal, I say; for it so shaded off into the
sur-round-ing in-fin-ite of things, that it seemed one with the gen-eral
stolid-ity dis-cern-ible in the whole vis-ible world; which while
pause-lessly act-ive in un-coun-ted modes, still etern-ally holds its peace,
and ig-nores you, though you dig found-a-tions for cathed-rals. Yet was
this half-hor-rible stolid-ity in him, in-volving, too, as it ap-peared, an
all-rami-fy-ing heart-less-ness;—yet was it oddly dashed at times, with an
old, crutch-like, antedi-lu-vian, wheez-ing hu-mor-ous-ness, not un-streaked
now and then with a cer-tain grizzled wit-ti-ness; such as might have
served to pass the time dur-ing the mid-night watch on the bearded
fore-castle of Noah’s ark. Was it that this old car-penter had been a
life-long wan-derer, whose much rolling, to and fro, not only had
gathered no moss; but what is more, had rubbed off whatever small
out-ward cling-ings might have ori-gin-ally per-tained to him? He was a
stript ab-stract; an un-frac-tioned in-teg-ral; un-com-prom-ised as a new-born
babe; liv-ing without pre-med-it-ated ref-er-ence to this world or the next.
You might al-most say, that this strange un-com-prom-ised-ness in him
in-volved a sort of un-in-tel-li-gence; for in his nu-mer-ous trades, he did
not seem to work so much by reason or by in-stinct, or simply be-cause he
had been tutored to it, or by any in-ter-mix-ture of all these, even or
un-even; but merely by a kind of deaf and dumb, spon-tan-eous lit-eral
pro-cess. He was a pure ma-nip-u-lator; his brain, if he had ever had one,
must have early oozed along into the muscles of his fin-gers. He was
like one of those un-reas-on-ing but still highly use-ful, _multum in
par-vo_, Shef-field con-triv-ances, as-sum-ing the ex-ter-ior—though a little
swelled—of a com-mon pocket knife; but con-tain-ing, not only blades of
vari-ous sizes, but also screw-drivers, cork-screws, tweez-ers, awls,
pens, rulers, nail-filers, coun-ter-sinkers. So, if his su-per-i-ors wanted
to use the car-penter for a screw-driver, all they had to do was to open
that part of him, and the screw was fast: or if for tweez-ers, take him
up by the legs, and there they were.

Yet, as pre-vi-ously hin-ted, this om-ni-tooled, open-and-shut car-penter,
was, after all, no mere ma-chine of an auto-maton. If he did not have a
com-mon soul in him, he had a subtle some-thing that some-how an-om-al-ously
did its duty. What that was, whether es-sence of quick-sil-ver, or a few
drops of hartshorn, there is no telling. But there it was; and there it
had abided for now some sixty years or more. And this it was, this same
un-ac-count-able, cun-ning life-prin-ciple in him; this it was, that kept
him a great part of the time so-li-lo-quiz-ing; but only like an
un-reas-on-ing wheel, which also hum-mingly so-li-lo-quizes; or rather, his
body was a sen-try-box and this so-li-lo-quizer on guard there, and talk-ing
all the time to keep him-self awake.


CHAPTER 108. Ahab and the Car-penter.

The Deck—First Night Watch.

(_Car-penter stand-ing be-fore his vice-bench, and by the light of two
lan-terns busily fil-ing the ivory joist for the leg, which joist is
firmly fixed in the vice. Slabs of ivory, leather straps, pads, screws,
and vari-ous tools of all sorts ly-ing about the bench. For-ward, the red
flame of the forge is seen, where the black-smith is at work._)

Drat the file, and drat the bone! That is hard which should be soft,
and that is soft which should be hard. So we go, who file old jaws and
shin-bones. Let’s try an-other. Aye, now, this works bet-ter (_s-neezes_).
Hal-loa, this bone dust is (_s-neezes_)—why it’s (_s-neezes_)—yes it’s
(_s-neezes_)—bless my soul, it won’t let me speak! This is what an old
fel-low gets now for work-ing in dead lum-ber. Saw a live tree, and you
don’t get this dust; am-pu-tate a live bone, and you don’t get it
(_s-neezes_). Come, come, you old Smut, there, bear a hand, and let’s
have that fer-ule and buckle-screw; I’ll be ready for them presently.
Lucky now (_s-neezes_) there’s no knee-joint to make; that might puzzle
a little; but a mere shin-bone—why it’s easy as mak-ing hop-poles; only I
should like to put a good fin-ish on. Time, time; if I but only had the
time, I could turn him out as neat a leg now as ever (_s-neezes_)
scraped to a lady in a par-lor. Those buck-skin legs and calves of legs
I’ve seen in shop win-dows wouldn’t com-pare at all. They soak wa-ter,
they do; and of course get rheum-atic, and have to be doctored
(_s-neezes_) with washes and lo-tions, just like live legs. There; be-fore
I saw it off, now, I must call his old Mogul-ship, and see whether the
length will be all right; too short, if any-thing, I guess. Ha! that’s
the heel; we are in luck; here he comes, or it’s some-body else, that’s
cer-tain.

AHAB (_ad-van-cing_). (_Dur-ing the en-su-ing scene, the car-penter con-tin-ues
sneez-ing at times._)

Well, man-maker!

Just in time, sir. If the cap-tain pleases, I will now mark the length.
Let me meas-ure, sir.

Meas-ured for a leg! good. Well, it’s not the first time. About it!
There; keep thy fin-ger on it. This is a co-gent vice thou hast here,
car-penter; let me feel its grip once. So, so; it does pinch some.

Oh, sir, it will break bones—be-ware, be-ware!

No fear; I like a good grip; I like to feel some-thing in this slip-pery
world that can hold, man. What’s Pro-meth-eus about there?—the
black-smith, I mean—what’s he about?

He must be for-ging the buckle-screw, sir, now.

Right. It’s a part-ner-ship; he sup-plies the muscle part. He makes a
fierce red flame there!

Aye, sir; he must have the white heat for this kind of fine work.

Um-m. So he must. I do deem it now a most mean-ing thing, that that old
Greek, Pro-meth-eus, who made men, they say, should have been a
black-smith, and an-im-ated them with fire; for what’s made in fire must
prop-erly be-long to fire; and so hell’s prob-able. How the soot flies!
This must be the re-mainder the Greek made the Afric-ans of. Car-penter,
when he’s through with that buckle, tell him to forge a pair of steel
shoulder-blades; there’s a ped-lar aboard with a crush-ing pack.

Sir?

Hold; while Pro-meth-eus is about it, I’ll or-der a com-plete man after a
de-sir-able pat-tern. Imprimis, fifty feet high in his socks; then, chest
mod-elled after the Thames Tun-nel; then, legs with roots to ’em, to stay
in one place; then, arms three feet through the wrist; no heart at all,
brass fore-head, and about a quarter of an acre of fine brains; and let
me see—shall I or-der eyes to see out-wards? No, but put a sky-light on
top of his head to il-lu-min-ate in-wards. There, take the or-der, and away.

Now, what’s he speak-ing about, and who’s he speak-ing to, I should like
to know? Shall I keep stand-ing here? (_aside_).

’Tis but in-dif-fer-ent ar-chi-tec-ture to make a blind dome; here’s one. No,
no, no; I must have a lan-tern.

Ho, ho! That’s it, hey? Here are two, sir; one will serve my turn.

What art thou thrust-ing that thief-catcher into my face for, man?
Thrus-ted light is worse than presen-ted pis-tols.

I thought, sir, that you spoke to car-penter.

Car-penter? why that’s—but no;—a very tidy, and, I may say, an ex-tremely
gen-tle-man-like sort of busi-ness thou art in here, car-penter;—or would’st
thou rather work in clay?

Sir?—Clay? clay, sir? That’s mud; we leave clay to ditch-ers, sir.

The fel-low’s im-pi-ous! What art thou sneez-ing about?

Bone is rather dusty, sir.

Take the hint, then; and when thou art dead, never bury thy-self un-der
liv-ing people’s noses.

Sir?—oh! ah!—I guess so;—yes—oh, dear!

Look ye, car-penter, I dare say thou callest thy-self a right good
work-man-like work-man, eh? Well, then, will it speak thor-oughly well for
thy work, if, when I come to mount this leg thou makest, I shall
nev-er-the-less feel an-other leg in the same identical place with it; that
is, car-penter, my old lost leg; the flesh and blood one, I mean. Canst
thou not drive that old Adam away?

Truly, sir, I be-gin to un-der-stand some-what now. Yes, I have heard
some-thing curi-ous on that score, sir; how that a dis-masted man never
en-tirely loses the feel-ing of his old spar, but it will be still
prick-ing him at times. May I humbly ask if it be really so, sir?

It is, man. Look, put thy live leg here in the place where mine once
was; so, now, here is only one dis-tinct leg to the eye, yet two to the
soul. Where thou fee-lest tingling life; there, ex-actly there, there to
a hair, do I. Is’t a riddle?

I should humbly call it a poser, sir.

Hist, then. How dost thou know that some en-tire, liv-ing, think-ing thing
may not be in-vis-ibly and un-in-ter-pen-et-rat-ingly stand-ing pre-cisely where
thou now stand-est; aye, and stand-ing there in thy spite? In thy most
sol-it-ary hours, then, dost thou not fear eaves-drop-pers? Hold, don’t
speak! And if I still feel the smart of my crushed leg, though it be
now so long dis-solved; then, why mayst not thou, car-penter, feel the
fiery pains of hell for ever, and without a body? Hah!

Good Lord! Truly, sir, if it comes to that, I must cal-cu-late over
again; I think I didn’t carry a small fig-ure, sir.

Look ye, pud-ding-heads should never grant premises.—How long be-fore the
leg is done?

Per-haps an hour, sir.

Bungle away at it then, and bring it to me (_turns to go_). Oh, Life!
Here I am, proud as Greek god, and yet stand-ing debtor to this
block-head for a bone to stand on! Cursed be that mor-tal
inter-in-debted-ness which will not do away with ledgers. I would be free
as air; and I’m down in the whole world’s books. I am so rich, I could
have given bid for bid with the wealth-i-est Prætori-ans at the auc-tion of
the Ro-man em-pire (which was the world’s); and yet I owe for the flesh
in the tongue I brag with. By heav-ens! I’ll get a cru-cible, and into
it, and dis-solve my-self down to one small, com-pen-di-ous ver-tebra. So.

CARPENTER (_re-sum-ing his work_).

Well, well, well! Stubb knows him best of all, and Stubb al-ways says
he’s queer; says noth-ing but that one suf-fi-cient little word queer;
he’s queer, says Stubb; he’s queer—queer, queer; and keeps din-ning it
into Mr. Star-buck all the time—queer—sir—queer, queer, very queer. And
here’s his leg! Yes, now that I think of it, here’s his bed-fel-low! has
a stick of whale’s jaw-bone for a wife! And this is his leg; he’ll
stand on this. What was that now about one leg stand-ing in three
places, and all three places stand-ing in one hell—how was that? Oh! I
don’t won-der he looked so scorn-ful at me! I’m a sort of
strange-thoughted some-times, they say; but that’s only haphaz-ard-like.
Then, a short, little old body like me, should never un-der-take to wade
out into deep wa-ters with tall, heron-built cap-tains; the wa-ter chucks
you un-der the chin pretty quick, and there’s a great cry for
life-boats. And here’s the heron’s leg! long and slim, sure enough!
Now, for most folks one pair of legs lasts a life-time, and that must be
be-cause they use them mer-ci-fully, as a tender-hearted old lady uses her
roly-poly old coach-horses. But Ahab; oh he’s a hard driver. Look,
driven one leg to death, and spavined the other for life, and now wears
out bone legs by the cord. Hal-loa, there, you Smut! bear a hand there
with those screws, and let’s fin-ish it be-fore the re-sur-rec-tion fel-low
comes a-call-ing with his horn for all legs, true or false, as
brew-ery-men go round col-lect-ing old beer bar-rels, to fill ’em up again.
What a leg this is! It looks like a real live leg, filed down to
noth-ing but the core; he’ll be stand-ing on this to-mor-row; he’ll be
tak-ing alti-tudes on it. Hal-loa! I al-most for-got the little oval slate,
smoothed ivory, where he fig-ures up the lat-it-ude. So, so; chisel, file,
and sand-pa-per, now!


CHAPTER 109. Ahab and Star-buck in the Cabin.

Ac-cord-ing to us-age they were pump-ing the ship next morn-ing; and lo! no
in-con-sid-er-able oil came up with the wa-ter; the casks be-low must have
sprung a bad leak. Much con-cern was shown; and Star-buck went down into
the cabin to re-port this un-fa-vour-able af-fair.*

*In Sperm-whale-men with any con-sid-er-able quant-ity of oil on board, it
is a reg-u-lar semi-weekly duty to con-duct a hose into the hold, and
drench the casks with sea-wa-ter; which af-ter-wards, at vary-ing
in-ter-vals, is re-moved by the ship’s pumps. Hereby the casks are sought
to be kept damply tight; while by the changed char-ac-ter of the
with-drawn wa-ter, the mar-iners read-ily de-tect any ser-i-ous leak-age in the
pre-cious cargo.

Now, from the South and West the Pequod was draw-ing nigh to For-mosa and
the Bashee Isles, between which lies one of the trop-ical out-lets from
the Ch-ina wa-ters into the Pa-cific. And so Star-buck found Ahab with a
gen-eral chart of the ori-ental ar-chipela-goes spread be-fore him; and
an-other sep-ar-ate one rep-res-ent-ing the long east-ern coasts of the
Japan-ese is-lands—Ni-phon, Matsmai, and Sikoke. With his snow-white new
ivory leg braced against the screwed leg of his table, and with a long
prun-ing-hook of a jack-knife in his hand, the won-drous old man, with
his back to the gang-way door, was wrink-ling his brow, and tra-cing his
old courses again.

“Who’s there?” hear-ing the foot-step at the door, but not turn-ing round
to it. “On deck! Be-gone!”

“Cap-tain Ahab mis-takes; it is I. The oil in the hold is leak-ing, sir.
We must up Bur-tons and break out.”

“Up Bur-tons and break out? Now that we are near-ing Japan; heave-to here
for a week to tinker a par-cel of old hoops?”

“Either do that, sir, or waste in one day more oil than we may make
good in a year. What we come twenty thou-sand miles to get is worth
sav-ing, sir.”

“So it is, so it is; if we get it.”

“I was speak-ing of the oil in the hold, sir.”

“And I was not speak-ing or think-ing of that at all. Be-gone! Let it
leak! I’m all aleak my-self. Aye! leaks in leaks! not only full of leaky
casks, but those leaky casks are in a leaky ship; and that’s a far
worse plight than the Pequod’s, man. Yet I don’t stop to plug my leak;
for who can find it in the deep-loaded hull; or how hope to plug it,
even if found, in this life’s howl-ing gale? Star-buck! I’ll not have the
Bur-tons hois-ted.”

“What will the own-ers say, sir?”

“Let the own-ers stand on Nan-tucket beach and out-yell the Typhoons. What
cares Ahab? Own-ers, own-ers? Thou art al-ways prat-ing to me, Star-buck,
about those miserly own-ers, as if the own-ers were my con-science. But
look ye, the only real owner of any-thing is its com-mander; and hark ye,
my con-science is in this ship’s keel.—On deck!”

“Cap-tain Ahab,” said the red-den-ing mate, mov-ing fur-ther into the cabin,
with a dar-ing so strangely re-spect-ful and cau-tious that it al-most
seemed not only every way seek-ing to avoid the slight-est out-ward
mani-fest-a-tion of it-self, but within also seemed more than half
dis-trust-ful of it-self; “A bet-ter man than I might well pass over in
thee what he would quickly enough re-sent in a younger man; aye, and in
a hap-pier, Cap-tain Ahab.”

“Devils! Dost thou then so much as dare to crit-ic-ally think of me?—On
deck!”

“Nay, sir, not yet; I do en-treat. And I do dare, sir—to be for-bear-ing!
Shall we not un-der-stand each other bet-ter than hitherto, Cap-tain Ahab?”

Ahab seized a loaded mus-ket from the rack (form-ing part of most
South-Sea-men’s cabin fur-niture), and point-ing it to-wards Star-buck,
ex-claimed: “There is one God that is Lord over the earth, and one
Cap-tain that is lord over the Pequod.—On deck!”

For an in-stant in the flash-ing eyes of the mate, and his fiery cheeks,
you would have al-most thought that he had really re-ceived the blaze of
the lev-elled tube. But, mas-ter-ing his emo-tion, he half calmly rose, and
as he quit-ted the cabin, paused for an in-stant and said: “Thou hast
out-raged, not in-sul-ted me, sir; but for that I ask thee not to be-ware
of Star-buck; thou wouldst but laugh; but let Ahab be-ware of Ahab;
be-ware of thy-self, old man.”

“He waxes brave, but nev-er-the-less obeys; most care-ful bravery that!”
mur-mured Ahab, as Star-buck dis-ap-peared. “What’s that he said—Ahab
be-ware of Ahab—there’s some-thing there!” Then un-con-sciously us-ing the
mus-ket for a staff, with an iron brow he paced to and fro in the little
cabin; but presently the thick plaits of his fore-head re-laxed, and
re-turn-ing the gun to the rack, he went to the deck.

“Thou art but too good a fel-low, Star-buck,” he said lowly to the mate;
then rais-ing his voice to the crew: “Furl the t’gal-lant-sails, and
close-reef the top-sails, fore and aft; back the main-yard; up Bur-ton,
and break out in the main-hold.”

It were per-haps vain to sur-mise ex-actly why it was, that as re-spect-ing
Star-buck, Ahab thus ac-ted. It may have been a flash of hon-esty in him;
or mere pruden-tial policy which, un-der the cir-cum-stance, im-per-i-ously
for-bade the slight-est symp-tom of open dis-af-fec-tion, how-ever tran-si-ent,
in the im-port-ant chief of-ficer of his ship. However it was, his or-ders
were ex-ecuted; and the Bur-tons were hois-ted.


CHAPTER 110. Queequeg in His Coffin.

Upon search-ing, it was found that the casks last struck into the hold
were per-fectly sound, and that the leak must be fur-ther off. So, it
be-ing calm weather, they broke out deeper and deeper, dis-turb-ing the
slum-bers of the huge ground-tier butts; and from that black mid-night
send-ing those gi-gantic moles into the day-light above. So deep did they
go; and so an-cient, and cor-roded, and weedy the as-pect of the lower-most
puncheons, that you al-most looked next for some mouldy corner-stone
cask con-tain-ing coins of Cap-tain Noah, with cop-ies of the pos-ted
plac-ards, vainly warn-ing the in-fatu-ated old world from the flood.
Tierce after tierce, too, of wa-ter, and bread, and beef, and shooks of
staves, and iron bundles of hoops, were hois-ted out, till at last the
piled decks were hard to get about; and the hol-low hull echoed un-der
foot, as if you were tread-ing over empty cata-combs, and reeled and
rolled in the sea like an air-freighted demi-john. Top-heavy was the
ship as a din-ner-less stu-dent with all Aris-totle in his head. Well was
it that the Typhoons did not visit them then.

Now, at this time it was that my poor pa-gan com-pan-ion, and fast
bosom-friend, Queequeg, was seized with a fever, which brought him nigh
to his end-less end.

Be it said, that in this vo-ca-tion of whal-ing, sine-cures are un-known;
dig-nity and danger go hand in hand; till you get to be Cap-tain, the
higher you rise the harder you toil. So with poor Queequeg, who, as
har-poon-eer, must not only face all the rage of the liv-ing whale, but—as
we have else-where seen—mount his dead back in a rolling sea; and
fi-nally des-cend into the gloom of the hold, and bit-terly sweat-ing all
day in that sub-ter-raneous con-fine-ment, res-ol-utely man-handle the
clum-si-est casks and see to their stow-age. To be short, among whale-men,
the har-poon-eers are the hold-ers, so called.

Poor Queequeg! when the ship was about half dis-em-bowelled, you should
have stooped over the hatch-way, and peered down upon him there; where,
stripped to his wool-len draw-ers, the tat-tooed sav-age was crawl-ing about
amid that damp-ness and slime, like a green spot-ted liz-ard at the bot-tom
of a well. And a well, or an ice-house, it some-how proved to him, poor
pa-gan; where, strange to say, for all the heat of his sweat-ings, he
caught a ter-rible chill which lapsed into a fever; and at last, after
some days’ suf-fer-ing, laid him in his ham-mock, close to the very sill
of the door of death. How he wasted and wasted away in those few
long-linger-ing days, till there seemed but little left of him but his
frame and tat-too-ing. But as all else in him thinned, and his
cheek-bones grew sharper, his eyes, nev-er-the-less, seemed grow-ing fuller
and fuller; they be-came of a strange soft-ness of lustre; and mildly but
deeply looked out at you there from his sick-ness, a won-drous testi-mony
to that im-mor-tal health in him which could not die, or be weakened. And
like circles on the wa-ter, which, as they grow fainter, ex-pand; so his
eyes seemed round-ing and round-ing, like the rings of Etern-ity. An awe
that can-not be named would steal over you as you sat by the side of
this wan-ing sav-age, and saw as strange things in his face, as any
be-held who were bystand-ers when Zoroaster died. For whatever is truly
won-drous and fear-ful in man, never yet was put into words or books. And
the draw-ing near of Death, which alike levels all, alike im-presses all
with a last rev-el-a-tion, which only an au-thor from the dead could
ad-equately tell. So that—let us say it again—no dy-ing Chaldee or Greek
had higher and ho-lier thoughts than those, whose mys-ter-i-ous shades you
saw creep-ing over the face of poor Queequeg, as he quietly lay in his
sway-ing ham-mock, and the rolling sea seemed gently rock-ing him to his
fi-nal rest, and the ocean’s in-vis-ible flood-tide lif-ted him higher and
higher to-wards his destined heaven.

Not a man of the crew but gave him up; and, as for Queequeg him-self,
what he thought of his case was for-cibly shown by a curi-ous fa-vour he
asked. He called one to him in the grey morn-ing watch, when the day was
just break-ing, and tak-ing his hand, said that while in Nan-tucket he had
chanced to see cer-tain little ca-noes of dark wood, like the rich
war-wood of his nat-ive isle; and upon in-quiry, he had learned that all
whale-men who died in Nan-tucket, were laid in those same dark ca-noes,
and that the fancy of be-ing so laid had much pleased him; for it was
not un-like the cus-tom of his own race, who, after em-balm-ing a dead
war-rior, stretched him out in his ca-noe, and so left him to be floated
away to the starry ar-chipela-goes; for not only do they be-lieve that the
stars are isles, but that far bey-ond all vis-ible ho-ri-zons, their own
mild, un-con-tin-en-ted seas, in-ter-flow with the blue heav-ens; and so form
the white break-ers of the milky way. He ad-ded, that he shuddered at the
thought of be-ing bur-ied in his ham-mock, ac-cord-ing to the usual
sea-cus-tom, tossed like some-thing vile to the death-de-vour-ing sharks.
No: he de-sired a ca-noe like those of Nan-tucket, all the more con-genial
to him, be-ing a whale-man, that like a whale-boat these coffin-ca-noes
were without a keel; though that in-volved but un-cer-tain steer-ing, and
much lee-way adown the dim ages.

Now, when this strange cir-cum-stance was made known aft, the car-penter
was at once com-manded to do Queequeg’s bid-ding, whatever it might
in-clude. There was some hea-then-ish, coffin-col-oured old lum-ber aboard,
which, upon a long pre-vi-ous voy-age, had been cut from the ab-ori-ginal
groves of the Lack-aday is-lands, and from these dark planks the coffin
was re-com-men-ded to be made. No sooner was the car-penter ap-prised of the
or-der, than tak-ing his rule, he forth-with with all the in-dif-fer-ent
promptitude of his char-ac-ter, pro-ceeded into the fore-castle and took
Queequeg’s meas-ure with great ac-cur-acy, reg-u-larly chalk-ing Queequeg’s
per-son as he shif-ted the rule.

“Ah! poor fel-low! he’ll have to die now,” ejac-u-lated the Long Is-land
sailor.

Go-ing to his vice-bench, the car-penter for con-veni-ence sake and gen-eral
ref-er-ence, now trans-fer-ringly meas-ured on it the ex-act length the
coffin was to be, and then made the trans-fer per-man-ent by cut-ting two
notches at its ex-tremit-ies. This done, he mar-shalled the planks and his
tools, and to work.

When the last nail was driven, and the lid duly planed and fit-ted, he
lightly shouldered the coffin and went for-ward with it, in-quir-ing
whether they were ready for it yet in that dir-ec-tion.

Over-hear-ing the in-dig-nant but half-hu-mor-ous cries with which the people
on deck began to drive the coffin away, Queequeg, to every one’s
con-sterna-tion, com-manded that the thing should be in-stantly brought to
him, nor was there any deny-ing him; see-ing that, of all mor-tals, some
dy-ing men are the most tyr-an-nical; and cer-tainly, since they will
shortly trouble us so little for ever-more, the poor fel-lows ought to be
in-dulged.

Lean-ing over in his ham-mock, Queequeg long re-garded the coffin with an
at-tent-ive eye. He then called for his har-poon, had the wooden stock
drawn from it, and then had the iron part placed in the coffin along
with one of the paddles of his boat. All by his own re-quest, also,
bis-cuits were then ranged round the sides within: a flask of fresh
wa-ter was placed at the head, and a small bag of woody earth scraped up
in the hold at the foot; and a piece of sail-cloth be-ing rolled up for
a pil-low, Queequeg now en-treated to be lif-ted into his fi-nal bed, that
he might make trial of its com-forts, if any it had. He lay without
mov-ing a few minutes, then told one to go to his bag and bring out his
little god, Yojo. Then cross-ing his arms on his breast with Yojo
between, he called for the coffin lid (hatch he called it) to be placed
over him. The head part turned over with a leather hinge, and there lay
Queequeg in his coffin with little but his com-posed coun-ten-ance in
view. “Rarmai” (it will do; it is easy), he mur-mured at last, and
signed to be re-placed in his ham-mock.

But ere this was done, Pip, who had been slily hov-er-ing near by all
this while, drew nigh to him where he lay, and with soft sob-bings, took
him by the hand; in the other, hold-ing his tam-bour-ine.

“Poor rover! will ye never have done with all this weary rov-ing? where
go ye now? But if the cur-rents carry ye to those sweet An-tilles where
the beaches are only beat with wa-ter-lilies, will ye do one little
er-rand for me? Seek out one Pip, who’s now been miss-ing long: I think
he’s in those far An-tilles. If ye find him, then com-fort him; for he
must be very sad; for look! he’s left his tam-bour-ine be-hind;—I found
it. Rig-a-dig, dig, dig! Now, Queequeg, die; and I’ll beat ye your
dy-ing march.”

“I have heard,” mur-mured Star-buck, gaz-ing down the scuttle, “that in
vi-ol-ent fevers, men, all ig-nor-ance, have talked in an-cient tongues; and
that when the mys-tery is probed, it turns out al-ways that in their
wholly for-got-ten child-hood those an-cient tongues had been really spoken
in their hear-ing by some lofty schol-ars. So, to my fond faith, poor
Pip, in this strange sweet-ness of his lun-acy, brings heav-enly vouch-ers
of all our heav-enly homes. Where learned he that, but there?—Hark! he
speaks again: but more wildly now.”

“Form two and two! Let’s make a Gen-eral of him! Ho, where’s his
har-poon? Lay it across here.—Rig-a-dig, dig, dig! huzza! Oh for a game
cock now to sit upon his head and crow! Queequeg dies game!—mind ye
that; Queequeg dies game!—take ye good heed of that; Queequeg dies
game! I say; game, game, game! but base little Pip, he died a cow-ard;
died all a’shiver;—out upon Pip! Hark ye; if ye find Pip, tell all the
An-tilles he’s a run-away; a cow-ard, a cow-ard, a cow-ard! Tell them he
jumped from a whale-boat! I’d never beat my tam-bour-ine over base Pip,
and hail him Gen-eral, if he were once more dy-ing here. No, no! shame
upon all cow-ards—shame upon them! Let ’em go drown like Pip, that
jumped from a whale-boat. Shame! shame!”

Dur-ing all this, Queequeg lay with closed eyes, as if in a dream. Pip
was led away, and the sick man was re-placed in his ham-mock.

But now that he had ap-par-ently made every pre-par-a-tion for death; now
that his coffin was proved a good fit, Queequeg sud-denly ral-lied; soon
there seemed no need of the car-penter’s box: and thereupon, when some
ex-pressed their de-lighted sur-prise, he, in sub-stance, said, that the
cause of his sud-den con-vales-cence was this;—at a crit-ical mo-ment, he
had just re-called a little duty ashore, which he was leav-ing un-done;
and there-fore had changed his mind about dy-ing: he could not die yet,
he averred. They asked him, then, whether to live or die was a mat-ter
of his own sov-er-eign will and pleas-ure. He answered, cer-tainly. In a
word, it was Queequeg’s con-ceit, that if a man made up his mind to
live, mere sick-ness could not kill him: noth-ing but a whale, or a gale,
or some vi-ol-ent, un-gov-ern-able, un-in-tel-li-gent des-troyer of that sort.

Now, there is this note-worthy dif-fer-ence between sav-age and civ-il-ized;
that while a sick, civ-il-ized man may be six months con-vales-cing,
gen-er-ally speak-ing, a sick sav-age is al-most half-well again in a day.
So, in good time my Queequeg gained strength; and at length after
sit-ting on the wind-lass for a few in-dol-ent days (but eat-ing with a
vig-or-ous ap-pet-ite) he sud-denly leaped to his feet, threw out his arms
and legs, gave him-self a good stretch-ing, yawned a little bit, and then
spring-ing into the head of his hois-ted boat, and pois-ing a har-poon,
pro-nounced him-self fit for a fight.

With a wild whim-si-ness, he now used his coffin for a sea-chest; and
empty-ing into it his can-vas bag of clothes, set them in or-der there.
Many spare hours he spent, in carving the lid with all man-ner of
grot-esque fig-ures and draw-ings; and it seemed that hereby he was
striv-ing, in his rude way, to copy parts of the twis-ted tat-too-ing on
his body. And this tat-too-ing had been the work of a de-par-ted prophet
and seer of his is-land, who, by those hiero-glyphic marks, had writ-ten
out on his body a com-plete the-ory of the heav-ens and the earth, and a
mys-tical treat-ise on the art of at-tain-ing truth; so that Queequeg in
his own proper per-son was a riddle to un-fold; a won-drous work in one
volume; but whose mys-ter-ies not even him-self could read, though his own
live heart beat against them; and these mys-ter-ies were there-fore
destined in the end to moulder away with the liv-ing parch-ment whereon
they were in-scribed, and so be un-solved to the last. And this thought
it must have been which sug-ges-ted to Ahab that wild ex-clam-a-tion of his,
when one morn-ing turn-ing away from sur-vey-ing poor Queequeg—“Oh,
dev-il-ish tan-tal-iz-a-tion of the gods!”


CHAPTER 111. The Pa-cific.

When glid-ing by the Bashee isles we emerged at last upon the great
South Sea; were it not for other things, I could have greeted my dear
Pa-cific with un-coun-ted thanks, for now the long sup-plic-a-tion of my
youth was answered; that se-rene ocean rolled east-wards from me a
thou-sand leagues of blue.

There is, one knows not what sweet mys-tery about this sea, whose gently
aw-ful stir-rings seem to speak of some hid-den soul be-neath; like those
fabled un-du-la-tions of the Eph-esian sod over the bur-ied Evan-gel-ist St.
John. And meet it is, that over these sea-pas-tures, wide-rolling wa-tery
prair-ies and Pot-ters’ Fields of all four con-tin-ents, the waves should
rise and fall, and ebb and flow un-ceas-ingly; for here, mil-lions of
mixed shades and shad-ows, drowned dreams, somn-am-bu-lisms, rev-er-ies; all
that we call lives and souls, lie dream-ing, dream-ing, still; toss-ing
like slum-ber-ers in their beds; the ever-rolling waves but made so by
their rest-less-ness.

To any med-it-at-ive Ma-gian rover, this se-rene Pa-cific, once be-held, must
ever after be the sea of his ad-op-tion. It rolls the mid-most wa-ters of
the world, the In-dian ocean and At-lantic be-ing but its arms. The same
waves wash the moles of the new-built Cali-for-nian towns, but yes-ter-day
planted by the re-cen-test race of men, and lave the faded but still
gor-geous skirts of Asi-atic lands, older than Abra-ham; while all between
float milky-ways of coral isles, and low-ly-ing, end-less, un-known
Ar-chipela-goes, and im-pen-et-rable Japans. Thus this mys-ter-i-ous, di-vine
Pa-cific zones the world’s whole bulk about; makes all coasts one bay to
it; seems the tide-beat-ing heart of earth. Lif-ted by those eternal
swells, you needs must own the se-duct-ive god, bow-ing your head to Pan.

But few thoughts of Pan stirred Ahab’s brain, as stand-ing like an iron
statue at his ac-cus-tomed place be-side the mizen rig-ging, with one
nos-tril he un-think-ingly snuffed the sug-ary musk from the Bashee isles
(in whose sweet woods mild lov-ers must be walk-ing), and with the other
con-sciously in-haled the salt breath of the new found sea; that sea in
which the hated White Whale must even then be swim-ming. Launched at
length upon these al-most fi-nal wa-ters, and glid-ing to-wards the Japan-ese
cruis-ing-ground, the old man’s pur-pose in-tens-i-fied it-self. His firm
lips met like the lips of a vice; the Delta of his fore-head’s veins
swelled like over-laden brooks; in his very sleep, his ringing cry ran
through the vaul-ted hull, “Stern all! the White Whale spouts thick
blood!”


CHAPTER 112. The Black-smith.

Avail-ing him-self of the mild, sum-mer-cool weather that now reigned in
these lat-it-udes, and in pre-par-a-tion for the pe-cu-li-arly act-ive pur-suits
shortly to be an-ti-cip-ated, Perth, the be-grimed, blistered old
black-smith, had not re-moved his port-able forge to the hold again, after
con-clud-ing his con-trib-ut-ory work for Ahab’s leg, but still re-tained it
on deck, fast lashed to ring-bolts by the fore-mast; be-ing now al-most
in-cess-antly in-voked by the heads-men, and har-poon-eers, and bow-smen to do
some little job for them; al-ter-ing, or re-pair-ing, or new shap-ing their
vari-ous weapons and boat fur-niture. Often he would be sur-roun-ded by an
eager circle, all wait-ing to be served; hold-ing boat-spades,
pike-heads, har-poons, and lances, and jeal-ously watch-ing his every
sooty move-ment, as he toiled. Never-the-less, this old man’s was a
pa-tient ham-mer wiel-ded by a pa-tient arm. No mur-mur, no im-pa-tience, no
petu-lance did come from him. Si-lent, slow, and sol-emn; bow-ing over
still fur-ther his chron-ic-ally broken back, he toiled away, as if toil
were life it-self, and the heavy beat-ing of his ham-mer the heavy beat-ing
of his heart. And so it was.—Most miser-able!

A pe-cu-liar walk in this old man, a cer-tain slight but pain-ful ap-pear-ing
yaw-ing in his gait, had at an early period of the voy-age ex-cited the
curi-os-ity of the mar-iners. And to the im-por-tun-ity of their per-sisted
ques-tion-ings he had fi-nally given in; and so it came to pass that every
one now knew the shame-ful story of his wretched fate.

Belated, and not in-no-cently, one bit-ter winter’s mid-night, on the road
run-ning between two coun-try towns, the black-smith half-stu-pidly felt
the deadly numb-ness steal-ing over him, and sought refuge in a lean-ing,
dilap-id-ated barn. The is-sue was, the loss of the ex-tremit-ies of both
feet. Out of this rev-el-a-tion, part by part, at last came out the four
acts of the glad-ness, and the one long, and as yet un-cata-strophied
fifth act of the grief of his life’s drama.

He was an old man, who, at the age of nearly sixty, had post-ponedly
en-countered that thing in sor-row’s tech-nic-als called ruin. He had been
an ar-tisan of famed ex-cel-lence, and with plenty to do; owned a house
and garden; em-braced a youth-ful, daugh-ter-like, lov-ing wife, and three
blithe, ruddy chil-dren; every Sunday went to a cheer-ful-look-ing church,
planted in a grove. But one night, un-der cover of dark-ness, and fur-ther
con-cealed in a most cun-ning dis-guise-ment, a des-per-ate burg-lar slid into
his happy home, and robbed them all of everything. And darker yet to
tell, the black-smith him-self did ig-nor-antly con-duct this burg-lar into
his fam-ily’s heart. It was the Bottle Con-juror! Upon the open-ing of
that fatal cork, forth flew the fiend, and shriv-elled up his home. Now,
for prudent, most wise, and eco-nomic reas-ons, the black-smith’s shop was
in the base-ment of his dwell-ing, but with a sep-ar-ate en-trance to it; so
that al-ways had the young and lov-ing healthy wife listened with no
un-happy nervous-ness, but with vig-or-ous pleas-ure, to the stout ringing
of her young-armed old hus-band’s ham-mer; whose re-ver-ber-a-tions, muffled
by passing through the floors and walls, came up to her, not un-sweetly,
in her nurs-ery; and so, to stout Labor’s iron lul-laby, the black-smith’s
in-fants were rocked to slum-ber.

Oh, woe on woe! Oh, Death, why canst thou not some-times be timely?
Hadst thou taken this old black-smith to thy-self ere his full ruin came
upon him, then had the young widow had a de-li-cious grief, and her
orphans a truly ven-er-able, le-gendary sire to dream of in their after
years; and all of them a care-killing com-pet-ency. But Death plucked
down some vir-tu-ous elder brother, on whose whist-ling daily toil solely
hung the re-spons-ib-il-it-ies of some other fam-ily, and left the worse than
use-less old man stand-ing, till the hideous rot of life should make him
easier to har-vest.

Why tell the whole? The blows of the base-ment ham-mer every day grew
more and more between; and each blow every day grew fainter than the
last; the wife sat frozen at the win-dow, with tear-less eyes,
glit-ter-ingly gaz-ing into the weep-ing faces of her chil-dren; the bel-lows
fell; the forge choked up with cinders; the house was sold; the mother
dived down into the long church-yard grass; her chil-dren twice fol-lowed
her thither; and the house-less, fam-ily-less old man staggered off a
vag-a-bond in crape; his every woe un-rev-er-enced; his grey head a scorn to
flaxen curls!

Death seems the only de-sir-able se-quel for a ca-reer like this; but Death
is only a launch-ing into the re-gion of the strange Un-tried; it is but
the first sa-luta-tion to the pos-sib-il-it-ies of the im-mense Re-mote, the
Wild, the Watery, the Un-shored; there-fore, to the death-long-ing eyes of
such men, who still have left in them some in-terior com-punc-tions
against sui-cide, does the all-con-trib-uted and all-re-cept-ive ocean
al-lur-ingly spread forth his whole plain of un-ima-gin-able, tak-ing
ter-rors, and won-der-ful, new-life ad-ven-tures; and from the hearts of
in-fin-ite Pa-cif-ics, the thou-sand mer-maids sing to them—“Come hither,
broken-hearted; here is an-other life without the guilt of in-ter-me-di-ate
death; here are won-ders su-per-nat-ural, without dy-ing for them. Come
hither! bury thy-self in a life which, to your now equally ab-horred and
ab-hor-ring, landed world, is more ob-li-vi-ous than death. Come hither! put
up _thy_ grave-stone, too, within the church-yard, and come hither, till
we marry thee!”

Heark-en-ing to these voices, East and West, by early sun-rise, and by
fall of eve, the black-smith’s soul re-spon-ded, Aye, I come! And so Perth
went a-whal-ing.


CHAPTER 113. The Forge.

With mat-ted beard, and swathed in a brist-ling shark-skin ap-ron, about
mid-day, Perth was stand-ing between his forge and an-vil, the lat-ter
placed upon an iron-wood log, with one hand hold-ing a pike-head in the
coals, and with the other at his forge’s lungs, when Cap-tain Ahab came
along, car-ry-ing in his hand a small rusty-look-ing leath-ern bag. While
yet a little dis-tance from the forge, moody Ahab paused; till at last,
Perth, with-draw-ing his iron from the fire, began ham-mer-ing it upon the
an-vil—the red mass send-ing off the sparks in thick hov-er-ing flights,
some of which flew close to Ahab.

“Are these thy Mother Carey’s chick-ens, Perth? they are al-ways fly-ing
in thy wake; birds of good omen, too, but not to all;—look here, they
burn; but thou—thou liv’st among them without a scorch.”

“Be-cause I am scorched all over, Cap-tain Ahab,” answered Perth, rest-ing
for a mo-ment on his ham-mer; “I am past scorch-ing; not eas-ily can’st
thou scorch a scar.”

“Well, well; no more. Thy shrunk voice sounds too calmly, sanely woe-ful
to me. In no Paradise my-self, I am im-pa-tient of all misery in oth-ers
that is not mad. Thou should’st go mad, black-smith; say, why dost thou
not go mad? How can’st thou en-dure without be-ing mad? Do the heav-ens
yet hate thee, that thou can’st not go mad?—What wert thou mak-ing
there?”

“Weld-ing an old pike-head, sir; there were seams and dents in it.”

“And can’st thou make it all smooth again, black-smith, after such hard
us-age as it had?”

“I think so, sir.”

“And I sup-pose thou can’st smoothe al-most any seams and dents; never
mind how hard the metal, black-smith?”

“Aye, sir, I think I can; all seams and dents but one.”

“Look ye here, then,” cried Ahab, pas-sion-ately ad-van-cing, and lean-ing
with both hands on Perth’s shoulders; “look ye here—_here_—can ye
smoothe out a seam like this, black-smith,” sweep-ing one hand across his
ribbed brow; “if thou could’st, black-smith, glad enough would I lay my
head upon thy an-vil, and feel thy heav-iest ham-mer between my eyes.
An-swer! Can’st thou smoothe this seam?”

“Oh! that is the one, sir! Said I not all seams and dents but one?”

“Aye, black-smith, it is the one; aye, man, it is un-smooth-able; for
though thou only see’st it here in my flesh, it has worked down into
the bone of my skull—_that_ is all wrinkles! But, away with child’s
play; no more gaffs and pikes to-day. Look ye here!” jingling the
leath-ern bag, as if it were full of gold coins. “I, too, want a har-poon
made; one that a thou-sand yoke of fiends could not part, Perth;
some-thing that will stick in a whale like his own fin-bone. There’s the
stuff,” fling-ing the pouch upon the an-vil. “Look ye, black-smith, these
are the gathered nail-stubbs of the steel shoes of ra-cing horses.”

“Horse-shoe stubbs, sir? Why, Cap-tain Ahab, thou hast here, then, the
best and stub-born-est stuff we black-smiths ever work.”

“I know it, old man; these stubbs will weld to-gether like glue from the
melted bones of mur-der-ers. Quick! forge me the har-poon. And forge me
first, twelve rods for its shank; then wind, and twist, and ham-mer
these twelve to-gether like the yarns and strands of a tow-line. Quick!
I’ll blow the fire.”

When at last the twelve rods were made, Ahab tried them, one by one, by
spiralling them, with his own hand, round a long, heavy iron bolt. “A
flaw!” re-ject-ing the last one. “Work that over again, Perth.”

This done, Perth was about to be-gin weld-ing the twelve into one, when
Ahab stayed his hand, and said he would weld his own iron. As, then,
with reg-u-lar, gasp-ing hems, he hammered on the an-vil, Perth passing to
him the glow-ing rods, one after the other, and the hard pressed forge
shoot-ing up its in-tense straight flame, the Parsee passed si-lently, and
bow-ing over his head to-wards the fire, seemed in-vok-ing some curse or
some bless-ing on the toil. But, as Ahab looked up, he slid aside.

“What’s that bunch of lu-ci-fers dodging about there for?” muttered
Stubb, look-ing on from the fore-castle. “That Parsee smells fire like a
fusee; and smells of it him-self, like a hot mus-ket’s powder-pan.”

At last the shank, in one com-plete rod, re-ceived its fi-nal heat; and as
Perth, to tem-per it, plunged it all hiss-ing into the cask of wa-ter near
by, the scald-ing steam shot up into Ahab’s bent face.

“Would’st thou brand me, Perth?” win-cing for a mo-ment with the pain;
“have I been but for-ging my own brand-ing-iron, then?”

“Pray God, not that; yet I fear some-thing, Cap-tain Ahab. Is not this
har-poon for the White Whale?”

“For the white fiend! But now for the barbs; thou must make them
thy-self, man. Here are my razors—the best of steel; here, and make the
barbs sharp as the needle-sleet of the Icy Sea.”

For a mo-ment, the old black-smith eyed the razors as though he would
fain not use them.

“Take them, man, I have no need for them; for I now neither shave, sup,
nor pray till—but here—to work!”

Fash-ioned at last into an ar-rowy shape, and wel-ded by Perth to the
shank, the steel soon poin-ted the end of the iron; and as the
black-smith was about giv-ing the barbs their fi-nal heat, prior to
tem-per-ing them, he cried to Ahab to place the wa-ter-cask near.

“No, no—no wa-ter for that; I want it of the true death-tem-per. Ahoy,
there! Tasht-ego, Queequeg, Dag-goo! What say ye, pa-gans! Will ye give me
as much blood as will cover this barb?” hold-ing it high up. A cluster
of dark nods replied, Yes. Three punc-tures were made in the hea-then
flesh, and the White Whale’s barbs were then tempered.

“Ego non bap-tizo te in nom-ine pat-ris, sed in nom-ine di-aboli!”
de-li-ri-ously howled Ahab, as the ma-lig-nant iron scorch-ingly de-voured the
bap-tis-mal blood.

Now, mus-ter-ing the spare poles from be-low, and se-lect-ing one of
hick-ory, with the bark still in-vest-ing it, Ahab fit-ted the end to the
socket of the iron. A coil of new tow-line was then un-wound, and some
fathoms of it taken to the wind-lass, and stretched to a great ten-sion.
Press-ing his foot upon it, till the rope hummed like a harp-string,
then eagerly bend-ing over it, and see-ing no strand-ings, Ahab ex-claimed,
“Good! and now for the seiz-ings.”

At one ex-tremity the rope was un-stran-ded, and the sep-ar-ate spread yarns
were all braided and woven round the socket of the har-poon; the pole
was then driven hard up into the socket; from the lower end the rope
was traced half-way along the pole’s length, and firmly se-cured so,
with in-ter-twist-ings of twine. This done, pole, iron, and rope—like the
Three Fates—re-mained in-sep-ar-able, and Ahab moodily stalked away with
the weapon; the sound of his ivory leg, and the sound of the hick-ory
pole, both hol-lowly ringing along every plank. But ere he entered his
cabin, light, un-nat-ural, half-ban-ter-ing, yet most piteous sound was
heard. Oh, Pip! thy wretched laugh, thy idle but un-rest-ing eye; all thy
strange mum-mer-ies not un-mean-ingly blen-ded with the black tragedy of the
mel-an-choly ship, and mocked it!


CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Pen-et-rat-ing fur-ther and fur-ther into the heart of the Japan-ese cruis-ing
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fish-ery. Often, in mild,
pleas-ant weather, for twelve, fif-teen, eight-een, and twenty hours on
the stretch, they were en-gaged in the boats, stead-ily pulling, or
sail-ing, or pad-dling after the whales, or for an in-ter-lude of sixty or
sev-enty minutes calmly await-ing their up-ris-ing; though with but small
suc-cess for their pains.

At such times, un-der an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow
heav-ing swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch ca-noe; and so
so-ci-ably mix-ing with the soft waves them-selves, that like hearth-stone
cats they purr against the gun-wale; these are the times of dreamy
quiet-ude, when be-hold-ing the tran-quil beauty and bril-liancy of the
ocean’s skin, one for-gets the ti-ger heart that pants be-neath it; and
would not will-ingly re-mem-ber, that this vel-vet paw but con-ceals a
re-morse-less fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a
cer-tain fi-lial, con-fid-ent, land-like feel-ing to-wards the sea; that he
re-gards it as so much flowery earth; and the dis-tant ship re-veal-ing
only the tops of her masts, seems strug-gling for-ward, not through high
rolling waves, but through the tall grass of a rolling prairie: as when
the west-ern emig-rants’ horses only show their erec-ted ears, while their
hid-den bod-ies widely wade through the amaz-ing ver-dure.

The long-drawn vir-gin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these
there steals the hush, the hum; you al-most swear that play-wear-ied
chil-dren lie sleep-ing in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when
the flowers of the woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most
mys-tic mood; so that fact and fancy, half-way meet-ing, in-ter-pen-et-rate,
and form one seam-less whole.

Nor did such sooth-ing scenes, how-ever tem-por-ary, fail of at least as
tem-por-ary an ef-fect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem
to open in him his own secret golden treas-ur-ies, yet did his breath
upon them prove but tar-nish-ing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever ver-nal end-less land-scapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye,
men yet may roll, like young horses in new morn-ing clover; and for some
few fleet-ing mo-ments, feel the cool dew of the life im-mor-tal on them.
Would to God these blessed calms would last. But the mingled, ming-ling
threads of life are woven by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a
storm for every calm. There is no steady un-re-tra-cing pro-gress in this
life; we do not ad-vance through fixed grad-a-tions, and at the last one
pause:—through in-fancy’s un-con-scious spell, boy-hood’s thought-less
faith, ad-oles-cence’ doubt (the com-mon doom), then scep-ti-cism, then
dis-be-lief, rest-ing at last in man-hood’s pon-der-ing re-pose of If. But
once gone through, we trace the round again; and are in-fants, boys, and
men, and Ifs etern-ally. Where lies the fi-nal har-bor, whence we un-moor
no more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the wear-i-est will
never weary? Where is the found-ling’s father hid-den? Our souls are like
those orphans whose un-wed-ded moth-ers die in bear-ing them: the secret of
our pa-tern-ity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gaz-ing far down from his boat’s side into that
same golden sea, Star-buck lowly mur-mured:—

“Love-li-ness un-fathom-able, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s
eye!—Tell me not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kid-nap-ping
can-ni-bal ways. Let faith oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep
down and do be-lieve.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with spark-ling scales, leaped up in that same
golden light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his his-tory; but here Stubb takes oaths that
he has al-ways been jolly!”


CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bach-elor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bear-ing down
be-fore the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s har-poon had been wel-ded.

It was a Nan-tucket ship, the Bach-elor, which had just wedged in her
last cask of oil, and bolted down her burst-ing hatches; and now, in
glad hol-i-day ap-parel, was joy-ously, though some-what vain-glor-i-ously,
sail-ing round among the widely-sep-ar-ated ships on the ground, pre-vi-ous
to point-ing her prow for home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long stream-ers of nar-row red
bunt-ing at their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was sus-pen-ded,
bot-tom down; and hanging cap-tive from the bow-sprit was seen the long
lower jaw of the last whale they had slain. Sig-nals, en-signs, and jacks
of all col-ours were fly-ing from her rig-ging, on every side. Side-ways
lashed in each of her three bas-keted tops were two bar-rels of sperm;
above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you saw slender break-ers of
the same pre-cious fluid; and nailed to her main truck was a brazen
lamp.

As was af-ter-wards learned, the Bach-elor had met with the most
sur-pris-ing suc-cess; all the more won-der-ful, for that while cruis-ing in
the same seas nu-mer-ous other ves-sels had gone en-tire months without
se-cur-ing a single fish. Not only had bar-rels of beef and bread been
given away to make room for the far more valu-able sperm, but ad-di-tional
sup-ple-mental casks had been bartered for, from the ships she had met;
and these were stowed along the deck, and in the cap-tain’s and
of-ficers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table it-self had been knocked
into kind-ling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the
fore-castle, the sail-ors had ac-tu-ally caulked and pitched their chests,
and filled them; it was hu-mor-ously ad-ded, that the cook had clapped a
head on his largest boiler, and filled it; that the stew-ard had plugged
his spare cof-fee-pot and filled it; that the har-poon-eers had headed the
sock-ets of their irons and filled them; that in-deed everything was
filled with sperm, ex-cept the cap-tain’s pan-ta-loons pock-ets, and those
he re-served to thrust his hands into, in self-com-pla-cent testi-mony of
his en-tire sat-is-fac-tion.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the
bar-bar-ian sound of enorm-ous drums came from her fore-castle; and draw-ing
still nearer, a crowd of her men were seen stand-ing round her huge
try-pots, which, covered with the parch-ment-like _poke_ or stom-ach skin
of the black fish, gave forth a loud roar to every stroke of the
clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-deck, the mates and
har-poon-eers were dan-cing with the olive-hued girls who had eloped with
them from the Polyne-sian Isles; while sus-pen-ded in an or-na-men-ted boat,
firmly se-cured aloft between the fore-mast and main-mast, three Long
Is-land negroes, with glit-ter-ing fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were
presid-ing over the hil-ari-ous jig. Mean-while, oth-ers of the ship’s
com-pany were tu-mul-tu-ously busy at the ma-sonry of the try-works, from
which the huge pots had been re-moved. You would have al-most thought
they were pulling down the cursed Bastille, such wild cries they
raised, as the now use-less brick and mor-tar were be-ing hurled into the
sea.

Lord and mas-ter over all this scene, the cap-tain stood erect on the
ship’s el-ev-ated quarter-deck, so that the whole re-joicing drama was
full be-fore him, and seemed merely con-trived for his own in-di-vidual
di-ver-sion.

And Ahab, he too was stand-ing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black,
with a stub-born gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s
wakes—one all ju-bil-a-tions for things passed, the other all fore-bod-ings
as to things to come—their two cap-tains in them-selves im-per-son-ated the
whole strik-ing con-trast of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bach-elor’s com-mander, lift-ing
a glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” grit-ted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t be-lieve in him at all,” said the
other good-hu-moredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two is-landers, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come
along, will ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and home-ward-bound.”

“How won-drous fa-mil-iar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art
a full ship and home-ward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an
empty ship, and out-ward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. For-ward
there! Set all sail, and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheer-ily be-fore the breeze, the other
stub-bornly fought against it; and so the two ves-sels par-ted; the crew
of the Pequod look-ing with grave, linger-ing glances to-wards the
re-ced-ing Bach-elor; but the Bach-elor’s men never heed-ing their gaze for
the lively rev-elry they were in. And as Ahab, lean-ing over the
taffrail, eyed the home-ward-bound craft, he took from his pocket a
small vial of sand, and then look-ing from the ship to the vial, seemed
thereby bring-ing two re-mote as-so-ci-ations to-gether, for that vial was
filled with Nan-tucket sound-ings.


CHAPTER 116. The Dy-ing Whale.

Not sel-dom in this life, when, on the right side, for-tune’s fa-vour-ites
sail close by us, we, though all ad-roop be-fore, catch some-what of the
rush-ing breeze, and joy-fully feel our bag-ging sails fill out. So seemed
it with the Pequod. For next day after en-coun-ter-ing the gay Bach-elor,
whales were seen and four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the af-ter-noon; and when all the spear-ings of the
crim-son fight were done: and float-ing in the lovely sun-set sea and sky,
sun and whale both stilly died to-gether; then, such a sweet-ness and
such plaint-ive-ness, such in-wreath-ing oris-ons curled up in that rosy
air, that it al-most seemed as if far over from the deep green con-vent
val-leys of the Manilla isles, the Span-ish land-breeze, wan-tonly turned
sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these ves-per hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned
off from the whale, sat in-tently watch-ing his fi-nal wan-ings from the
now tran-quil boat. For that strange spec-tacle ob-serv-able in all sperm
whales dy-ing—the turn-ing sun-wards of the head, and so ex-pir-ing—that
strange spec-tacle, be-held of such a pla-cid even-ing, some-how to Ahab
con-veyed a won-drous-ness un-known be-fore.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how stead-fastly, his
homage-ren-der-ing and in-vok-ing brow, with his last dy-ing mo-tions. He too
wor-ships fire; most faith-ful, broad, baronial vas-sal of the sun!—Oh
that these too-fa-vour-ing eyes should see these too-fa-vour-ing sights.
Look! here, far wa-ter-locked; bey-ond all hum of hu-man weal or woe; in
these most can-did and im-par-tial seas; where to tra-di-tions no rocks
fur-nish tab-lets; where for long Chinese ages, the bil-lows have still
rolled on speech-less and un-spoken to, as stars that shine upon the
Ni-ger’s un-known source; here, too, life dies sun-wards full of faith;
but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the corpse, and it
heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hin-doo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast buil-ded
thy sep-ar-ate throne some-where in the heart of these un-ver-dured seas;
thou art an in-fi-del, thou queen, and too truly speak-est to me in the
wide-slaughter-ing Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor
has this thy whale sun-wards turned his dy-ing head, and then gone round
again, without a les-son to me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and wel-ded hip of power! Oh, high as-pir-ing,
rain-bowed jet!—that one strivest, this one jet-test all in vain! In
vain, oh whale, dost thou seek in-ter-ced-ings with yon all-quick-en-ing
sun, that only calls forth life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou,
darker half, rock me with a prouder, if a darker faith. All thy
un-nam-able im-ming-lings float be-neath me here; I am buoyed by breaths of
once liv-ing things, ex-haled as air, but wa-ter now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal toss-ings the wild
fowl finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though
hill and val-ley mothered me, ye bil-lows are my foster-broth-ers!”


CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that even-ing had died wide apart; one, far to
wind-ward; one, less dis-tant, to lee-ward; one ahead; one astern. These
last three were brought along-side ere night-fall; but the wind-ward one
could not be reached till morn-ing; and the boat that had killed it lay
by its side all night; and that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust up-right into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and
the lan-tern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flick-er-ing glare upon
the black, glossy back, and far out upon the mid-night waves, which
gently chafed the whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who
crouch-ing in the bow, sat watch-ing the sharks, that spec-trally played
round the whale, and tapped the light ce-dar planks with their tails. A
sound like the moan-ing in squad-rons over As-phaltites of un-for-given
ghosts of Go-mor-rah, ran shud-der-ing through the air.

Star-ted from his slum-bers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and
hooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a
flooded world. “I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor
coffin can be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voy-age, two
hearses must ver-ily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by
mor-tal hands; and the vis-ible wood of the last one must be grown in
Amer-ica.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes
float-ing over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bear-ers. Ha! Such a
sight we shall not soon see.”

“Be-lieve it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that say-ing about thy-self?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go be-fore thee thy pi-lot.”

“And when thou art so gone be-fore—if that ever be-fall—then ere I can
fol-low, thou must still ap-pear to me, to pi-lot me still?—Was it not so?
Well, then, did I be-lieve all ye say, oh my pi-lot! I have here two
pledges that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and sur-vive it.”

“Take an-other pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up
like fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gal-lows, ye mean.—I am im-mor-tal then, on land and on sea,” cried
Ahab, with a laugh of de-ri-sion;—“Im-mor-tal on land and on sea!”

Both were si-lent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the
slum-ber-ing crew arose from the boat’s bot-tom, and ere noon the dead
whale was brought to the ship.


CHAPTER 118. The Quad-rant.

The sea-son for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab,
com-ing from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vi-gil-ant helms-man would
os-ten-ta-tiously handle his spokes, and the eager mar-iners quickly run to
the braces, and would stand there with all their eyes cent-rally fixed
on the nailed doub-loon; im-pa-tient for the or-der to point the ship’s
prow for the equator. In good time the or-der came. It was hard upon
high noon; and Ahab, seated in the bows of his high-hois-ted boat, was
about tak-ing his wonted daily ob-ser-va-tion of the sun to de-term-ine his
lat-it-ude.

Now, in that Japan-ese sea, the days in sum-mer are as fresh-ets of
ef-ful-gences. That un-blink-ingly vivid Japan-ese sun seems the blaz-ing
fo-cus of the glassy ocean’s im-meas-ur-able burn-ing-glass. The sky looks
lacquered; clouds there are none; the ho-ri-zon floats; and this
na-ked-ness of un-re-lieved ra-di-ance is as the in-suf-fer-able splendors of
God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quad-rant was fur-nished with col-oured
glasses, through which to take sight of that solar fire. So, swinging
his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
as-tro-lo-gical-look-ing in-stru-ment placed to his eye, he re-mained in that
pos-ture for some mo-ments to catch the pre-cise in-stant when the sun
should gain its pre-cise me-ridian. Mean-time while his whole at-ten-tion
was ab-sorbed, the Parsee was kneel-ing be-neath him on the ship’s deck,
and with face thrown up like Ahab’s, was eye-ing the same sun with him;
only the lids of his eyes half hooded their orbs, and his wild face was
sub-dued to an earthly pas-sion-less-ness. At length the de-sired
ob-ser-va-tion was taken; and with his pen-cil upon his ivory leg, Ahab
soon cal-cu-lated what his lat-it-ude must be at that pre-cise in-stant. Then
fall-ing into a mo-ment’s re-very, he again looked up to-wards the sun and
mur-mured to him-self: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty Pilot! thou
tell-est me truly where I _am_—but canst thou cast the least hint where
I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing be-sides me is
this mo-ment liv-ing? Where is Moby Dick? This in-stant thou must be
eye-ing him. These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now
be-hold-ing him; aye, and into the eye that is even now equally be-hold-ing
the ob-jects on the un-known, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gaz-ing at his quad-rant, and hand-ling, one after the other, its
nu-mer-ous cabal-ist-ical con-triv-ances, he pondered again, and muttered:
“Fool-ish toy! ba-bies’ plaything of haughty Ad-mir-als, and Com-modores,
and Cap-tains; the world brags of thee, of thy cun-ning and might; but
what after all canst thou do, but tell the poor, pi-ti-ful point, where
thou thy-self happen-est to be on this wide planet, and the hand that
holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not tell where one drop of
wa-ter or one grain of sand will be to-mor-row noon; and yet with thy
im-pot-ence thou in-sultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain toy;
and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vivid-ness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now
scorched with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s ho-ri-zon
are the glances of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as
if God had meant him to gaze on his firm-a-ment. Curse thee, thou
quad-rant!” dash-ing it to the deck, “no longer will I guide my earthly
way by thee; the level ship’s com-pass, and the level dead-reck-on-ing, by
log and by line; _these_ shall con-duct me, and show me my place on the
sea. Aye,” light-ing from the boat to the deck, “thus I trample on thee,
thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split and
des-troy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and
dead feet, a sneer-ing tri-umph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a
fa-tal-istic des-pair that seemed meant for him-self—these passed over the
mute, mo-tion-less Parsee’s face. Unob-served he rose and glided away;
while, awe-struck by the as-pect of their com-mander, the sea-men clustered
to-gether on the fore-castle, till Ahab, troubledly pa-cing the deck,
shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an in-stant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon
her heel, her three firm-seated grace-ful masts erectly poised upon her
long, ribbed hull, seemed as the three Hor-atii pi-rou-et-ting on one
suf-fi-cient steed.

Stand-ing between the knight-heads, Star-buck watched the Pequod’s
tu-mul-tu-ous way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurch-ing along the deck.

“I have sat be-fore the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full
of its tor-men-ted flam-ing life; and I have seen it wane at last, down,
down, to dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of
thine, what will at length re-main but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr.
Star-buck—sea-coal, not your com-mon char-coal. Well, well; I heard Ahab
mut-ter, ‘Here some one thrusts these cards into these old hands of
mine; swears that I must play them, and no oth-ers.’ And damn me, Ahab,
but thou act-est right; live in the game, and die in it!”


CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the ti-ger of Bengal
crouches in spiced groves of cease-less ver-dure. Skies the most
ef-ful-gent but bas-ket the dead-li-est thun-ders: gor-geous Cuba knows
tor-nadoes that never swept tame north-ern lands. So, too, it is, that in
these resplen-dent Japan-ese seas the mar-iner en-coun-ters the direst of
all storms, the Typhoon. It will some-times burst from out that
cloud-less sky, like an ex-plod-ing bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town.

Towards even-ing of that day, the Pequod was torn of her can-vas, and
bare-poled was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her dir-ectly
ahead. When dark-ness came on, sky and sea roared and split with the
thun-der, and blazed with the light-ning, that showed the dis-abled masts
flut-ter-ing here and there with the rags which the first fury of the
tem-pest had left for its after sport.

Hold-ing by a shroud, Star-buck was stand-ing on the quarter-deck; at
every flash of the light-ning glan-cing aloft, to see what ad-di-tional
dis-aster might have be-fallen the in-tric-ate hamper there; while Stubb
and Flask were dir-ect-ing the men in the higher hoist-ing and firmer
lash-ing of the boats. But all their pains seemed naught. Though lif-ted
to the very top of the cranes, the wind-ward quarter boat (Ahab’s) did
not es-cape. A great rolling sea, dash-ing high up against the reel-ing
ship’s high tee-ter-ing side, stove in the boat’s bot-tom at the stern,
and left it again, all drip-ping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Star-buck,” said Stubb, re-gard-ing the wreck,
“but the sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You
see, Mr. Star-buck, a wave has such a great long start be-fore it leaps,
all round the world it runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me,
all the start I have to meet it, is just across the deck here. But
never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old song says;”—(_sings_.)


  Oh! jolly is the gale, And a joker is the whale, A’ flour-ishin’ his
  tail,— Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the
  Ocean, oh!

  The scud all a flyin’, That’s his flip only foamin’; When he stirs in
  the spi-cin’,— Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad,
  is the Ocean, oh!

  Thun-der splits the ships, But he only smacks his lips, A tastin’ of
  this flip,— Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad,
  is the Ocean, oh!



“Avast Stubb,” cried Star-buck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his
harp here in our rig-ging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold
thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a cow-ard;
and I sing to keep up my spir-its. And I tell you what it is, Mr.
Star-buck, there’s no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my
throat. And when that’s done, ten to one I sing ye the dox-o-logy for a
wind-up.”

“Mad-man! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see bet-ter of a dark night than any-body else, never
mind how fool-ish?”

“Here!” cried Star-buck, seiz-ing Stubb by the shoulder, and point-ing his
hand to-wards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes
from the east-ward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the
very course he swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where
is that stove? In the stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his
stand-point is stove, man! Now jump over-board, and sing away, if thou
must!

“I don’t half un-der-stand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to
Nan-tucket,” so-li-lo-quized Star-buck sud-denly, heed-less of Stubb’s
ques-tion. “The gale that now ham-mers at us to stave us, we can turn it
into a fair wind that will drive us to-wards home. Yon-der, to wind-ward,
all is black-ness of doom; but to lee-ward, home-ward—I see it light-ens up
there; but not with the light-ning.”

At that mo-ment in one of the in-ter-vals of pro-found dark-ness, fol-low-ing
the flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and al-most at the same
in-stant a vol-ley of thun-der peals rolled over-head.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thun-der!” said Ahab, grop-ing his way along the bul-warks to his
pivot-hole; but sud-denly find-ing his path made plain to him by el-bowed
lances of fire.

Now, as the light-ning rod to a spire on shore is in-ten-ded to carry off
the per-il-ous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some
ships carry to each mast, is in-ten-ded to con-duct it into the wa-ter. But
as this con-ductor must des-cend to con-sid-er-able depth, that its end may
avoid all con-tact with the hull; and as moreover, if kept con-stantly
tow-ing there, it would be li-able to many mis-haps, be-sides in-ter-fer-ing
not a little with some of the rig-ging, and more or less im-ped-ing the
ves-sel’s way in the wa-ter; be-cause of all this, the lower parts of a
ship’s light-ning-rods are not al-ways over-board; but are gen-er-ally made
in long slender links, so as to be the more read-ily hauled up into the
chains out-side, or thrown down into the sea, as oc-ca-sion may re-quire.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Star-buck to the crew, sud-denly ad-mon-ished
to vi-gil-ance by the vivid light-ning that had just been dart-ing
flam-beaux, to light Ahab to his post. “Are they over-board? drop them
over, fore and aft. Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the
weaker side. Yet I’ll con-trib-ute to raise rods on the Him-malehs and
Andes, that all the world may be se-cured; but out on priv-ileges! Let
them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Star-buck. “The cor-pusants! the cor-pusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pal-lid fire; and touched at each
tri-poin-ted light-ning-rod-end with three taper-ing white flames, each of
the three tall masts was si-lently burn-ing in that sul-phur-ous air, like
three gi-gantic wax tapers be-fore an al-tar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this in-stant, as a swash-ing
sea heaved up un-der his own little craft, so that its gun-wale vi-ol-ently
jammed his hand, as he was passing a lash-ing. “Blast it!”—but slip-ping
back-ward on the deck, his up-lif-ted eyes caught the flames; and
im-me-di-ately shift-ing his tone he cried—“The cor-pusants have mercy on us
all!”

To sail-ors, oaths are house-hold words; they will swear in the trance of
the calm, and in the teeth of the tem-pest; they will im-prec-ate curses
from the top-sail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seeth-ing
sea; but in all my voy-agings, sel-dom have I heard a com-mon oath when
God’s burn-ing fin-ger has been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene,
Tekel Upharsin” has been woven into the shrouds and the cord-age.

While this pal-lid-ness was burn-ing aloft, few words were heard from the
en-chanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the fore-castle, all
their eyes gleam-ing in that pale phos-phor-es-cence, like a far away
con-stel-la-tion of stars. Re-lieved against the ghostly light, the
gi-gantic jet negro, Dag-goo, loomed up to thrice his real stature, and
seemed the black cloud from which the thun-der had come. The par-ted
mouth of Tasht-ego re-vealed his shark-white teeth, which strangely
gleamed as if they too had been tipped by cor-pusants; while lit up by
the preter-nat-ural light, Queequeg’s tat-too-ing burned like Satanic blue
flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pal-lid-ness aloft; and once more
the Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A mo-ment
or two passed, when Star-buck, go-ing for-ward, pushed against some one.
It was Stubb. “What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not
the same in the song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the cor-pusants have mercy on us all; and I
hope they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have
they no bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Star-buck—but it’s too dark
to look. Hear me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign
of good luck; for those masts are rooted in a hold that is go-ing to be
chock a’ block with sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will
work up into the masts, like sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will
yet be as three sper-ma-ceti candles—that’s the good prom-ise we saw.”

At that mo-ment Star-buck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly be-gin-ning
to glim-mer into sight. Glan-cing up-wards, he cried: “See! see!” and once
more the high taper-ing flames were be-held with what seemed re-doubled
su-per-nat-ur-al-ness in their pal-lor.

“The cor-pusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the main-mast, full be-neath the doub-loon and the flame,
the Parsee was kneel-ing in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away
from him; while near by, from the arched and over-hanging rig-ging, where
they had just been en-gaged se-cur-ing a spar, a num-ber of the sea-men,
ar-res-ted by the glare, now co-hered to-gether, and hung pen-du-lous, like a
knot of numbed wasps from a droop-ing, orch-ard twig. In vari-ous
en-chanted at-ti-tudes, like the stand-ing, or step-ping, or run-ning
skel-et-ons in Her-cu-laneum, oth-ers re-mained rooted to the deck; but all
their eyes up-cast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white
flame but lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those main-mast
links there; I would fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against
it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turn-ing—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot
upon the Parsee; and with fixed up-ward eye, and high-flung right arm,
he stood erect be-fore the lofty tri-poin-ted trin-ity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Per-sian
once did wor-ship, till in the sac-ra-mental act so burned by thee, that
to this hour I bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I
now know that thy right wor-ship is de-fi-ance. To neither love nor
rev-er-ence wilt thou be kind; and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and
all are killed. No fear-less fool now fronts thee. I own thy speech-less,
place-less power; but to the last gasp of my earth-quake life will
dis-pute its un-con-di-tional, un-in-teg-ral mas-tery in me. In the midst of
the per-son-i-fied im-per-sonal, a per-son-al-ity stands here. Though but a
point at best; whence-soe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly per-son-al-ity lives in me, and feels her royal
rights. But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy low-est form of
love, and I will kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere
su-per-nal power; and though thou launchest navies of full-freighted
worlds, there’s that in here that still re-mains in-dif-fer-ent. Oh, thou
clear spirit, of thy fire thou mad-est me, and like a true child of
fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[_Sud-den, re-peated flashes of light-ning; the nine flames leap
length-wise to thrice their pre-vi-ous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes
his eyes, his right hand pressed hard upon them._]

“I own thy speech-less, place-less power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung
from me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can
then grope. Thou canst con-sume; but I can then be ashes. Take the
homage of these poor eyes, and shut-ter-hands. I would not take it. The
light-ning flashes through my skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my
whole beaten brain seems as be-headed, and rolling on some stun-ning
ground. Oh, oh! Yet blind-fold, yet will I talk to thee. Light though
thou be, thou leapest out of dark-ness; but I am dark-ness leap-ing out of
light, leap-ing out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see, or not?
There burn the flames! Oh, thou mag-nan-im-ous! now I do glory in my
gene-a-logy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know
not. Oh, cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but
thine is greater. Thou know-est not how came ye, hence callest thy-self
un-be-got-ten; cer-tainly know-est not thy be-gin-ning, hence callest thy-self
un-be-gun. I know that of me, which thou know-est not of thy-self, oh, thou
om-ni-po-tent. There is some un-suf-fus-ing thing bey-ond thee, thou clear
spirit, to whom all thy etern-ity is but time, all thy cre-at-ive-ness
mech-an-ical. Through thee, thy flam-ing self, my scorched eyes do dimly
see it. Oh, thou found-ling fire, thou her-mit im-me-morial, thou too hast
thy in-com-mu-nic-able riddle, thy un-par-ti-cip-ated grief. Here again with
haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick the sky! I leap
with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be wel-ded with thee; de-fy-ingly
I wor-ship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Star-buck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s har-poon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, re-mained firmly lashed
in its con-spicu-ous crotch, so that it pro-jec-ted bey-ond his whale-boat’s
bow; but the sea that had stove its bot-tom had caused the loose leather
sheath to drop off; and from the keen steel barb there now came a
lev-elled flame of pale, forked fire. As the si-lent har-poon burned there
like a ser-pent’s tongue, Star-buck grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is
against thee, old man; for-bear! ’tis an ill voy-age! ill be-gun, ill
con-tin-ued; let me square the yards, while we may, old man, and make a
fair wind of it home-wards, to go on a bet-ter voy-age than this.”

Over-hear-ing Star-buck, the panic-stricken crew in-stantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the mo-ment all the aghast
mate’s thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutin-ous cry. But
dash-ing the rat-tling light-ning links to the deck, and snatch-ing the
burn-ing har-poon, Ahab waved it like a torch among them; swear-ing to
trans-fix with it the first sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end.
Pet-ri-fied by his as-pect, and still more shrink-ing from the fiery dart
that he held, the men fell back in dis-may, and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as bind-ing as mine; and
heart, soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye
may know to what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out
the last fear!” And with one blast of his breath he ex-tin-guished the
flame.

As in the hur-ricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neigh-bor-hood of
some lone, gi-gantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it
so much the more un-safe, be-cause so much the more a mark for
thun-der-bolts; so at those last words of Ahab’s many of the mar-iners did
run from him in a ter-ror of dis-may.


CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab stand-ing by the helm. Star-buck ap-proach-ing him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is work-ing
loose and the lee lift is half-stran-ded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike noth-ing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up
now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The an-chors are work-ing, sir. Shall I get them in-board?”

“Strike noth-ing, and stir noth-ing, but lash everything. The wind rises,
but it has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By
masts and keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skip-per of some
coast-ing smack. Send down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, glue-pots! Lofti-est
trucks were made for wild-est winds, and this brain-truck of mine now
sails amid the cloud-scud. Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cow-ards
send down their brain-trucks in tem-pest time. What a hoo-roosh aloft
there! I would e’en take it for sub-lime, did I not know that the colic
is a noisy mal-ady. Oh, take medi-cine, take medi-cine!”


CHAPTER 121. Mid-night.—The Fore-castle Bul-warks.

_Stubb and Flask moun-ted on them, and passing ad-di-tional lash-ings over
the an-chors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but
you will never pound into me what you were just now say-ing. And how
long ago is it since you said the very con-trary? Didn’t you once say
that whatever ship Ahab sails in, that ship should pay some-thing ex-tra
on its in-sur-ance policy, just as though it were loaded with powder
bar-rels aft and boxes of lu-ci-fers for-ward? Stop, now; didn’t you say
so?”

“Well, sup-pose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that
time, why not my mind? Besides, sup-pos-ing we _are_ loaded with powder
bar-rels aft and lu-ci-fers for-ward; how the devil could the lu-ci-fers get
afire in this drench-ing spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty
red hair, but you couldn’t get afire now. Shake your-self; you’re
Aquar-ius, or the wa-ter-bearer, Flask; might fill pitch-ers at your coat
col-lar. Don’t you see, then, that for these ex-tra risks the Mar-ine
In-sur-ance com-pan-ies have ex-tra guar-an-tees? Here are hy-drants, Flask.
But hark, again, and I’ll an-swer ye the other thing. First take your
leg off from the crown of the an-chor here, though, so I can pass the
rope; now listen. What’s the mighty dif-fer-ence between hold-ing a mast’s
light-ning-rod in the storm, and stand-ing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any light-ning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you
tim-ber-head, that no harm can come to the holder of the rod, un-less the
mast is first struck? What are you talk-ing about, then? Not one ship in
a hun-dred car-ries rods, and Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no
more danger then, in my poor opin-ion, than all the crews in ten
thou-sand ships now sail-ing the seas. Why, you King-Post, you, I sup-pose
you would have every man in the world go about with a small
light-ning-rod run-ning up the corner of his hat, like a mi-li-tia
of-ficer’s skewered feather, and trail-ing be-hind like his sash. Why
don’t ye be sens-ible, Flask? it’s easy to be sens-ible; why don’t ye,
then? any man with half an eye can be sens-ible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You some-times find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fel-low’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sens-ible, that’s
a fact. And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the
turn there, and pass it. Seems to me we are lash-ing down these an-chors
now as if they were never go-ing to be used again. Ty-ing these two
an-chors here, Flask, seems like ty-ing a man’s hands be-hind him. And
what big gen-er-ous hands they are, to be sure. These are your iron
fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I won-der, Flask, whether the
world is anchored any-where; if she is, she swings with an un-com-mon long
cable, though. There, ham-mer that knot down, and we’ve done. So; next
to touch-ing land, light-ing on deck is the most sat-is-fact-ory. I say,
just wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at
long-togs so, Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought al-ways
to be worn in all storms afloat. The tails taper-ing down that way,
serve to carry off the wa-ter, d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the
cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask. No more mon-key-jack-ets and
tar-paul-ins for me; I must mount a swal-low-tail, and drive down a
beaver; so. Hal-loa! whew! there goes my tar-paulin over-board; Lord,
Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so un-man-nerly!
This is a nasty night, lad.”


CHAPTER 122. Mid-night Aloft.—Thun-der and Light-ning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.—_Tasht-ego passing new lash-ings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thun-der! Plenty too much thun-der up here. What’s
the use of thun-der? Um, um, um. We don’t want thun-der; we want rum;
give us a glass of rum. Um, um, um!”


CHAPTER 123. The Mus-ket.

Dur-ing the most vi-ol-ent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s
jaw-bone tiller had sev-eral times been reel-ingly hurled to the deck by
its spas-modic mo-tions, even though pre-venter tackles had been at-tached
to it—for they were slack—be-cause some play to the tiller was
in-dis-pens-able.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttle-cock
to the blast, it is by no means un-com-mon to see the needles in the
com-passes, at in-ter-vals, go round and round. It was thus with the
Pequod’s; at al-most every shock the helms-man had not failed to no-tice
the whirl-ing ve-lo-city with which they re-volved upon the cards; it is a
sight that hardly any-one can be-hold without some sort of un-wonted
emo-tion.

Some hours after mid-night, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenu-ous ex-er-tions of Star-buck and Stubb—one en-gaged for-ward and the
other aft—the shivered rem-nants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails
were cut adrift from the spars, and went ed-dy-ing away to lee-ward, like
the feath-ers of an al-batross, which some-times are cast to the winds
when that storm-tossed bird is on the wing.

The three cor-res-pond-ing new sails were now bent and reefed, and a
storm-try-sail was set fur-ther aft; so that the ship soon went through
the wa-ter with some pre-ci-sion again; and the course—for the present,
East-south-east—which he was to steer, if prac-tic-able, was once more
given to the helms-man. For dur-ing the vi-ol-ence of the gale, he had only
steered ac-cord-ing to its vi-cis-situdes. But as he was now bring-ing the
ship as near her course as pos-sible, watch-ing the com-pass mean-while,
lo! a good sign! the wind seemed com-ing round astern; aye, the foul
breeze be-came fair!

In-stantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “_Ho! the fair
wind! oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_” the crew singing for joy, that so
prom-ising an event should so soon have fals-i-fied the evil portents
pre-ced-ing it.

In com-pli-ance with the stand-ing or-der of his com-mander—to re-port
im-me-di-ately, and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any de-cided
change in the af-fairs of the deck,—Star-buck had no sooner trimmed the
yards to the breeze—how-ever re-luct-antly and gloomily,—than he
mech-an-ic-ally went be-low to ap-prise Cap-tain Ahab of the cir-cum-stance.

Ere knock-ing at his state-room, he in-vol-un-tar-ily paused be-fore it a
mo-ment. The cabin lamp—tak-ing long swings this way and that—was burn-ing
fit-fully, and cast-ing fit-ful shad-ows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a
thin one, with fixed blinds in-ser-ted, in place of up-per pan-els. The
isol-ated sub-ter-raneous-ness of the cabin made a cer-tain hum-ming si-lence
to reign there, though it was hooped round by all the roar of the
ele-ments. The loaded mus-kets in the rack were shin-ingly re-vealed, as
they stood up-right against the for-ward bulk-head. Star-buck was an
hon-est, up-right man; but out of Star-buck’s heart, at that in-stant when
he saw the mus-kets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but so
blent with its neut-ral or good ac-com-pani-ments that for the in-stant he
hardly knew it for it-self.

“He would have shot me once,” he mur-mured, “yes, there’s the very
mus-ket that he poin-ted at me;—that one with the stud-ded stock; let me
touch it—lift it. Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly
lances, strange, that I should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye,
aye; and powder in the pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll
cure my-self of this. I’ll hold the mus-ket boldly while I think.—I come
to re-port a fair wind to him. But how fair? Fair for death and
doom,—_that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind that’s only fair
for that ac-cursed fish.—The very tube he poin-ted at me!—the very one;
_this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very thing
I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his
heav-enly quad-rant? and in these same per-il-ous seas, gropes he not his
way by mere dead reck-on-ing of the er-ror-abound-ing log? and in this very
Typhoon, did he not swear that he would have no light-ning-rods? But
shall this crazed old man be tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s
com-pany down to doom with him?—Yes, it would make him the wil-ful
mur-derer of thirty men and more, if this ship come to any deadly harm;
and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if Ahab have
his way. If, then, he were this in-stant—put aside, that crime would not
be his. Ha! is he mut-ter-ing in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there,
he’s sleep-ing. Sleep-ing? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I
can’t with-stand thee, then, old man. Not reas-on-ing; not re-mon-strance;
not en-treaty wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scorn-est. Flat
obed-i-ence to thy own flat com-mands, this is all thou breathest. Aye,
and say’st the men have vow’d thy vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs.
Great God for-bid!—But is there no other way? no law-ful way?—Make him a
pris-oner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this old man’s liv-ing
power from his own liv-ing hands? Only a fool would try it. Say he were
pin-ioned even; knot-ted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained down to
ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
ti-ger, then. I could not en-dure the sight; could not pos-sibly fly his
howl-ings; all com-fort, sleep it-self, in-es-tim-able reason would leave me
on the long in-tol-er-able voy-age. What, then, re-mains? The land is
hun-dreds of leagues away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone
here upon an open sea, with two oceans and a whole con-tin-ent between me
and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is heaven a mur-derer when its light-ning
strikes a would-be mur-derer in his bed, tin-der-ing sheets and skin
to-gether?—And would I be a mur-derer, then, if”—and slowly, stealth-ily,
and half side-ways look-ing, he placed the loaded mus-ket’s end against
the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s ham-mock swings within; his head this way. A
touch, and Star-buck may sur-vive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh
Mary! Mary!—boy! boy! boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man,
who can tell to what un-soun-ded deeps Star-buck’s body this day week may
sink, with all the crew! Great God, where art Thou? Shall I? shall
I?—The wind has gone down and shif-ted, sir; the fore and main top-sails
are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurt-ling from out the old man’s
tor-men-ted sleep, as if Star-buck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream
to speak.

The yet lev-elled mus-ket shook like a drunk-ard’s arm against the panel;
Star-buck seemed wrest-ling with an an-gel; but turn-ing from the door, he
placed the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell
him. I must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

Next morn-ing the not-yet-sub-sided sea rolled in long slow bil-lows of
mighty bulk, and striv-ing in the Pequod’s gurg-ling track, pushed her on
like gi-ants’ palms out-spread. The strong, un-stag-ger-ing breeze aboun-ded
so, that sky and air seemed vast out-bel-ly-ing sails; the whole world
boomed be-fore the wind. Muffled in the full morn-ing light, the
in-vis-ible sun was only known by the spread in-tens-ity of his place;
where his bay-onet rays moved on in stacks. Emblazon-ings, as of crowned
Baby-lo-nian kings and queens, reigned over everything. The sea was as a
cru-cible of mol-ten gold, that bub-blingly leaps with light and heat.

Long main-tain-ing an en-chanted si-lence, Ahab stood apart; and every time
the te-ter-ing ship lower-ingly pitched down her bow-sprit, he turned to
eye the bright sun’s rays pro-duced ahead; and when she pro-foundly
settled by the stern, he turned be-hind, and saw the sun’s rear-ward
place, and how the same yel-low rays were blend-ing with his un-devi-at-ing
wake.

“Ha, ha, my ship! thou might-est well be taken now for the sea-chariot
of the sun. Ho, ho! all ye na-tions be-fore my prow, I bring the sun to
ye! Yoke on the fur-ther bil-lows; hallo! a tan-dem, I drive the sea!”

But sud-denly reined back by some counter thought, he hur-ried to-wards
the helm, husk-ily de-mand-ing how the ship was head-ing.

“East-sou-east, sir,” said the frightened steers-man.

“Thou li-est!” smit-ing him with his clenched fist. “Head-ing East at this
hour in the morn-ing, and the sun astern?”

Upon this every soul was con-foun-ded; for the phe-nomenon just then
ob-served by Ahab had un-ac-count-ably es-caped every one else; but its very
blind-ing palp-able-ness must have been the cause.

Thrust-ing his head half way into the bin-nacle, Ahab caught one glimpse
of the com-passes; his up-lif-ted arm slowly fell; for a mo-ment he al-most
seemed to stag-ger. Stand-ing be-hind him Star-buck looked, and lo! the two
com-passes poin-ted East, and the Pequod was as in-fal-libly go-ing West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the
old man with a ri-gid laugh ex-claimed, “I have it! It has happened
be-fore. Mr. Star-buck, last night’s thun-der turned our com-passes—that’s
all. Thou hast be-fore now heard of such a thing, I take it.”

“Aye; but never be-fore has it happened to me, sir,” said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that ac-ci-dents like this have in more than
one case oc-curred to ships in vi-ol-ent storms. The mag-netic en-ergy, as
de-veloped in the mar-iner’s needle, is, as all know, es-sen-tially one
with the elec-tri-city be-held in heaven; hence it is not to be much
mar-velled at, that such things should be. In-stances where the light-ning
has ac-tu-ally struck the ves-sel, so as to smite down some of the spars
and rig-ging, the ef-fect upon the needle has at times been still more
fatal; all its load-stone vir-tue be-ing an-ni-hil-ated, so that the be-fore
mag-netic steel was of no more use than an old wife’s knit-ting needle.
But in either case, the needle never again, of it-self, re-cov-ers the
ori-ginal vir-tue thus marred or lost; and if the bin-nacle com-passes be
af-fected, the same fate reaches all the oth-ers that may be in the ship;
even were the lower-most one in-ser-ted into the kel-son.

Delib-er-ately stand-ing be-fore the bin-nacle, and eye-ing the transpoin-ted
com-passes, the old man, with the sharp of his ex-ten-ded hand, now took
the pre-cise bear-ing of the sun, and sat-is-fied that the needles were
ex-actly in-ver-ted, shouted out his or-ders for the ship’s course to be
changed ac-cord-ingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod
thrust her un-daun-ted bows into the op-pos-ing wind, for the sup-posed fair
one had only been jug-gling her.

Mean-while, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Star-buck said
noth-ing, but quietly he is-sued all re-quis-ite or-ders; while Stubb and
Flask—who in some small de-gree seemed then to be shar-ing his
feel-ings—like-wise un-mur-mur-ingly ac-qui-esced. As for the men, though some
of them lowly rumbled, their fear of Ahab was greater than their fear
of Fate. But as ever be-fore, the pa-gan har-poon-eers re-mained al-most
wholly un-im-pressed; or if im-pressed, it was only with a cer-tain
mag-net-ism shot into their con-genial hearts from in-flex-ible Ahab’s.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling rev-er-ies. But
chan-cing to slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed cop-per
sight-tubes of the quad-rant he had the day be-fore dashed to the deck.

“Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun’s pi-lot! yes-ter-day I wrecked
thee, and to-day the com-passes would fain have wrecked me. So, so. But
Ahab is lord over the level load-stone yet. Mr. Star-buck—a lance without
a pole; a top-maul, and the smal-lest of the sail-maker’s needles.
Quick!”

Ac-cess-ory, per-haps, to the im-pulse dic-tat-ing the thing he was now about
to do, were cer-tain pruden-tial motives, whose ob-ject might have been to
re-vive the spir-its of his crew by a stroke of his sub-tile skill, in a
mat-ter so won-drous as that of the in-ver-ted com-passes. Besides, the old
man well knew that to steer by transpoin-ted needles, though clum-sily
prac-tic-able, was not a thing to be passed over by su-per-sti-tious
sail-ors, without some shud-der-ings and evil portents.

“Men,” said he, stead-ily turn-ing upon the crew, as the mate handed him
the things he had de-man-ded, “my men, the thun-der turned old Ahab’s
needles; but out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own,
that will point as true as any.”

Abashed glances of servile won-der were ex-changed by the sail-ors, as
this was said; and with fas-cin-ated eyes they awaited whatever ma-gic
might fol-low. But Star-buck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the
lance, and then hand-ing to the mate the long iron rod re-main-ing, bade
him hold it up-right, without its touch-ing the deck. Then, with the
maul, after re-peatedly smit-ing the up-per end of this iron rod, he
placed the blun-ted needle end-wise on the top of it, and less strongly
hammered that, sev-eral times, the mate still hold-ing the rod as be-fore.
Then go-ing through some small strange mo-tions with it—whether
in-dis-pens-able to the mag-net-iz-ing of the steel, or merely in-ten-ded to
aug-ment the awe of the crew, is un-cer-tain—he called for linen thread;
and mov-ing to the bin-nacle, slipped out the two re-versed needles there,
and ho-ri-zont-ally sus-pen-ded the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the com-pass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quiv-er-ing
and vi-brat-ing at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when
Ahab, who had been in-tently watch-ing for this res-ult, stepped frankly
back from the bin-nacle, and point-ing his stretched arm to-wards it,
ex-claimed,—“Look ye, for yourselves, if Ahab be not lord of the level
load-stone! The sun is East, and that com-pass swears it!”

One after an-other they peered in, for noth-ing but their own eyes could
per-suade such ig-nor-ance as theirs, and one after an-other they slunk
away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and tri-umph, you then saw Ahab in all his
fatal pride.


CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voy-age, the log
and line had but very sel-dom been in use. Owing to a con-fid-ent re-li-ance
upon other means of de-term-in-ing the ves-sel’s place, some mer-chant-men,
and many whale-men, es-pe-cially when cruis-ing, wholly neg-lect to heave
the log; though at the same time, and fre-quently more for form’s sake
than any-thing else, reg-u-larly put-ting down upon the cus-tom-ary slate the
course steered by the ship, as well as the pre-sumed av-er-age rate of
pro-gres-sion every hour. It had been thus with the Pequod. The wooden
reel and an-gu-lar log at-tached hung, long un-touched, just be-neath the
rail-ing of the after bul-warks. Rains and spray had damped it; sun and
wind had warped it; all the ele-ments had com-bined to rot a thing that
hung so idly. But heed-less of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he
happened to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the mag-net
scene, and he re-membered how his quad-rant was no more, and re-called his
frantic oath about the level log and line. The ship was sail-ing
plungingly; astern the bil-lows rolled in ri-ots.

“For-ward, there! Heave the log!”

Two sea-men came. The golden-hued Tahi-tian and the grizzly Manxman.
“Take the reel, one of ye, I’ll heave.”

They went to-wards the ex-treme stern, on the ship’s lee side, where the
deck, with the ob-lique en-ergy of the wind, was now al-most dip-ping into
the creamy, side-long-rush-ing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and hold-ing it high up, by the pro-ject-ing
handle-ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line re-volved, so
stood with the an-gu-lar log hanging down-wards, till Ahab ad-vanced to
him.

Ahab stood be-fore him, and was lightly un-wind-ing some thirty or forty
turns to form a pre-lim-in-ary hand-coil to toss over-board, when the old
Manxman, who was in-tently eye-ing both him and the line, made bold to
speak.

“Sir, I mis-trust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have
spoiled it.”

“’Twill hold, old gen-tle-man. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee?
Thou seem’st to hold. Or, truer per-haps, life holds thee; not thou it.”

“I hold the spool, sir. But just as my cap-tain says. With these grey
hairs of mine ’tis not worth while dis-put-ing, ’spe-cially with a
su-per-ior, who’ll ne’er con-fess.”

“What’s that? There now’s a patched pro-fessor in Queen Nature’s
gran-ite-foun-ded Col-lege; but me-thinks he’s too sub-ser-vi-ent. Where wert
thou born?”

“In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.”

“Ex-cel-lent! Thou’st hit the world by that.”

“I know not, sir, but I was born there.”

“In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it’s good. Here’s a man
from Man; a man born in once in-de-pend-ent Man, and now un-manned of Man;
which is sucked in—by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall
butts all in-quir-ing heads at last. Up with it! So.”

The log was heaved. The loose coils rap-idly straightened out in a long
drag-ging line astern, and then, in-stantly, the reel began to whirl. In
turn, jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling bil-lows, the tow-ing
res-ist-ance of the log caused the old reel-man to stag-ger strangely.

“Hold hard!”

Snap! the over-strained line sagged down in one long fes-toon; the
tug-ging log was gone.

“I crush the quad-rant, the thun-der turns the needles, and now the mad
sea parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahi-tian;
reel up, Manxman. And look ye, let the car-penter make an-other log, and
mend thou the line. See to it.”

“There he goes now; to him noth-ing’s happened; but to me, the skewer
seems loosen-ing out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in,
Tahi-tian! These lines run whole, and whirl-ing out: come in broken, and
drag-ging slow. Ha, Pip? come to help; eh, Pip?”

“Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pip’s miss-ing.
Let’s see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fish-er-man. It drags
hard; I guess he’s hold-ing on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul
in no cow-ards here. Ho! there’s his arm just break-ing wa-ter. A hatchet!
a hatchet! cut it off—we haul in no cow-ards here. Cap-tain Ahab! sir,
sir! here’s Pip, try-ing to get on board again.”

“Peace, thou crazy loon,” cried the Manxman, seiz-ing him by the arm.
“Away from the quarter-deck!”

“The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser,” muttered Ahab, ad-van-cing.
“Hands off from that holi-ness! Where say-est thou Pip was, boy?

“Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!”

“And who art thou, boy? I see not my re-flec-tion in the va-cant pu-pils of
thy eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for im-mor-tal souls to
sieve through! Who art thou, boy?”

“Bell-boy, sir; ship’s-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One
hun-dred pounds of clay re-ward for Pip; five feet high—looks
cow-ardly—quick-est known by that! Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip the
cow-ard?”

“There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heav-ens!
look down here. Ye did be-get this luck-less child, and have aban-doned
him, ye cre-at-ive lib-ertines. Here, boy; Ahab’s cabin shall be Pip’s
home hence-forth, while Ahab lives. Thou touchest my in-most centre, boy;
thou art tied to me by cords woven of my heart-strings. Come, let’s
down.”

“What’s this? here’s vel-vet shark-skin,” in-tently gaz-ing at Ahab’s
hand, and feel-ing it. “Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing
as this, per-haps he had ne’er been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a
man-rope; some-thing that weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth
now come and rivet these two hands to-gether; the black one with the
white, for I will not let this go.”

“Oh, boy, nor will I thee, un-less I should thereby drag thee to worse
hor-rors than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye be-liev-ers in
gods all good-ness, and in man all ill, lo you! see the om-ni-scient gods
ob-li-vi-ous of suf-fer-ing man; and man, though idi-otic, and know-ing not
what he does, yet full of the sweet things of love and grat-it-ude. Come!
I feel prouder lead-ing thee by thy black hand, than though I grasped an
Em-peror’s!”

“There go two daft ones now,” muttered the old Manxman. “One daft with
strength, the other daft with weak-ness. But here’s the end of the
rot-ten line—all drip-ping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a
new line al-to-gether. I’ll see Mr. Stubb about it.”


CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

Steer-ing now south-east-ward by Ahab’s lev-elled steel, and her pro-gress
solely de-term-ined by Ahab’s level log and line; the Pequod held on her
path to-wards the Equator. Mak-ing so long a pas-sage through such
un-fre-quen-ted wa-ters, descry-ing no ships, and ere long, side-ways
im-pelled by un-vary-ing trade winds, over waves mono-ton-ously mild; all
these seemed the strange calm things pre-lud-ing some ri-ot-ous and
des-per-ate scene.

At last, when the ship drew near to the out-skirts, as it were, of the
Equat-orial fish-ing-ground, and in the deep dark-ness that goes be-fore
the dawn, was sail-ing by a cluster of rocky is-lets; the watch—then
headed by Flask—was startled by a cry so plaint-ively wild and
un-earthly—like half-ar-tic-u-lated wail-ings of the ghosts of all Herod’s
murdered In-no-cents—that one and all, they star-ted from their rev-er-ies,
and for the space of some mo-ments stood, or sat, or leaned all
trans-fix-edly listen-ing, like the carved Ro-man slave, while that wild
cry re-mained within hear-ing. The Chris-tian or civ-il-ized part of the
crew said it was mer-maids, and shuddered; but the pa-gan har-poon-eers
re-mained un-ap-palled. Yet the grey Manxman—the old-est mar-iner of
all—de-clared that the wild thrill-ing sounds that were heard, were the
voices of newly drowned men in the sea.

Below in his ham-mock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when he
came to the deck; it was then re-coun-ted to him by Flask, not
un-ac-com-pan-ied with hin-ted dark mean-ings. He hol-lowly laughed, and thus
ex-plained the won-der.

Those rocky is-lands the ship had passed were the re-sort of great
num-bers of seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or
some dams that had lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and
kept com-pany with her, cry-ing and sob-bing with their hu-man sort of
wail. But this only the more af-fected some of them, be-cause most
mar-iners cher-ish a very su-per-sti-tious feel-ing about seals, arising not
only from their pe-cu-liar tones when in dis-tress, but also from the
hu-man look of their round heads and semi-in-tel-li-gent faces, seen
peer-ingly up-ris-ing from the wa-ter along-side. In the sea, un-der cer-tain
cir-cum-stances, seals have more than once been mis-taken for men.

But the bod-ings of the crew were destined to re-ceive a most plaus-ible
con-firm-a-tion in the fate of one of their num-ber that morn-ing. At
sun-rise this man went from his ham-mock to his mast-head at the fore;
and whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for
sail-ors some-times go aloft in a trans-ition state), whether it was thus
with the man, there is now no telling; but, be that as it may, he had
not been long at his perch, when a cry was heard—a cry and a
rush-ing—and look-ing up, they saw a fall-ing phantom in the air; and
look-ing down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue of the
sea.

The life-buoy—a long slender cask—was dropped from the stern, where it
al-ways hung obed-i-ent to a cun-ning spring; but no hand rose to seize it,
and the sun hav-ing long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it
slowly filled, and that parched wood also filled at its every pore; and
the stud-ded iron-bound cask fol-lowed the sailor to the bot-tom, as if to
yield him his pil-low, though in sooth but a hard one.

And thus the first man of the Pequod that moun-ted the mast to look out
for the White Whale, on the White Whale’s own pe-cu-liar ground; that man
was swal-lowed up in the deep. But few, per-haps, thought of that at the
time. Indeed, in some sort, they were not grieved at this event, at
least as a portent; for they re-garded it, not as a fore-shad-ow-ing of
evil in the fu-ture, but as the ful-fil-ment of an evil already pres-aged.
They de-clared that now they knew the reason of those wild shrieks they
had heard the night be-fore. But again the old Manxman said nay.

The lost life-buoy was now to be re-placed; Star-buck was dir-ec-ted to see
to it; but as no cask of suf-fi-cient light-ness could be found, and as in
the fe-ver-ish eager-ness of what seemed the ap-proach-ing crisis of the
voy-age, all hands were im-pa-tient of any toil but what was dir-ectly
con-nec-ted with its fi-nal end, whatever that might prove to be;
there-fore, they were go-ing to leave the ship’s stern un-provided with a
buoy, when by cer-tain strange signs and inu-en-does Queequeg hin-ted a
hint con-cern-ing his coffin.

“A life-buoy of a coffin!” cried Star-buck, start-ing.

“Rather queer, that, I should say,” said Stubb.

“It will make a good enough one,” said Flask, “the car-penter here can
ar-range it eas-ily.”

“Bring it up; there’s noth-ing else for it,” said Star-buck, after a
mel-an-choly pause. “Rig it, car-penter; do not look at me so—the coffin,
I mean. Dost thou hear me? Rig it.”

“And shall I nail down the lid, sir?” mov-ing his hand as with a ham-mer.

“Aye.”

“And shall I caulk the seams, sir?” mov-ing his hand as with a
caulking-iron.

“Aye.”

“And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?” mov-ing his hand
as with a pitch-pot.

“Away! what pos-sesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin, and
no more.—Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come for-ward with me.”

“He goes off in a huff. The whole he can en-dure; at the parts he
baulks. Now I don’t like this. I make a leg for Cap-tain Ahab, and he
wears it like a gen-tle-man; but I make a band-box for Queequeg, and he
won’t put his head into it. Are all my pains to go for noth-ing with
that coffin? And now I’m ordered to make a life-buoy of it. It’s like
turn-ing an old coat; go-ing to bring the flesh on the other side now. I
don’t like this cob-bling sort of busi-ness—I don’t like it at all; it’s
un-dig-ni-fied; it’s not my place. Let tinkers’ brats do tinker-ings; we
are their bet-ters. I like to take in hand none but clean, vir-gin,
fair-and-square math-em-at-ical jobs, some-thing that reg-u-larly be-gins at
the be-gin-ning, and is at the middle when mid-way, and comes to an end at
the con-clu-sion; not a cob-bler’s job, that’s at an end in the middle,
and at the be-gin-ning at the end. It’s the old wo-man’s tricks to be
giv-ing cob-bling jobs. Lord! what an af-fec-tion all old wo-men have for
tinkers. I know an old wo-man of sixty-five who ran away with a
bald-headed young tinker once. And that’s the reason I never would work
for lonely widow old wo-men ashore, when I kept my job-shop in the
Vine-yard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads to run
off with me. But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let
me see. Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with
pitch; bat-ten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over
the ship’s stern. Were ever such things done be-fore with a coffin? Some
su-per-sti-tious old car-penters, now, would be tied up in the rig-ging, ere
they would do the job. But I’m made of knotty Aroostook hem-lock; I
don’t budge. Cruppered with a coffin! Sail-ing about with a grave-yard
tray! But never mind. We work-ers in woods make bridal-bed-steads and
card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses. We work by the month, or
by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the why and where-fore
of our work, un-less it be too con-foun-ded cob-bling, and then we stash it
if we can. Hem! I’ll do the job, now, ten-derly. I’ll have me—let’s
see—how many in the ship’s com-pany, all told? But I’ve for-got-ten. Any
way, I’ll have me thirty sep-ar-ate, Turk’s-headed life-lines, each three
feet long hanging all round to the coffin. Then, if the hull go down,
there’ll be thirty lively fel-lows all fight-ing for one coffin, a sight
not seen very of-ten be-neath the sun! Come ham-mer, caulking-iron,
pitch-pot, and marling-spike! Let’s to it.”


CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the
open hatch-way; the Car-penter caulking its seams; the string of twis-ted
oakum slowly un-wind-ing from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of
his frock.—Ahab comes slowly from the cabin-gang-way, and hears Pip
fol-low-ing him._

“Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand
com-plies with my hu-mor more gen-i-ally than that boy.—Middle aisle of a
church! What’s here?”

“Life-buoy, sir. Mr. Star-buck’s or-ders. Oh, look, sir! Be-ware the
hatch-way!”

“Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.”

“Sir? The hatch-way? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.”

“Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy
shop?”

“I be-lieve it did, sir; does the fer-rule stand, sir?”

“Well enough. But art thou not also the un-der-taker?”

“Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but
they’ve set me now to turn-ing it into some-thing else.”

“Then tell me; art thou not an ar-rant, all-grasp-ing, in-ter-med-dling,
mono-pol-ising, hea-then-ish old scamp, to be one day mak-ing legs, and the
next day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those
same coffins? Thou art as un-prin-cipled as the gods, and as much of a
jack-of-all-trades.”

“But I do not mean any-thing, sir. I do as I do.”

“The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing work-ing about a
coffin? The Tit-ans, they say, hummed snatches when chip-ping out the
craters for vol-ca-noes; and the grave-dig-ger in the play sings, spade in
hand. Dost thou never?”

“Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I’m in-dif-fer-ent enough, sir, for that; but
the reason why the grave-dig-ger made mu-sic must have been be-cause there
was none in his spade, sir. But the caulking mal-let is full of it. Hark
to it.”

“Aye, and that’s be-cause the lid there’s a sound-ing-board; and what in
all things makes the sound-ing-board is this—there’s naught be-neath. And
yet, a coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Car-penter.
Hast thou ever helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against
the church-yard gate, go-ing in?

“Faith, sir, I’ve——”

“Faith? What’s that?”

“Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of ex-clam-a-tion-like—that’s all,
sir.”

“Um, um; go on.”

“I was about to say, sir, that——”

“Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thy-self?
Look at thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.”

“He goes aft. That was sud-den, now; but squalls come sud-den in hot
lat-it-udes. I’ve heard that the Isle of Al-bemarle, one of the
Gal-lipa-gos, is cut by the Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some
sort of Equator cuts yon old man, too, right in his middle. He’s al-ways
un-der the Line—fiery hot, I tell ye! He’s look-ing this way—come, oakum;
quick. Here we go again. This wooden mal-let is the cork, and I’m the
pro-fessor of mu-sical glasses—tap, tap!”

(_Ahab to him-self_.)

“There’s a sight! There’s a sound! The grey-headed wood-pecker tap-ping
the hol-low tree! Blind and dumb might well be en-vied now. See! that
thing rests on two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most ma-li-cious wag,
that fel-low. Rat-tat! So man’s seconds tick! Oh! how im-ma-ter-ial are all
ma-ter-i-als! What things real are there, but im-pon-der-able thoughts? Here
now’s the very dreaded sym-bol of grim death, by a mere hap, made the
ex-press-ive sign of the help and hope of most en-dangered life. A
life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go fur-ther? Can it be that in some
spir-itual sense the coffin is, after all, but an im-mor-tal-ity-pre-server!
I’ll think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of earth,
that its other side, the the-or-etic bright one, seems but un-cer-tain
twi-light to me. Will ye never have done, Car-penter, with that ac-cursed
sound? I go be-low; let me not see that thing here when I re-turn again.
Now, then, Pip, we’ll talk this over; I do suck most won-drous
philo-sophies from thee! Some un-known con-duits from the un-known worlds
must empty into thee!”


CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bear-ing dir-ectly down
upon the Pequod, all her spars thickly clus-ter-ing with men. At the time
the Pequod was mak-ing good speed through the wa-ter; but as the
broad-winged wind-ward stranger shot nigh to her, the boast-ful sails all
fell to-gether as blank blad-ders that are burst, and all life fled from
the smit-ten hull.

“Bad news; she brings bad news,” muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
com-mander, who, with trum-pet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he
could hope-fully hail, Ahab’s voice was heard.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Aye, yes-ter-day. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?”

Throt-tling his joy, Ahab neg-at-ively answered this un-ex-pec-ted ques-tion;
and would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger
cap-tain him-self, hav-ing stopped his ves-sel’s way, was seen des-cend-ing
her side. A few keen pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the
Pequod’s main-chains, and he sprang to the deck. Im-me-di-ately he was
re-cog-nised by Ahab for a Nan-tuck-eter he knew. But no formal sa-luta-tion
was ex-changed.

“Where was he?—not killed!—not killed!” cried Ahab, closely ad-van-cing.
“How was it?”

It seemed that some-what late on the af-ter-noon of the day pre-vi-ous,
while three of the stranger’s boats were en-gaged with a shoal of
whales, which had led them some four or five miles from the ship; and
while they were yet in swift chase to wind-ward, the white hump and head
of Moby Dick had sud-denly loomed up out of the wa-ter, not very far to
lee-ward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat—a re-served one—had been
in-stantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail be-fore the wind, this
fourth boat—the swift-est keeled of all—seemed to have suc-ceeded in
fasten-ing—at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell
any-thing about it. In the dis-tance he saw the di-min-ished dot-ted boat;
and then a swift gleam of bub-bling white wa-ter; and after that noth-ing
more; whence it was con-cluded that the stricken whale must have
in-def-in-itely run away with his pur-suers, as of-ten hap-pens. There was
some ap-pre-hen-sion, but no pos-it-ive alarm, as yet. The re-call sig-nals
were placed in the rig-ging; dark-ness came on; and forced to pick up her
three far to wind-ward boats—ere go-ing in quest of the fourth one in the
pre-cisely op-pos-ite dir-ec-tion—the ship had not only been ne-ces-sit-ated to
leave that boat to its fate till near mid-night, but, for the time, to
in-crease her dis-tance from it. But the rest of her crew be-ing at last
safe aboard, she crowded all sail—stun-sail on stun-sail—after the
miss-ing boat; kind-ling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every
other man aloft on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a
suf-fi-cient dis-tance to gain the pre-sumed place of the ab-sent ones when
last seen; though she then paused to lower her spare boats to pull all
around her; and not find-ing any-thing, had again dashed on; again
paused, and lowered her boats; and though she had thus con-tin-ued do-ing
till day-light; yet not the least glimpse of the miss-ing keel had been
seen.

The story told, the stranger Cap-tain im-me-di-ately went on to re-veal his
ob-ject in board-ing the Pequod. He de-sired that ship to unite with his
own in the search; by sail-ing over the sea some four or five miles
apart, on par-al-lel lines, and so sweep-ing a double ho-ri-zon, as it were.

“I will wager some-thing now,” whispered Stubb to Flask, “that some one
in that miss-ing boat wore off that Cap-tain’s best coat; may-hap, his
watch—he’s so cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two
pi-ous whale-ships cruis-ing after one miss-ing whale-boat in the height
of the whal-ing sea-son? See, Flask, only see how pale he looks—pale in
the very but-tons of his eyes—look—it wasn’t the coat—it must have been
the—”

“My boy, my own boy is among them. For God’s sake—I beg, I
con-jure”—here ex-claimed the stranger Cap-tain to Ahab, who thus far had
but icily re-ceived his pe-ti-tion. “For eight-and-forty hours let me
charter your ship—I will gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it—if
there be no other way—for eight-and-forty hours only—only that—you
must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this thing.”

“His son!” cried Stubb, “oh, it’s his son he’s lost! I take back the
coat and watch—what says Ahab? We must save that boy.”

“He’s drowned with the rest on ’em, last night,” said the old Manx
sailor stand-ing be-hind them; “I heard; all of ye heard their spir-its.”

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this in-cid-ent of the Rachel’s
the more mel-an-choly, was the cir-cum-stance, that not only was one of the
Cap-tain’s sons among the num-ber of the miss-ing boat’s crew; but among
the num-ber of the other boat’s crews, at the same time, but on the
other hand, sep-ar-ated from the ship dur-ing the dark vi-cis-situdes of the
chase, there had been still an-other son; as that for a time, the
wretched father was plunged to the bot-tom of the cruellest per-plex-ity;
which was only solved for him by his chief mate’s in-stinct-ively
ad-opt-ing the or-din-ary pro-ced-ure of a whale-ship in such emer-gen-cies,
that is, when placed between jeop-ard-ized but di-vided boats, al-ways to
pick up the ma-jor-ity first. But the cap-tain, for some un-known
con-sti-tu-tional reason, had re-frained from men-tion-ing all this, and not
till forced to it by Ahab’s ici-ness did he al-lude to his one yet
miss-ing boy; a little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the
earn-est but un-mis-giv-ing hardi-hood of a Nan-tuck-eter’s pa-ternal love, had
thus early sought to ini-ti-ate him in the per-ils and won-ders of a
vo-ca-tion al-most im-me-mori-ally the des-tiny of all his race. Nor does it
un-fre-quently oc-cur, that Nan-tucket cap-tains will send a son of such
tender age away from them, for a pro-trac-ted three or four years’ voy-age
in some other ship than their own; so that their first know-ledge of a
whale-man’s ca-reer shall be unen-er-vated by any chance dis-play of a
father’s nat-ural but un-timely par-ti-al-ity, or un-due ap-pre-hens-ive-ness and
con-cern.

Mean-time, now the stranger was still be-seech-ing his poor boon of Ahab;
and Ahab still stood like an an-vil, re-ceiv-ing every shock, but without
the least quiv-er-ing of his own.

“I will not go,” said the stranger, “till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me
as you would have me do to you in the like case. For _y-ou_ too have a
boy, Cap-tain Ahab—though but a child, and nest-ling safely at home now—a
child of your old age too—Yes, yes, you re-lent; I see it—run, run, men,
now, and stand by to square in the yards.”

“Avast,” cried Ahab—“touch not a rope-yarn”; then in a voice that
pro-long-ingly moul-ded every word—“Cap-tain Gardiner, I will not do it.
Even now I lose time. Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I
for-give my-self, but I must go. Mr. Star-buck, look at the bin-nacle
watch, and in three minutes from this present in-stant warn off all
strangers: then brace for-ward again, and let the ship sail as be-fore.”

Hur-riedly turn-ing, with aver-ted face, he des-cen-ded into his cabin,
leav-ing the strange cap-tain trans-fixed at this un-con-di-tional and ut-ter
re-jec-tion of his so earn-est suit. But start-ing from his en-chant-ment,
Gardiner si-lently hur-ried to the side; more fell than stepped into his
boat, and re-turned to his ship.

Soon the two ships di-verged their wakes; and long as the strange ves-sel
was in view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot,
how-ever small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung
round; star-board and lar-board, she con-tin-ued to tack; now she beat
against a head sea; and again it pushed her be-fore it; while all the
while, her masts and yards were thickly clustered with men, as three
tall cherry trees, when the boys are cher-ry-ing among the boughs.

But by her still halt-ing course and wind-ing, woe-ful way, you plainly
saw that this ship that so wept with spray, still re-mained without
com-fort. She was Rachel, weep-ing for her chil-dren, be-cause they were
not.


CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

(_Ahab mov-ing to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to fol-low._)

“Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not fol-low Ahab now. The hour is
com-ing when Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have thee
by him. There is that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too cur-ing to my
mal-ady. Like cures like; and for this hunt, my mal-ady be-comes my most
de-sired health. Do thou abide be-low here, where they shall serve thee,
as if thou wert the cap-tain. Aye, lad, thou shalt sit here in my own
screwed chair; an-other screw to it, thou must be.”

“No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for
your one lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I re-main
a part of ye.”

“Oh! spite of mil-lion vil-lains, this makes me a bigot in the fade-less
fi-del-ity of man!—and a black! and crazy!—but me-thinks like-cures-like
ap-plies to him too; he grows so sane again.”

“They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose
drowned bones now show white, for all the black-ness of his liv-ing skin.
But I will never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him. Sir, I must go with
ye.”

“If thou speak-est thus to me much more, Ahab’s pur-pose keels up in him.
I tell thee no; it can-not be.”

“Oh good mas-ter, mas-ter, mas-ter!

“Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad.
Listen, and thou wilt of-ten hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still
know that I am there. And now I quit thee. Thy hand!—Met! True art
thou, lad, as the cir-cum-fer-ence to its centre. So: God for ever bless
thee; and if it come to that,—God for ever save thee, let what will
be-fall.”

(_Ahab goes; Pip steps one step for-ward._)

“Here he this in-stant stood; I stand in his air,—but I’m alone. Now
were even poor Pip here I could en-dure it, but he’s miss-ing. Pip! Pip!
Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip? He must be up here; let’s try the
door. What? neither lock, nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there’s no open-ing
it. It must be the spell; he told me to stay here: Aye, and told me
this screwed chair was mine. Here, then, I’ll seat me, against the
transom, in the ship’s full middle, all her keel and her three masts
be-fore me. Here, our old sail-ors say, in their black sev-enty-fours
great ad-mir-als some-times sit at table, and lord it over rows of
cap-tains and lieu-ten-ants. Ha! what’s this? epaul-ets! epaul-ets! the
epaul-ets all come crowding! Pass round the de-canters; glad to see ye;
fill up, mon-sieurs! What an odd feel-ing, now, when a black boy’s host
to white men with gold lace upon their coats!—Mon-sieurs, have ye seen
one Pip?—a little negro lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and
cow-ardly! Jumped from a whale-boat once;—seen him? No! Well then, fill
up again, cap-tains, and let’s drink shame upon all cow-ards! I name no
names. Shame upon them! Put one foot upon the table. Shame upon all
cow-ards.—Hist! above there, I hear ivory—Oh, mas-ter! mas-ter! I am
in-deed down-hearted when you walk over me. But here I’ll stay, though
this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to
join me.”


CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
pre-lim-in-ary cruise, Ahab,—all other whal-ing wa-ters swept—seemed to have
chased his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more se-curely there;
now, that he found him-self hard by the very lat-it-ude and lon-git-ude
where his tor-ment-ing wound had been in-flic-ted; now that a ves-sel had
been spoken which on the very day pre-ced-ing had ac-tu-ally en-countered
Moby Dick;—and now that all his suc-cess-ive meet-ings with vari-ous ships
con-trast-ingly con-curred to show the de-moniac in-dif-fer-ence with which
the white whale tore his hunters, whether sin-ning or sinned against;
now it was that there lurked a some-thing in the old man’s eyes, which
it was hardly suf-fer-able for feeble souls to see. As the un-set-ting
po-lar star, which through the livelong, arc-tic, six months’ night
sus-tains its pier-cing, steady, cent-ral gaze; so Ahab’s pur-pose now
fix-edly gleamed down upon the con-stant mid-night of the gloomy crew. It
dom-in-eered above them so, that all their bod-ings, doubts, mis-giv-ings,
fears, were fain to hide be-neath their souls, and not sprout forth a
single spear or leaf.

In this fore-shad-ow-ing in-ter-val too, all hu-mor, forced or nat-ural,
van-ished. Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Star-buck no more
strove to check one. Alike, joy and sor-row, hope and fear, seemed
ground to finest dust, and powdered, for the time, in the clamped
mor-tar of Ahab’s iron soul. Like ma-chines, they dumbly moved about the
deck, ever con-scious that the old man’s des-pot eye was on them.

But did you deeply scan him in his more secret con-fid-en-tial hours; when
he thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen that
even as Ahab’s eyes so awed the crew’s, the in-scrut-able Parsee’s glance
awed his; or some-how, at least, in some wild way, at times af-fected it.
Such an ad-ded, glid-ing strange-ness began to in-vest the thin Fedal-lah
now; such cease-less shud-der-ings shook him; that the men looked du-bi-ous
at him; half un-cer-tain, as it seemed, whether in-deed he were a mor-tal
sub-stance, or else a trem-u-lous shadow cast upon the deck by some un-seen
be-ing’s body. And that shadow was al-ways hov-er-ing there. For not by
night, even, had Fedal-lah ever cer-tainly been known to slum-ber, or go
be-low. He would stand still for hours: but never sat or leaned; his wan
but won-drous eyes did plainly say—We two watch-men never rest.

Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mar-iners now step upon the
deck, un-less Ahab was be-fore them; either stand-ing in his pivot-hole,
or ex-actly pa-cing the planks between two un-devi-at-ing lim-its,—the
main-mast and the mizen; or else they saw him stand-ing in the
cabin-scuttle,—his liv-ing foot ad-vanced upon the deck, as if to step;
his hat slouched heav-ily over his eyes; so that how-ever mo-tion-less he
stood, how-ever the days and nights were ad-ded on, that he had not swung
in his ham-mock; yet hid-den be-neath that slouch-ing hat, they could never
tell un-err-ingly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed at
times; or whether he was still in-tently scan-ning them; no mat-ter,
though he stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and
the un-heeded night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved
coat and hat. The clothes that the night had wet, the next day’s
sun-shine dried upon him; and so, day after day, and night after night;
he went no more be-neath the planks; whatever he wanted from the cabin
that thing he sent for.

He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,—break-fast and
din-ner: sup-per he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly
grew all gnarled, as un-earthed roots of trees blown over, which still
grow idly on at na-ked base, though per-ished in the up-per ver-dure. But
though his whole life was now be-come one watch on deck; and though the
Parsee’s mys-tic watch was without in-ter-mis-sion as his own; yet these
two never seemed to speak—one man to the other—un-less at long in-ter-vals
some passing un-mo-ment-ous mat-ter made it ne-ces-sary. Though such a po-tent
spell seemed secretly to join the twain; openly, and to the awe-struck
crew, they seemed pole-like asun-der. If by day they chanced to speak
one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as con-cerned the
slight-est verbal in-ter-change. At times, for longest hours, without a
single hail, they stood far par-ted in the star-light; Ahab in his
scuttle, the Parsee by the main-mast; but still fix-edly gaz-ing upon each
other; as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his fore-thrown shadow, in Ahab the
Parsee his aban-doned sub-stance.

And yet, some-how, did Ahab—in his own proper self, as daily, hourly,
and every in-stant, com-mand-ingly re-vealed to his sub-or-din-ates,—Ahab
seemed an in-de-pend-ent lord; the Parsee but his slave. Still again both
seemed yoked to-gether, and an un-seen tyr-ant driv-ing them; the lean
shade sid-ing the solid rib. For be this Parsee what he may, all rib and
keel was solid Ahab.

At the first faintest glim-mer-ing of the dawn, his iron voice was heard
from aft,—“Man the mast-heads!”—and all through the day, till after
sun-set and after twi-light, the same voice every hour, at the strik-ing
of the helms-man’s bell, was heard—“What d’ye see?—sharp! sharp!”

But when three or four days had slided by, after meet-ing the
chil-dren-seek-ing Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the mono-ma-niac
old man seemed dis-trust-ful of his crew’s fi-del-ity; at least, of nearly
all ex-cept the Pagan har-poon-eers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether
Stubb and Flask might not will-ingly over-look the sight he sought. But
if these sus-pi-cions were really his, he saga-ciously re-frained from
verbally ex-press-ing them, how-ever his ac-tions might seem to hint them.

“I will have the first sight of the whale my-self,”—he said. “Aye! Ahab
must have the doub-loon!” and with his own hands he rigged a nest of
bas-keted bowlines; and send-ing a hand aloft, with a single sheaved
block, to se-cure to the main-mast head, he re-ceived the two ends of the
down-ward-reeved rope; and at-tach-ing one to his bas-ket pre-pared a pin
for the other end, in or-der to fasten it at the rail. This done, with
that end yet in his hand and stand-ing be-side the pin, he looked round
upon his crew, sweep-ing from one to the other; paus-ing his glance long
upon Dag-goo, Queequeg, Tasht-ego; but shun-ning Fedal-lah; and then
set-tling his firm re-ly-ing eye upon the chief mate, said,—“Take the
rope, sir—I give it into thy hands, Star-buck.” Then ar-ran-ging his
per-son in the bas-ket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his
perch, Star-buck be-ing the one who se-cured the rope at last; and
af-ter-wards stood near it. And thus, with one hand cling-ing round the
royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad upon the sea for miles and miles,—ahead,
astern, this side, and that,—within the wide ex-pan-ded circle com-manded
at so great a height.

When in work-ing with his hands at some lofty al-most isol-ated place in
the rig-ging, which chances to af-ford no foothold, the sailor at sea is
hois-ted up to that spot, and sus-tained there by the rope; un-der these
cir-cum-stances, its fastened end on deck is al-ways given in strict
charge to some one man who has the spe-cial watch of it. Be-cause in such
a wil-der-ness of run-ning rig-ging, whose vari-ous dif-fer-ent re-la-tions
aloft can-not al-ways be in-fal-libly dis-cerned by what is seen of them at
the deck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are be-ing every few
minutes cast down from the fasten-ings, it would be but a nat-ural
fatal-ity, if, un-provided with a con-stant watch-man, the hois-ted sailor
should by some care-less-ness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all
swoop-ing to the sea. So Ahab’s pro-ceed-ings in this mat-ter were not
un-usual; the only strange thing about them seemed to be, that Star-buck,
al-most the one only man who had ever ven-tured to op-pose him with
any-thing in the slight-est de-gree ap-proach-ing to de-cision—one of those
too, whose faith-ful-ness on the look-out he had seemed to doubt
some-what;—it was strange, that this was the very man he should se-lect
for his watch-man; freely giv-ing his whole life into such an oth-er-wise
dis-trus-ted per-son’s hands.

Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten
minutes; one of those red-billed sav-age sea-hawks which so of-ten fly
in-com-mo-di-ously close round the manned mast-heads of whale-men in these
lat-it-udes; one of these birds came wheel-ing and scream-ing round his
head in a maze of un-track-ably swift circ-lings. Then it dar-ted a
thou-sand feet straight up into the air; then spir-al-ized down-wards, and
went ed-dy-ing again round his head.

But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and dis-tant ho-ri-zon, Ahab seemed
not to mark this wild bird; nor, in-deed, would any one else have marked
it much, it be-ing no un-com-mon cir-cum-stance; only now al-most the least
heed-ful eye seemed to see some sort of cun-ning mean-ing in al-most every
sight.

“Your hat, your hat, sir!” sud-denly cried the Si-cilian sea-man, who
be-ing pos-ted at the mizen-mast-head, stood dir-ectly be-hind Ahab, though
some-what lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air di-vid-ing
them.

But already the sable wing was be-fore the old man’s eyes; the long
hooked bill at his head: with a scream, the black hawk dar-ted away with
his prize.

An eagle flew thrice round Tar-quin’s head, re-mov-ing his cap to re-place
it, and thereupon Tana-quil, his wife, de-clared that Tar-quin would be
king of Rome. But only by the re-pla-cing of the cap was that omen
ac-coun-ted good. Ahab’s hat was never re-stored; the wild hawk flew on
and on with it; far in ad-vance of the prow: and at last dis-ap-peared;
while from the point of that dis-ap-pear-ance, a minute black spot was
dimly dis-cerned, fall-ing from that vast height into the sea.


CHAPTER 131. The Pequod Meets The De-light.

The in-tense Pequod sailed on; the rolling waves and days went by; the
life-buoy-coffin still lightly swung; and an-other ship, most miser-ably
mis-named the De-light, was descried. As she drew nigh, all eyes were
fixed upon her broad beams, called shears, which, in some
whal-ing-ships, cross the quarter-deck at the height of eight or nine
feet; serving to carry the spare, un-rigged, or dis-abled boats.

Upon the stranger’s shears were be-held the shattered, white ribs, and
some few splintered planks, of what had once been a whale-boat; but you
now saw through this wreck, as plainly as you see through the peeled,
half-un-hinged, and bleach-ing skel-eton of a horse.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Look!” replied the hol-low-cheeked cap-tain from his taffrail; and with
his trum-pet he poin-ted to the wreck.

“Hast killed him?”

“The har-poon is not yet forged that ever will do that,” answered the
other, sadly glan-cing upon a roun-ded ham-mock on the deck, whose
gathered sides some noise-less sail-ors were busy in sew-ing to-gether.

“Not forged!” and snatch-ing Perth’s lev-elled iron from the crotch, Ahab
held it out, ex-claim-ing—“Look ye, Nan-tuck-eter; here in this hand I hold
his death! Tempered in blood, and tempered by light-ning are these
barbs; and I swear to tem-per them triply in that hot place be-hind the
fin, where the White Whale most feels his ac-cursed life!”

“Then God keep thee, old man—see’st thou that”—point-ing to the
ham-mock—“I bury but one of five stout men, who were alive only
yes-ter-day; but were dead ere night. Only _that_ one I bury; the rest
were bur-ied be-fore they died; you sail upon their tomb.” Then turn-ing
to his crew—“Are ye ready there? place the plank then on the rail, and
lift the body; so, then—Oh! God”—ad-van-cing to-wards the ham-mock with
up-lif-ted hands—“may the re-sur-rec-tion and the life——”

“Brace for-ward! Up helm!” cried Ahab like light-ning to his men.

But the sud-denly star-ted Pequod was not quick enough to es-cape the
sound of the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea; not
so quick, in-deed, but that some of the fly-ing bubbles might have
sprinkled her hull with their ghostly bap-tism.

As Ahab now glided from the de-jec-ted De-light, the strange life-buoy
hanging at the Pequod’s stern came into con-spicu-ous re-lief.

“Ha! yon-der! look yon-der, men!” cried a fore-bod-ing voice in her wake.
“In vain, oh, ye strangers, ye fly our sad burial; ye but turn us your
taffrail to show us your coffin!”


CHAPTER 132. The Sym-phony.

It was a clear steel-blue day. The firma-ments of air and sea were
hardly sep-ar-able in that all-per-vad-ing azure; only, the pens-ive air was
trans-par-ently pure and soft, with a wo-man’s look, and the ro-bust and
man-like sea heaved with long, strong, linger-ing swells, as Sam-son’s
chest in his sleep.

Hither, and thither, on high, glided the snow-white wings of small,
un-speckled birds; these were the gentle thoughts of the fem-in-ine air;
but to and fro in the deeps, far down in the bot-tom-less blue, rushed
mighty le-viath-ans, sword-fish, and sharks; and these were the strong,
troubled, mur-der-ous think-ings of the mas-cu-line sea.

But though thus con-trast-ing within, the con-trast was only in shades and
shad-ows without; those two seemed one; it was only the sex, as it were,
that dis-tin-guished them.

Aloft, like a royal czar and king, the sun seemed giv-ing this gentle
air to this bold and rolling sea; even as bride to groom. And at the
gird-ling line of the ho-ri-zon, a soft and trem-u-lous mo-tion—most seen
here at the equator—de-noted the fond, throb-bing trust, the lov-ing
alarms, with which the poor bride gave her bosom away.

Tied up and twis-ted; gnarled and knot-ted with wrinkles; hag-gardly firm
and un-yield-ing; his eyes glow-ing like coals, that still glow in the
ashes of ruin; un-tot-ter-ing Ahab stood forth in the clear-ness of the
morn; lift-ing his splintered hel-met of a brow to the fair girl’s
fore-head of heaven.

Oh, im-mor-tal in-fancy, and in-no-cency of the azure! In-vis-ible winged
creatures that frolic all round us! Sweet child-hood of air and sky! how
ob-li-vi-ous were ye of old Ahab’s close-coiled woe! But so have I seen
little Miriam and Martha, laugh-ing-eyed elves, heed-lessly gam-bol around
their old sire; sport-ing with the circle of singed locks which grew on
the marge of that burnt-out crater of his brain.

Slowly cross-ing the deck from the scuttle, Ahab leaned over the side
and watched how his shadow in the wa-ter sank and sank to his gaze, the
more and the more that he strove to pierce the pro-fund-ity. But the
lovely aromas in that en-chanted air did at last seem to dis-pel, for a
mo-ment, the can-ker-ous thing in his soul. That glad, happy air, that
win-some sky, did at last stroke and caress him; the step-mother world,
so long cruel—for-bid-ding—now threw af-fec-tion-ate arms round his stub-born
neck, and did seem to joy-ously sob over him, as if over one, that
how-ever wil-ful and erring, she could yet find it in her heart to save
and to bless. From be-neath his slouched hat Ahab dropped a tear into
the sea; nor did all the Pa-cific con-tain such wealth as that one wee
drop.

Star-buck saw the old man; saw him, how he heav-ily leaned over the side;
and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the meas-ure-less sob-bing
that stole out of the centre of the serenity around. Care-ful not to
touch him, or be no-ticed by him, he yet drew near to him, and stood
there.

Ahab turned.

“Star-buck!”

“Sir.”

“Oh, Star-buck! it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild look-ing sky. On such
a day—very much such a sweet-ness as this—I struck my first whale—a
boy-har-poon-eer of eight-een! Forty—forty—forty years ago!—ago! Forty
years of con-tinual whal-ing! forty years of priva-tion, and peril, and
storm-time! forty years on the piti-less sea! for forty years has Ahab
for-saken the peace-ful land, for forty years to make war on the hor-rors
of the deep! Aye and yes, Star-buck, out of those forty years I have not
spent three ashore. When I think of this life I have led; the
des-ol-a-tion of solitude it has been; the masoned, walled-town of a
Cap-tain’s ex-clus-ive-ness, which ad-mits but small en-trance to any
sym-pathy from the green coun-try without—oh, wear-i-ness! heav-i-ness!
Guinea-coast slavery of sol-it-ary com-mand!—when I think of all this;
only half-sus-pec-ted, not so keenly known to me be-fore—and how for forty
years I have fed upon dry salted fare—fit em-blem of the dry nour-ish-ment
of my soil!—when the poorest lands-man has had fresh fruit to his daily
hand, and broken the world’s fresh bread to my mouldy crusts—away,
whole oceans away, from that young girl-wife I wed-ded past fifty, and
sailed for Cape Horn the next day, leav-ing but one dent in my mar-riage
pil-low—wife? wife?—rather a widow with her hus-band alive! Aye, I
wid-owed that poor girl when I mar-ried her, Star-buck; and then, the
mad-ness, the frenzy, the boil-ing blood and the smoking brow, with
which, for a thou-sand lower-ings old Ahab has furi-ously, foam-ingly
chased his prey—more a de-mon than a man!—aye, aye! what a forty years’
fool—fool—old fool, has old Ahab been! Why this strife of the chase?
why weary, and palsy the arm at the oar, and the iron, and the lance?
how the richer or bet-ter is Ahab now? Be-hold. Oh, Star-buck! is it not
hard, that with this weary load I bear, one poor leg should have been
snatched from un-der me? Here, brush this old hair aside; it blinds me,
that I seem to weep. Locks so grey did never grow but from out some
ashes! But do I look very old, so very, very old, Star-buck? I feel
deadly faint, bowed, and humped, as though I were Adam, stag-ger-ing
be-neath the piled cen-tur-ies since Paradise. God! God! God!—crack my
heart!—stave my brain!—mock-ery! mock-ery! bit-ter, bit-ing mock-ery of grey
hairs, have I lived enough joy to wear ye; and seem and feel thus
in-tol-er-ably old? Close! stand close to me, Star-buck; let me look into a
hu-man eye; it is bet-ter than to gaze into sea or sky; bet-ter than to
gaze upon God. By the green land; by the bright hearth-stone! this is
the ma-gic glass, man; I see my wife and my child in thine eye. No, no;
stay on board, on board!—lower not when I do; when branded Ahab gives
chase to Moby Dick. That haz-ard shall not be thine. No, no! not with
the far away home I see in that eye!”

“Oh, my Cap-tain! my Cap-tain! noble soul! grand old heart, after all!
why should any one give chase to that hated fish! Away with me! let us
fly these deadly wa-ters! let us home! Wife and child, too, are
Star-buck’s—wife and child of his broth-erly, sis-terly, play-fel-low
youth; even as thine, sir, are the wife and child of thy lov-ing,
long-ing, pa-ternal old age! Away! let us away!—this in-stant let me al-ter
the course! How cheer-ily, how hil-ari-ously, O my Cap-tain, would we bowl
on our way to see old Nan-tucket again! I think, sir, they have some
such mild blue days, even as this, in Nan-tucket.”

“They have, they have. I have seen them—some sum-mer days in the
morn-ing. About this time—yes, it is his noon nap now—the boy
vi-va-ciously wakes; sits up in bed; and his mother tells him of me, of
can-ni-bal old me; how I am abroad upon the deep, but will yet come back
to dance him again.”

“’Tis my Mary, my Mary her-self! She prom-ised that my boy, every
morn-ing, should be car-ried to the hill to catch the first glimpse of
his father’s sail! Yes, yes! no more! it is done! we head for
Nan-tucket! Come, my Cap-tain, study out the course, and let us away!
See, see! the boy’s face from the win-dow! the boy’s hand on the hill!”

But Ahab’s glance was aver-ted; like a blighted fruit tree he shook, and
cast his last, cindered apple to the soil.

“What is it, what name-less, in-scrut-able, un-earthly thing is it; what
cozen-ing, hid-den lord and mas-ter, and cruel, re-morse-less em-peror
com-mands me; that against all nat-ural lov-ings and long-ings, I so keep
push-ing, and crowding, and jam-ming my-self on all the time; reck-lessly
mak-ing me ready to do what in my own proper, nat-ural heart, I durst not
so much as dare? Is Ahab, Ahab? Is it I, God, or who, that lifts this
arm? But if the great sun move not of him-self; but is as an er-rand-boy
in heaven; nor one single star can re-volve, but by some in-vis-ible
power; how then can this one small heart beat; this one small brain
think thoughts; un-less God does that beat-ing, does that think-ing, does
that liv-ing, and not I. By heaven, man, we are turned round and round
in this world, like yon-der wind-lass, and Fate is the hand-spike. And all
the time, lo! that smil-ing sky, and this un-soun-ded sea! Look! see yon
Al-bicore! who put it into him to chase and fang that fly-ing-fish? Where
do mur-der-ers go, man! Who’s to doom, when the judge him-self is dragged
to the bar? But it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild look-ing sky; and
the air smells now, as if it blew from a far-away meadow; they have
been mak-ing hay some-where un-der the slopes of the Andes, Star-buck, and
the mowers are sleep-ing among the new-mown hay. Sleep-ing? Aye, toil we
how we may, we all sleep at last on the field. Sleep? Aye, and rust
amid green-ness; as last year’s scythes flung down, and left in the
half-cut swaths—Star-buck!”

But blanched to a corpse’s hue with des-pair, the Mate had stolen away.

Ahab crossed the deck to gaze over on the other side; but star-ted at
two re-flec-ted, fixed eyes in the wa-ter there. Fedal-lah was mo-tion-lessly
lean-ing over the same rail.


CHAPTER 133. The Chase—First Day.

That night, in the mid-watch, when the old man—as his wont at
in-ter-vals—stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned, and went
to his pivot-hole, he sud-denly thrust out his face fiercely, snuff-ing
up the sea air as a saga-cious ship’s dog will, in draw-ing nigh to some
bar-bar-ous isle. He de-clared that a whale must be near. Soon that
pe-cu-liar odor, some-times to a great dis-tance given forth by the liv-ing
sperm whale, was palp-able to all the watch; nor was any mar-iner
sur-prised when, after in-spect-ing the com-pass, and then the dog-vane,
and then as-cer-tain-ing the pre-cise bear-ing of the odor as nearly as
pos-sible, Ahab rap-idly ordered the ship’s course to be slightly
altered, and the sail to be shortened.

The acute policy dic-tat-ing these move-ments was suf-fi-ciently vin-dic-ated
at day-break, by the sight of a long sleek on the sea dir-ectly and
length-wise ahead, smooth as oil, and re-sem-bling in the pleated wa-tery
wrinkles bor-der-ing it, the pol-ished metal-lic-like marks of some swift
tide-rip, at the mouth of a deep, rapid stream.

“Man the mast-heads! Call all hands!”

Thun-der-ing with the butts of three clubbed hand-spikes on the fore-castle
deck, Dag-goo roused the sleep-ers with such judg-ment claps that they
seemed to ex-hale from the scuttle, so in-stant-an-eously did they ap-pear
with their clothes in their hands.

“What d’ye see?” cried Ahab, flat-ten-ing his face to the sky.

“Noth-ing, noth-ing sir!” was the sound hail-ing down in reply.

“T’gal-lant sails!—stun-sails! alow and aloft, and on both sides!”

All sail be-ing set, he now cast loose the life-line, re-served for
sway-ing him to the main royal-mast head; and in a few mo-ments they were
hoist-ing him thither, when, while but two thirds of the way aloft, and
while peer-ing ahead through the ho-ri-zontal va-cancy between the
main-top-sail and top-gal-lant-sail, he raised a gull-like cry in the
air. “There she blows!—there she blows! A hump like a snow-hill! It is
Moby Dick!”

Fired by the cry which seemed sim-ul-tan-eously taken up by the three
look-outs, the men on deck rushed to the rig-ging to be-hold the fam-ous
whale they had so long been pur-su-ing. Ahab had now gained his fi-nal
perch, some feet above the other look-outs, Tasht-ego stand-ing just
be-neath him on the cap of the top-gal-lant-mast, so that the In-dian’s
head was al-most on a level with Ahab’s heel. From this height the whale
was now seen some mile or so ahead, at every roll of the sea re-veal-ing
his high spark-ling hump, and reg-u-larly jet-ting his si-lent spout into
the air. To the cred-u-lous mar-iners it seemed the same si-lent spout they
had so long ago be-held in the moon-lit At-lantic and In-dian Oceans.

“And did none of ye see it be-fore?” cried Ahab, hail-ing the perched men
all around him.

“I saw him al-most that same in-stant, sir, that Cap-tain Ahab did, and I
cried out,” said Tasht-ego.

“Not the same in-stant; not the same—no, the doub-loon is mine, Fate
re-served the doub-loon for me. _I_ only; none of ye could have raised
the White Whale first. There she blows!—there she blows!—there she
blows! There again!—there again!” he cried, in long-drawn, linger-ing,
meth-odic tones, at-tuned to the gradual pro-long-ings of the whale’s
vis-ible jets. “He’s go-ing to sound! In stun-sails! Down
top-gal-lant-sails! Stand by three boats. Mr. Star-buck, re-mem-ber, stay
on board, and keep the ship. Helm there! Luff, luff a point! So;
steady, man, steady! There go flukes! No, no; only black wa-ter! All
ready the boats there? Stand by, stand by! Lower me, Mr. Star-buck;
lower, lower,—quick, quicker!” and he slid through the air to the deck.

“He is head-ing straight to lee-ward, sir,” cried Stubb, “right away from
us; can-not have seen the ship yet.”

“Be dumb, man! Stand by the braces! Hard down the helm!—brace up!
Shiver her!—shiver her!—So; well that! Boats, boats!”

Soon all the boats but Star-buck’s were dropped; all the boat-sails
set—all the paddles ply-ing; with rip-pling swift-ness, shoot-ing to
lee-ward; and Ahab head-ing the on-set. A pale, death-glim-mer lit up
Fedal-lah’s sunken eyes; a hideous mo-tion gnawed his mouth.

Like noise-less nautilus shells, their light prows sped through the sea;
but only slowly they neared the foe. As they neared him, the ocean grew
still more smooth; seemed draw-ing a car-pet over its waves; seemed a
noon-meadow, so se-renely it spread. At length the breath-less hunter
came so nigh his seem-ingly un-sus-pect-ing prey, that his en-tire dazzling
hump was dis-tinctly vis-ible, slid-ing along the sea as if an isol-ated
thing, and con-tinu-ally set in a re-volving ring of finest, fleecy,
green-ish foam. He saw the vast, in-volved wrinkles of the slightly
pro-ject-ing head bey-ond. Be-fore it, far out on the soft Turk-ish-rugged
wa-ters, went the glisten-ing white shadow from his broad, milky
fore-head, a mu-sical rip-pling play-fully ac-com-pa-ny-ing the shade; and
be-hind, the blue wa-ters in-ter-change-ably flowed over into the mov-ing
val-ley of his steady wake; and on either hand bright bubbles arose and
danced by his side. But these were broken again by the light toes of
hun-dreds of gay fowl softly feath-er-ing the sea, al-tern-ate with their
fit-ful flight; and like to some flag-staff rising from the painted hull
of an ar-gosy, the tall but shattered pole of a re-cent lance pro-jec-ted
from the white whale’s back; and at in-ter-vals one of the cloud of
soft-toed fowls hov-er-ing, and to and fro skim-ming like a can-opy over
the fish, si-lently perched and rocked on this pole, the long tail
feath-ers stream-ing like pen-nons.

A gentle joy-ous-ness—a mighty mild-ness of re-pose in swift-ness, in-ves-ted
the glid-ing whale. Not the white bull Jupiter swim-ming away with
rav-ished Europa cling-ing to his grace-ful horns; his lovely, leer-ing
eyes side-ways in-tent upon the maid; with smooth be-witch-ing fleet-ness,
rip-pling straight for the nup-tial bower in Crete; not Jove, not that
great majesty Su-preme! did sur-pass the glor-i-fied White Whale as he so
di-vinely swam.

On each soft side—co-in-cid-ent with the par-ted swell, that but once
leav-ing him, then flowed so wide away—on each bright side, the whale
shed off en-ti-cings. No won-der there had been some among the hunters who
name-lessly trans-por-ted and al-lured by all this serenity, had ven-tured
to as-sail it; but had fatally found that quiet-ude but the ves-ture of
tor-nadoes. Yet calm, en-ti-cing calm, oh, whale! thou glid-est on, to all
who for the first time eye thee, no mat-ter how many in that same way
thou may’st have be-juggled and des-troyed be-fore.

And thus, through the se-rene tran-quil-lit-ies of the trop-ical sea, among
waves whose hand-clap-pings were sus-pen-ded by ex-ceed-ing rap-ture, Moby
Dick moved on, still with-hold-ing from sight the full ter-rors of his
sub-merged trunk, en-tirely hid-ing the wrenched hideous-ness of his jaw.
But soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the wa-ter; for an
in-stant his whole marbleized body formed a high arch, like Vir-ginia’s
Nat-ural Bridge, and warn-ingly wav-ing his bannered flukes in the air,
the grand god re-vealed him-self, soun-ded, and went out of sight.
Hover-ingly halt-ing, and dip-ping on the wing, the white sea-fowls
long-ingly lingered over the agit-ated pool that he left.

With oars apeak, and paddles down, the sheets of their sails adrift,
the three boats now stilly floated, await-ing Moby Dick’s re-appear-ance.

“An hour,” said Ahab, stand-ing rooted in his boat’s stern; and he gazed
bey-ond the whale’s place, to-wards the dim blue spaces and wide woo-ing
va-can-cies to lee-ward. It was only an in-stant; for again his eyes seemed
whirl-ing round in his head as he swept the wa-tery circle. The breeze
now freshened; the sea began to swell.

“The birds!—the birds!” cried Tasht-ego.

In long In-dian file, as when her-ons take wing, the white birds were now
all fly-ing to-wards Ahab’s boat; and when within a few yards began
flut-ter-ing over the wa-ter there, wheel-ing round and round, with joy-ous,
ex-pect-ant cries. Their vis-ion was keener than man’s; Ahab could
dis-cover no sign in the sea. But sud-denly as he peered down and down
into its depths, he pro-foundly saw a white liv-ing spot no big-ger than a
white weasel, with won-der-ful celer-ity up-ris-ing, and mag-ni-fy-ing as it
rose, till it turned, and then there were plainly re-vealed two long
crooked rows of white, glisten-ing teeth, float-ing up from the
un-dis-cov-er-able bot-tom. It was Moby Dick’s open mouth and scrolled jaw;
his vast, shad-owed bulk still half blend-ing with the blue of the sea.
The glit-ter-ing mouth yawned be-neath the boat like an open-doored marble
tomb; and giv-ing one side-long sweep with his steer-ing oar, Ahab whirled
the craft aside from this tre-mend-ous ap-par-i-tion. Then, call-ing upon
Fedal-lah to change places with him, went for-ward to the bows, and
seiz-ing Perth’s har-poon, com-manded his crew to grasp their oars and
stand by to stern.

Now, by reason of this timely spin-ning round the boat upon its axis,
its bow, by an-ti-cip-a-tion, was made to face the whale’s head while yet
un-der wa-ter. But as if per-ceiv-ing this stratagem, Moby Dick, with that
ma-li-cious in-tel-li-gence ascribed to him, side-l-ingly trans-planted
him-self, as it were, in an in-stant, shoot-ing his pleated head
length-wise be-neath the boat.

Through and through; through every plank and each rib, it thrilled for
an in-stant, the whale ob-liquely ly-ing on his back, in the man-ner of a
bit-ing shark, slowly and feel-ingly tak-ing its bows full within his
mouth, so that the long, nar-row, scrolled lower jaw curled high up into
the open air, and one of the teeth caught in a row-lock. The blu-ish
pearl-white of the in-side of the jaw was within six inches of Ahab’s
head, and reached higher than that. In this at-ti-tude the White Whale
now shook the slight ce-dar as a mildly cruel cat her mouse. With
unaston-ished eyes Fedal-lah gazed, and crossed his arms; but the
ti-ger-yel-low crew were tum-bling over each other’s heads to gain the
ut-ter-most stern.

And now, while both elastic gun-wales were spring-ing in and out, as the
whale dal-lied with the doomed craft in this dev-il-ish way; and from his
body be-ing sub-merged be-neath the boat, he could not be dar-ted at from
the bows, for the bows were al-most in-side of him, as it were; and while
the other boats in-vol-un-tar-ily paused, as be-fore a quick crisis
im-possible to with-stand, then it was that mono-ma-niac Ahab, furi-ous with
this tan-tal-iz-ing vi-cin-ity of his foe, which placed him all alive and
help-less in the very jaws he hated; fren-zied with all this, he seized
the long bone with his na-ked hands, and wildly strove to wrench it from
its gripe. As now he thus vainly strove, the jaw slipped from him; the
frail gun-wales bent in, col-lapsed, and snapped, as both jaws, like an
enorm-ous shears, slid-ing fur-ther aft, bit the craft com-pletely in
twain, and locked them-selves fast again in the sea, mid-way between the
two float-ing wrecks. These floated aside, the broken ends droop-ing, the
crew at the stern-wreck cling-ing to the gun-wales, and striv-ing to hold
fast to the oars to lash them across.

At that pre-lud-ing mo-ment, ere the boat was yet snapped, Ahab, the first
to per-ceive the whale’s in-tent, by the crafty up-rais-ing of his head, a
move-ment that loosed his hold for the time; at that mo-ment his hand had
made one fi-nal ef-fort to push the boat out of the bite. But only
slip-ping fur-ther into the whale’s mouth, and tilt-ing over side-ways as
it slipped, the boat had shaken off his hold on the jaw; spilled him
out of it, as he leaned to the push; and so he fell flat-faced upon the
sea.

Rip-plingly with-draw-ing from his prey, Moby Dick now lay at a little
dis-tance, ver-tic-ally thrust-ing his ob-long white head up and down in the
bil-lows; and at the same time slowly re-volving his whole spindled body;
so that when his vast wrinkled fore-head rose—some twenty or more feet
out of the wa-ter—the now rising swells, with all their con-flu-ent waves,
dazzlingly broke against it; vin-dict-ively toss-ing their shivered spray
still higher into the air.* So, in a gale, the but half baffled Chan-nel
bil-lows only re-coil from the base of the Eddy-stone, tri-umphantly to
over-leap its sum-mit with their scud.

*This mo-tion is pe-cu-liar to the sperm whale. It re-ceives its
des-ig-na-tion (pitch-pol-ing) from its be-ing likened to that pre-lim-in-ary
up-and-down poise of the whale-lance, in the ex-er-cise called
pitch-pol-ing, pre-vi-ously de-scribed. By this mo-tion the whale must best
and most com-pre-hens-ively view whatever ob-jects may be en-circ-ling him.

But soon re-sum-ing his ho-ri-zontal at-ti-tude, Moby Dick swam swiftly round
and round the wrecked crew; side-ways churn-ing the wa-ter in his venge-ful
wake, as if lash-ing him-self up to still an-other and more deadly
as-sault. The sight of the splintered boat seemed to mad-den him, as the
blood of grapes and mul-ber-ries cast be-fore An-ti-o-chus’s ele-phants in the
book of Mac-ca-bees. Mean-while Ahab half smothered in the foam of the
whale’s in-solent tail, and too much of a cripple to swim,—though he
could still keep afloat, even in the heart of such a whirl-pool as that;
help-less Ahab’s head was seen, like a tossed bubble which the least
chance shock might burst. From the boat’s frag-ment-ary stern, Fedal-lah
in-curi-ously and mildly eyed him; the cling-ing crew, at the other
drift-ing end, could not suc-cor him; more than enough was it for them to
look to them-selves. For so re-volvingly ap-palling was the White Whale’s
as-pect, and so plan-et-ar-ily swift the ever-con-tract-ing circles he made,
that he seemed ho-ri-zont-ally swoop-ing upon them. And though the other
boats, un-harmed, still hovered hard by; still they dared not pull into
the eddy to strike, lest that should be the sig-nal for the in-stant
de-struc-tion of the jeop-ard-ized cast-aways, Ahab and all; nor in that
case could they them-selves hope to es-cape. With strain-ing eyes, then,
they re-mained on the outer edge of the dire-ful zone, whose centre had
now be-come the old man’s head.

Mean-time, from the be-gin-ning all this had been descried from the ship’s
mast heads; and squar-ing her yards, she had borne down upon the scene;
and was now so nigh, that Ahab in the wa-ter hailed her!—“Sail on
the”—but that mo-ment a break-ing sea dashed on him from Moby Dick, and
whelmed him for the time. But strug-gling out of it again, and chan-cing
to rise on a tower-ing crest, he shouted,—“Sail on the whale!—Drive him
off!”

The Pequod’s prows were poin-ted; and break-ing up the charmed circle,
she ef-fec-tu-ally par-ted the white whale from his vic-tim. As he sul-lenly
swam off, the boats flew to the res-cue.

Dragged into Stubb’s boat with blood-shot, blinded eyes, the white
brine cak-ing in his wrinkles; the long ten-sion of Ahab’s bod-ily
strength did crack, and help-lessly he yiel-ded to his body’s doom: for a
time, ly-ing all crushed in the bot-tom of Stubb’s boat, like one trod-den
un-der foot of herds of ele-phants. Far in-land, name-less wails came from
him, as des-ol-ate sounds from out rav-ines.

But this in-tens-ity of his phys-ical pros-tra-tion did but so much the more
ab-bre-vi-ate it. In an in-stant’s com-pass, great hearts some-times con-dense
to one deep pang, the sum total of those shal-low pains kindly dif-fused
through feebler men’s whole lives. And so, such hearts, though sum-mary
in each one suf-fer-ing; still, if the gods de-cree it, in their life-time
ag-greg-ate a whole age of woe, wholly made up of in-stant-an-eous
in-tens-it-ies; for even in their point-less centres, those noble natures
con-tain the en-tire cir-cum-fer-ences of in-ferior souls.

“The har-poon,” said Ahab, half way rising, and drag-gingly lean-ing on
one bended arm—“is it safe?”

“Aye, sir, for it was not dar-ted; this is it,” said Stubb, show-ing it.

“Lay it be-fore me;—any miss-ing men?”

“One, two, three, four, five;—there were five oars, sir, and here are
five men.”

“That’s good.—Help me, man; I wish to stand. So, so, I see him! there!
there! go-ing to lee-ward still; what a leap-ing spout!—Hands off from me!
The eternal sap runs up in Ahab’s bones again! Set the sail; out oars;
the helm!”

It is of-ten the case that when a boat is stove, its crew, be-ing picked
up by an-other boat, help to work that second boat; and the chase is
thus con-tin-ued with what is called double-banked oars. It was thus now.
But the ad-ded power of the boat did not equal the ad-ded power of the
whale, for he seemed to have treble-banked his every fin; swim-ming with
a ve-lo-city which plainly showed, that if now, un-der these
cir-cum-stances, pushed on, the chase would prove an in-def-in-itely
pro-longed, if not a hope-less one; nor could any crew en-dure for so long
a period, such an un-in-ter-mit-ted, in-tense strain-ing at the oar; a thing
barely tol-er-able only in some one brief vi-cis-situde. The ship it-self,
then, as it some-times hap-pens, offered the most prom-ising in-ter-me-di-ate
means of over-tak-ing the chase. Ac-cord-ingly, the boats now made for her,
and were soon swayed up to their cranes—the two parts of the wrecked
boat hav-ing been pre-vi-ously se-cured by her—and then hoist-ing everything
to her side, and stack-ing her can-vas high up, and side-ways
out-stretch-ing it with stun-sails, like the double-join-ted wings of an
al-batross; the Pequod bore down in the lee-ward wake of Moby-Dick. At
the well known, meth-odic in-ter-vals, the whale’s glit-ter-ing spout was
reg-u-larly an-nounced from the manned mast-heads; and when he would be
re-por-ted as just gone down, Ahab would take the time, and then pa-cing
the deck, bin-nacle-watch in hand, so soon as the last second of the
al-lot-ted hour ex-pired, his voice was heard.—“Whose is the doub-loon now?
D’ye see him?” and if the reply was, No, sir! straight-way he com-manded
them to lift him to his perch. In this way the day wore on; Ahab, now
aloft and mo-tion-less; anon, un-rest-ingly pa-cing the planks.

As he was thus walk-ing, ut-ter-ing no sound, ex-cept to hail the men
aloft, or to bid them hoist a sail still higher, or to spread one to a
still greater breadth—thus to and fro pa-cing, be-neath his slouched hat,
at every turn he passed his own wrecked boat, which had been dropped
upon the quarter-deck, and lay there re-versed; broken bow to shattered
stern. At last he paused be-fore it; and as in an already over-clouded
sky fresh troops of clouds will some-times sail across, so over the old
man’s face there now stole some such ad-ded gloom as this.

Stubb saw him pause; and per-haps in-tend-ing, not vainly, though, to
evince his own un-abated forti-tude, and thus keep up a vali-ant place in
his Cap-tain’s mind, he ad-vanced, and eye-ing the wreck ex-claimed—“The
thistle the ass re-fused; it pricked his mouth too keenly, sir; ha! ha!”

“What soul-less thing is this that laughs be-fore a wreck? Man, man! did
I not know thee brave as fear-less fire (and as mech-an-ical) I could
swear thou wert a pol-troon. Groan nor laugh should be heard be-fore a
wreck.”

“Aye, sir,” said Star-buck draw-ing near, “’tis a sol-emn sight; an omen,
and an ill one.”

“Omen? omen?—the dic-tion-ary! If the gods think to speak out-right to
man, they will hon-or-ably speak out-right; not shake their heads, and
give an old wives’ dark-ling hint.—Be-gone! Ye two are the op-pos-ite poles
of one thing; Star-buck is Stubb re-versed, and Stubb is Star-buck; and ye
two are all man-kind; and Ahab stands alone among the mil-lions of the
peopled earth, nor gods nor men his neigh-bors! Cold, cold—I shiver!—How
now? Aloft there! D’ye see him? Sing out for every spout, though he
spout ten times a second!”

The day was nearly done; only the hem of his golden robe was rust-ling.
Soon, it was al-most dark, but the look-out men still re-mained un-set.

“Can’t see the spout now, sir;—too dark”—cried a voice from the air.

“How head-ing when last seen?”

“As be-fore, sir,—straight to lee-ward.”

“Good! he will travel slower now ’tis night. Down roy-als and
top-gal-lant stun-sails, Mr. Star-buck. We must not run over him be-fore
morn-ing; he’s mak-ing a pas-sage now, and may heave-to a while. Helm
there! keep her full be-fore the wind!—Aloft! come down!—Mr. Stubb, send
a fresh hand to the fore-mast head, and see it manned till
morn-ing.”—Then ad-van-cing to-wards the doub-loon in the main-mast—“Men,
this gold is mine, for I earned it; but I shall let it abide here till
the White Whale is dead; and then, who-so-ever of ye first raises him,
upon the day he shall be killed, this gold is that man’s; and if on
that day I shall again raise him, then, ten times its sum shall be
di-vided among all of ye! Away now!—the deck is thine, sir!”

And so say-ing, he placed him-self half way within the scuttle, and
slouch-ing his hat, stood there till dawn, ex-cept when at in-ter-vals
rous-ing him-self to see how the night wore on.


CHAPTER 134. The Chase—Se-cond Day.

At day-break, the three mast-heads were punc-tu-ally manned afresh.

“D’ye see him?” cried Ahab after al-low-ing a little space for the light
to spread.

“See noth-ing, sir.”

“Turn up all hands and make sail! he travels faster than I thought
for;—the top-gal-lant sails!—aye, they should have been kept on her all
night. But no mat-ter—’tis but rest-ing for the rush.”

Here be it said, that this per-tina-cious pur-suit of one par-tic-u-lar
whale, con-tin-ued through day into night, and through night into day, is
a thing by no means un-pre-ced-en-ted in the South sea fish-ery. For such is
the won-der-ful skill, pres-ci-ence of ex-per-i-ence, and in-vin-cible
con-fid-ence ac-quired by some great nat-ural geni-uses among the Nan-tucket
com-mand-ers; that from the simple ob-ser-va-tion of a whale when last
descried, they will, un-der cer-tain given cir-cum-stances, pretty
ac-cur-ately fore-tell both the dir-ec-tion in which he will con-tinue to
swim for a time, while out of sight, as well as his prob-able rate of
pro-gres-sion dur-ing that period. And, in these cases, some-what as a
pi-lot, when about los-ing sight of a coast, whose gen-eral trend-ing he
well knows, and which he de-sires shortly to re-turn to again, but at
some fur-ther point; like as this pi-lot stands by his com-pass, and takes
the pre-cise bear-ing of the cape at present vis-ible, in or-der the more
cer-tainly to hit aright the re-mote, un-seen head-land, even-tu-ally to be
vis-ited: so does the fish-er-man, at his com-pass, with the whale; for
after be-ing chased, and di-li-gently marked, through sev-eral hours of
day-light, then, when night ob-scures the fish, the creature’s fu-ture
wake through the dark-ness is al-most as es-tab-lished to the saga-cious
mind of the hunter, as the pi-lot’s coast is to him. So that to this
hunter’s won-drous skill, the pro-ver-bial evan-es-cence of a thing writ in
wa-ter, a wake, is to all de-sired pur-poses well nigh as re-li-able as the
stead-fast land. And as the mighty iron Le-viathan of the mod-ern rail-way
is so fa-mil-iarly known in its every pace, that, with watches in their
hands, men time his rate as doc-tors that of a baby’s pulse; and lightly
say of it, the up train or the down train will reach such or such a
spot, at such or such an hour; even so, al-most, there are oc-ca-sions
when these Nan-tuck-eters time that other Le-viathan of the deep,
ac-cord-ing to the ob-served hu-mor of his speed; and say to them-selves, so
many hours hence this whale will have gone two hun-dred miles, will have
about reached this or that de-gree of lat-it-ude or lon-git-ude. But to
render this acute-ness at all suc-cess-ful in the end, the wind and the
sea must be the whale-man’s al-lies; for of what present avail to the
be-calmed or wind-bound mar-iner is the skill that as-sures him he is
ex-actly ninety-three leagues and a quarter from his port? In-fer-able
from these state-ments, are many col-lat-eral sub-tile mat-ters touch-ing the
chase of whales.

The ship tore on; leav-ing such a fur-row in the sea as when a
can-non-ball, mis-sent, be-comes a plough-share and turns up the level
field.

“By salt and hemp!” cried Stubb, “but this swift mo-tion of the deck
creeps up one’s legs and tingles at the heart. This ship and I are two
brave fel-lows!—Ha, ha! Some one take me up, and launch me, spine-wise,
on the sea,—for by live-oaks! my spine’s a keel. Ha, ha! we go the gait
that leaves no dust be-hind!”

“There she blows—she blows!—she blows!—right ahead!” was now the
mast-head cry.

“Aye, aye!” cried Stubb, “I knew it—ye can’t es-cape—blow on and split
your spout, O whale! the mad fiend him-self is after ye! blow your
trump—blister your lungs!—Ahab will dam off your blood, as a miller
shuts his wa-ter-gate upon the stream!”

And Stubb did but speak out for well nigh all that crew. The fren-zies
of the chase had by this time worked them bub-blingly up, like old wine
worked anew. Whatever pale fears and fore-bod-ings some of them might
have felt be-fore; these were not only now kept out of sight through the
grow-ing awe of Ahab, but they were broken up, and on all sides routed,
as timid prairie hares that scat-ter be-fore the bound-ing bison. The hand
of Fate had snatched all their souls; and by the stir-ring per-ils of the
pre-vi-ous day; the rack of the past night’s sus-pense; the fixed,
un-fear-ing, blind, reck-less way in which their wild craft went plunging
to-wards its fly-ing mark; by all these things, their hearts were bowled
along. The wind that made great bel-lies of their sails, and rushed the
ves-sel on by arms in-vis-ible as ir-res-ist-ible; this seemed the sym-bol of
that un-seen agency which so en-slaved them to the race.

They were one man, not thirty. For as the one ship that held them all;
though it was put to-gether of all con-trast-ing things—oak, and maple,
and pine wood; iron, and pitch, and hemp—yet all these ran into each
other in the one con-crete hull, which shot on its way, both bal-anced
and dir-ec-ted by the long cent-ral keel; even so, all the in-di-vidu-al-it-ies
of the crew, this man’s valor, that man’s fear; guilt and guilt-i-ness,
all vari-et-ies were wel-ded into one-ness, and were all dir-ec-ted to that
fatal goal which Ahab their one lord and keel did point to.

The rig-ging lived. The mast-heads, like the tops of tall palms, were
out-spread-ingly tufted with arms and legs. Cling-ing to a spar with one
hand, some reached forth the other with im-pa-tient wav-ings; oth-ers,
shad-ing their eyes from the vivid sun-light, sat far out on the rock-ing
yards; all the spars in full bear-ing of mor-tals, ready and ripe for
their fate. Ah! how they still strove through that in-fin-ite blue-ness to
seek out the thing that might des-troy them!

“Why sing ye not out for him, if ye see him?” cried Ahab, when, after
the lapse of some minutes since the first cry, no more had been heard.
“Sway me up, men; ye have been de-ceived; not Moby Dick casts one odd
jet that way, and then dis-ap-pears.”

It was even so; in their head-long eager-ness, the men had mis-taken some
other thing for the whale-spout, as the event it-self soon proved; for
hardly had Ahab reached his perch; hardly was the rope be-layed to its
pin on deck, when he struck the key-note to an or-ches-tra, that made the
air vi-brate as with the com-bined dis-charges of rifles. The tri-umphant
hal-loo of thirty buck-skin lungs was heard, as—much nearer to the ship
than the place of the ima-gin-ary jet, less than a mile ahead—Moby Dick
bod-ily burst into view! For not by any calm and in-dol-ent spout-ings; not
by the peace-able gush of that mys-tic foun-tain in his head, did the
White Whale now re-veal his vi-cin-ity; but by the far more won-drous
phe-nomenon of breach-ing. Rising with his ut-most ve-lo-city from the
fur-thest depths, the Sperm Whale thus booms his en-tire bulk into the
pure ele-ment of air, and pil-ing up a moun-tain of dazzling foam, shows
his place to the dis-tance of seven miles and more. In those mo-ments,
the torn, en-raged waves he shakes off, seem his mane; in some cases,
this breach-ing is his act of de-fi-ance.

“There she breaches! there she breaches!” was the cry, as in his
im-meas-ur-able bravadoes the White Whale tossed him-self sal-mon-like to
Heaven. So sud-denly seen in the blue plain of the sea, and re-lieved
against the still bluer mar-gin of the sky, the spray that he raised,
for the mo-ment, in-tol-er-ably glittered and glared like a gla-cier; and
stood there gradu-ally fad-ing and fad-ing away from its first spark-ling
in-tens-ity, to the dim misti-ness of an ad-van-cing shower in a vale.

“Aye, breach your last to the sun, Moby Dick!” cried Ahab, “thy hour
and thy har-poon are at hand!—Down! down all of ye, but one man at the
fore. The boats!—stand by!”

Un-mind-ful of the te-di-ous rope-lad-ders of the shrouds, the men, like
shoot-ing stars, slid to the deck, by the isol-ated back-stays and
hal-yards; while Ahab, less dart-ingly, but still rap-idly was dropped
from his perch.

“Lower away,” he cried, so soon as he had reached his boat—a spare one,
rigged the af-ter-noon pre-vi-ous. “Mr. Star-buck, the ship is thine—keep
away from the boats, but keep near them. Lower, all!”

As if to strike a quick ter-ror into them, by this time be-ing the first
as-sail-ant him-self, Moby Dick had turned, and was now com-ing for the
three crews. Ahab’s boat was cent-ral; and cheer-ing his men, he told
them he would take the whale head-and-head,—that is, pull straight up
to his fore-head,—a not un-com-mon thing; for when within a cer-tain limit,
such a course ex-cludes the com-ing on-set from the whale’s side-long
vis-ion. But ere that close limit was gained, and while yet all three
boats were plain as the ship’s three masts to his eye; the White Whale
churn-ing him-self into furi-ous speed, al-most in an in-stant as it were,
rush-ing among the boats with open jaws, and a lash-ing tail, offered
ap-palling battle on every side; and heed-less of the irons dar-ted at him
from every boat, seemed only in-tent on an-ni-hil-at-ing each sep-ar-ate plank
of which those boats were made. But skil-fully manœuvred, in-cess-antly
wheel-ing like trained char-gers in the field; the boats for a while
eluded him; though, at times, but by a plank’s breadth; while all the
time, Ahab’s un-earthly slo-gan tore every other cry but his to shreds.

But at last in his un-trace-able evol-u-tions, the White Whale so crossed
and re-crossed, and in a thou-sand ways en-tangled the slack of the three
lines now fast to him, that they fore-shortened, and, of them-selves,
warped the de-voted boats to-wards the planted irons in him; though now
for a mo-ment the whale drew aside a little, as if to rally for a more
tre-mend-ous charge. Seiz-ing that op-por-tun-ity, Ahab first paid out more
line: and then was rap-idly haul-ing and jerking in upon it again—hop-ing
that way to dis-en-cum-ber it of some snarls—when lo!—a sight more sav-age
than the em-battled teeth of sharks!

Caught and twis-ted—cork-screwed in the mazes of the line, loose har-poons
and lances, with all their brist-ling barbs and points, came flash-ing
and drip-ping up to the chocks in the bows of Ahab’s boat. Only one
thing could be done. Seiz-ing the boat-knife, he crit-ic-ally reached
within—through—and then, without—the rays of steel; dragged in the line
bey-ond, passed it, in-board, to the bow-sman, and then, twice sun-der-ing
the rope near the chocks—dropped the in-ter-cep-ted fagot of steel into
the sea; and was all fast again. That in-stant, the White Whale made a
sud-den rush among the re-main-ing tangles of the other lines; by so
do-ing, ir-res-ist-ibly dragged the more in-volved boats of Stubb and Flask
to-wards his flukes; dashed them to-gether like two rolling husks on a
surf-beaten beach, and then, diving down into the sea, dis-ap-peared in a
boil-ing mael-strom, in which, for a space, the odor-ous ce-dar chips of
the wrecks danced round and round, like the grated nut-meg in a swiftly
stirred bowl of punch.

While the two crews were yet circ-ling in the wa-ters, reach-ing out after
the re-volving line-tubs, oars, and other float-ing fur-niture, while
aslope little Flask bobbed up and down like an empty vial, twitch-ing
his legs up-wards to es-cape the dreaded jaws of sharks; and Stubb was
lust-ily singing out for some one to ladle him up; and while the old
man’s line—now part-ing—ad-mit-ted of his pulling into the creamy pool to
res-cue whom he could;—in that wild sim-ul-tan-eous-ness of a thou-sand
con-creted per-ils,—Ahab’s yet un-stricken boat seemed drawn up to-wards
Heaven by in-vis-ible wires,—as, ar-row-like, shoot-ing per-pen-dic-u-larly
from the sea, the White Whale dashed his broad fore-head against its
bot-tom, and sent it, turn-ing over and over, into the air; till it fell
again—gun-wale down-wards—and Ahab and his men struggled out from un-der
it, like seals from a sea-side cave.

The first up-ris-ing mo-mentum of the whale—modi-fy-ing its dir-ec-tion as he
struck the sur-face—in-vol-un-tar-ily launched him along it, to a little
dis-tance from the centre of the de-struc-tion he had made; and with his
back to it, he now lay for a mo-ment slowly feel-ing with his flukes from
side to side; and whenever a stray oar, bit of plank, the least chip or
crumb of the boats touched his skin, his tail swiftly drew back, and
came side-ways smit-ing the sea. But soon, as if sat-is-fied that his work
for that time was done, he pushed his pleated fore-head through the
ocean, and trail-ing after him the in-ter-tangled lines, con-tin-ued his
lee-ward way at a trav-el-ler’s meth-odic pace.

As be-fore, the at-tent-ive ship hav-ing descried the whole fight, again
came bear-ing down to the res-cue, and drop-ping a boat, picked up the
float-ing mar-iners, tubs, oars, and whatever else could be caught at,
and safely landed them on her decks. Some sprained shoulders, wrists,
and ankles; livid con-tu-sions; wrenched har-poons and lances;
in-ex-tric-able in-tric-a-cies of rope; shattered oars and planks; all these
were there; but no fatal or even ser-i-ous ill seemed to have be-fallen
any one. As with Fedal-lah the day be-fore, so Ahab was now found grimly
cling-ing to his boat’s broken half, which af-forded a com-par-at-ively easy
float; nor did it so ex-haust him as the pre-vi-ous day’s mis-hap.

But when he was helped to the deck, all eyes were fastened upon him; as
in-stead of stand-ing by him-self he still half-hung upon the shoulder of
Star-buck, who had thus far been the fore-most to as-sist him. His ivory
leg had been snapped off, leav-ing but one short sharp splinter.

“Aye, aye, Star-buck, ’tis sweet to lean some-times, be the leaner who he
will; and would old Ahab had leaned of-tener than he has.”

“The fer-rule has not stood, sir,” said the car-penter, now com-ing up; “I
put good work into that leg.”

“But no bones broken, sir, I hope,” said Stubb with true con-cern.

“Aye! and all splintered to pieces, Stubb!—d’ye see it.—But even with a
broken bone, old Ahab is un-touched; and I ac-count no liv-ing bone of
mine one jot more me, than this dead one that’s lost. Nor white whale,
nor man, nor fiend, can so much as graze old Ahab in his own proper and
in-ac-cess-ible be-ing. Can any lead touch yon-der floor, any mast scrape
yon-der roof?—Aloft there! which way?”

“Dead to lee-ward, sir.”

“Up helm, then; pile on the sail again, ship keep-ers! down the rest of
the spare boats and rig them—Mr. Star-buck away, and muster the boat’s
crews.”

“Let me first help thee to-wards the bul-warks, sir.”

“Oh, oh, oh! how this splinter gores me now! Ac-cursed fate! that the
un-con-quer-able cap-tain in the soul should have such a craven mate!”

“Sir?”

“My body, man, not thee. Give me some-thing for a cane—there, that
shivered lance will do. Muster the men. Surely I have not seen him yet.
By heaven it can-not be!—miss-ing?—quick! call them all.”

The old man’s hin-ted thought was true. Upon mus-ter-ing the com-pany, the
Parsee was not there.

“The Parsee!” cried Stubb—“he must have been caught in——”

“The black vomit wrench thee!—run all of ye above, alow, cabin,
fore-castle—find him—not gone—not gone!”

But quickly they re-turned to him with the tid-ings that the Parsee was
nowhere to be found.

“Aye, sir,” said Stubb—“caught among the tangles of your line—I thought
I saw him drag-ging un-der.”

“_My_ line! _my_ line? Gone?—gone? What means that little word?—What
death-knell rings in it, that old Ahab shakes as if he were the bel-fry.
The har-poon, too!—toss over the lit-ter there,—d’ye see it?—the forged
iron, men, the white whale’s—no, no, no,—blistered fool! this hand did
dart it!—’tis in the fish!—Aloft there! Keep him nailed—Quick!—all
hands to the rig-ging of the boats—col-lect the oars—har-poon-eers! the
irons, the irons!—hoist the roy-als higher—a pull on all the
sheets!—helm there! steady, steady for your life! I’ll ten times girdle
the un-meas-ured globe; yea and dive straight through it, but I’ll slay
him yet!”

“Great God! but for one single in-stant show thy-self,” cried Star-buck;
“never, never wilt thou cap-ture him, old man—In Je-sus’ name no more of
this, that’s worse than devil’s mad-ness. Two days chased; twice stove
to splin-ters; thy very leg once more snatched from un-der thee; thy evil
shadow gone—all good an-gels mob-bing thee with warn-ings:—what more
wouldst thou have?—Shall we keep chas-ing this mur-der-ous fish till he
swamps the last man? Shall we be dragged by him to the bot-tom of the
sea? Shall we be towed by him to the in-fernal world? Oh, oh,—Impi-ety
and blas-phemy to hunt him more!”

“Star-buck, of late I’ve felt strangely moved to thee; ever since that
hour we both saw—thou know’st what, in one an-other’s eyes. But in this
mat-ter of the whale, be the front of thy face to me as the palm of this
hand—a lip-less, un-fea-tured blank. Ahab is for ever Ahab, man. This
whole act’s im-mut-ably de-creed. ’Twas re-hearsed by thee and me a bil-lion
years be-fore this ocean rolled. Fool! I am the Fates’ lieu-ten-ant; I act
un-der or-ders. Look thou, un-der-ling! that thou obey-est mine.—Stand round
me, men. Ye see an old man cut down to the stump; lean-ing on a shivered
lance; propped up on a lonely foot. ’Tis Ahab—his body’s part; but
Ahab’s soul’s a centi-pede, that moves upon a hun-dred legs. I feel
strained, half stran-ded, as ropes that tow dis-masted frig-ates in a
gale; and I may look so. But ere I break, ye’ll hear me crack; and till
ye hear _that_, know that Ahab’s hawser tows his pur-pose yet. Be-lieve
ye, men, in the things called omens? Then laugh aloud, and cry en-core!
For ere they drown, drown-ing things will twice rise to the sur-face;
then rise again, to sink for ever-more. So with Moby Dick—two days he’s
floated—to-mor-row will be the third. Aye, men, he’ll rise once more,—but
only to spout his last! D’ye feel brave men, brave?”

“As fear-less fire,” cried Stubb.

“And as mech-an-ical,” muttered Ahab. Then as the men went for-ward, he
muttered on: “The things called omens! And yes-ter-day I talked the same
to Star-buck there, con-cern-ing my broken boat. Oh! how vali-antly I seek
to drive out of oth-ers’ hearts what’s clinched so fast in mine!—The
Parsee—the Parsee!—gone, gone? and he was to go be-fore:—but still was
to be seen again ere I could per-ish—How’s that?—There’s a riddle now
might baffle all the law-yers backed by the ghosts of the whole line of
judges:—like a hawk’s beak it pecks my brain. _I’ll_, _I’ll_ solve it,
though!”

When dusk des-cen-ded, the whale was still in sight to lee-ward.

So once more the sail was shortened, and everything passed nearly as on
the pre-vi-ous night; only, the sound of ham-mers, and the hum of the
grind-stone was heard till nearly day-light, as the men toiled by
lan-terns in the com-plete and care-ful rig-ging of the spare boats and
sharpen-ing their fresh weapons for the mor-row. Mean-time, of the broken
keel of Ahab’s wrecked craft the car-penter made him an-other leg; while
still as on the night be-fore, slouched Ahab stood fixed within his
scuttle; his hid, he-lio-trope glance an-ti-cip-at-ingly gone back-ward on its
dial; sat due east-ward for the earli-est sun.


CHAPTER 135. The Chase.—Third Day.

The morn-ing of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more the
sol-it-ary night-man at the fore-mast-head was re-lieved by crowds of the
day-light look-outs, who dot-ted every mast and al-most every spar.

“D’ye see him?” cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.

“In his in-fal-lible wake, though; but fol-low that wake, that’s all. Helm
there; steady, as thou goest, and hast been go-ing. What a lovely day
again! were it a new-made world, and made for a sum-mer-house to the
an-gels, and this morn-ing the first of its throw-ing open to them, a
fairer day could not dawn upon that world. Here’s food for thought, had
Ahab time to think; but Ahab never thinks; he only feels, feels, feels;
_that’s_ tingling enough for mor-tal man! to think’s au-da-city. God only
has that right and priv-ilege. Think-ing is, or ought to be, a cool-ness
and a calmness; and our poor hearts throb, and our poor brains beat too
much for that. And yet, I’ve some-times thought my brain was very
calm—frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which the
con-tents turned to ice, and shiver it. And still this hair is grow-ing
now; this mo-ment grow-ing, and heat must breed it; but no, it’s like
that sort of com-mon grass that will grow any-where, between the earthy
clefts of Green-land ice or in Ve-suvius lava. How the wild winds blow
it; they whip it about me as the torn shreds of split sails lash the
tossed ship they cling to. A vile wind that has no doubt blown ere this
through prison cor-ridors and cells, and wards of hos-pit-als, and
vent-il-ated them, and now comes blow-ing hither as in-no-cent as fleeces.
Out upon it!—it’s tain-ted. Were I the wind, I’d blow no more on such a
wicked, miser-able world. I’d crawl some-where to a cave, and slink
there. And yet, ’tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who ever
conquered it? In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow. Run
tilt-ing at it, and you but run through it. Ha! a cow-ard wind that
strikes stark na-ked men, but will not stand to re-ceive a single blow.
Even Ahab is a braver thing—a no-bler thing than _that_. Would now the
wind but had a body; but all the things that most ex-as-per-ate and
out-rage mor-tal man, all these things are bod-i-less, but only bod-i-less as
ob-jects, not as agents. There’s a most spe-cial, a most cun-ning, oh, a
most ma-li-cious dif-fer-ence! And yet, I say again, and swear it now, that
there’s some-thing all glor-i-ous and gra-cious in the wind. These warm
Trade Winds, at least, that in the clear heav-ens blow straight on, in
strong and stead-fast, vig-or-ous mild-ness; and veer not from their mark,
how-ever the baser cur-rents of the sea may turn and tack, and migh-ti-est
Mis-sis-sip-pies of the land swift and swerve about, un-cer-tain where to go
at last. And by the eternal Poles! these same Trades that so dir-ectly
blow my good ship on; these Trades, or some-thing like them—some-thing so
un-change-able, and full as strong, blow my keeled soul along! To it!
Aloft there! What d’ye see?”

“Noth-ing, sir.”

“Noth-ing! and noon at hand! The doub-loon goes a-beg-ging! See the sun!
Aye, aye, it must be so. I’ve over-sailed him. How, got the start? Aye,
he’s chas-ing _me_ now; not I, _him_—that’s bad; I might have known it,
too. Fool! the lines—the har-poons he’s tow-ing. Aye, aye, I have run him
by last night. About! about! Come down, all of ye, but the reg-u-lar look
outs! Man the braces!”

Steer-ing as she had done, the wind had been some-what on the Pequod’s
quarter, so that now be-ing poin-ted in the re-verse dir-ec-tion, the braced
ship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own
white wake.

“Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw,” mur-mured Star-buck to
him-self, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail. “God
keep us, but already my bones feel damp within me, and from the in-side
wet my flesh. I mis-doubt me that I dis-obey my God in obey-ing him!”

“Stand by to sway me up!” cried Ahab, ad-van-cing to the hempen bas-ket.
“We should meet him soon.”

“Aye, aye, sir,” and straight-way Star-buck did Ahab’s bid-ding, and once
more Ahab swung on high.

A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages. Time it-self now held
long breaths with keen sus-pense. But at last, some three points off the
weather bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and in-stantly from the
three mast-heads three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had
voiced it.

“Fore-head to fore-head I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick! On deck
there!—brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind’s eye. He’s too far
off to lower yet, Mr. Star-buck. The sails shake! Stand over that
helms-man with a top-maul! So, so; he travels fast, and I must down. But
let me have one more good round look aloft here at the sea; there’s
time for that. An old, old sight, and yet some-how so young; aye, and
not changed a wink since I first saw it, a boy, from the sand-hills of
Nan-tucket! The same!—the same!—the same to Noah as to me. There’s a
soft shower to lee-ward. Such lovely lee-ward-ings! They must lead
some-where—to some-thing else than com-mon land, more palmy than the
palms. Lee-ward! the white whale goes that way; look to wind-ward, then;
the bet-ter if the bit-terer quarter. But good bye, good bye, old
mast-head! What’s this?—green? aye, tiny mosses in these warped cracks.
No such green weather stains on Ahab’s head! There’s the dif-fer-ence now
between man’s old age and mat-ter’s. But aye, old mast, we both grow old
to-gether; sound in our hulls, though, are we not, my ship? Aye, minus a
leg, that’s all. By heaven this dead wood has the bet-ter of my live
flesh every way. I can’t com-pare with it; and I’ve known some ships
made of dead trees out-last the lives of men made of the most vi-tal
stuff of vi-tal fath-ers. What’s that he said? he should still go be-fore
me, my pi-lot; and yet to be seen again? But where? Will I have eyes at
the bot-tom of the sea, sup-pos-ing I des-cend those end-less stairs? and
all night I’ve been sail-ing from him, wherever he did sink to. Aye,
aye, like many more thou told’st dire-ful truth as touch-ing thy-self, O
Parsee; but, Ahab, there thy shot fell short. Good-bye, mast-head—keep
a good eye upon the whale, the while I’m gone. We’ll talk to-mor-row,
nay, to-night, when the white whale lies down there, tied by head and
tail.”

He gave the word; and still gaz-ing round him, was stead-ily lowered
through the cloven blue air to the deck.

In due time the boats were lowered; but as stand-ing in his shal-lop’s
stern, Ahab just hovered upon the point of the des-cent, he waved to the
mate,—who held one of the tackle-ropes on deck—and bade him pause.

“Star-buck!”

“Sir?”

“For the third time my soul’s ship starts upon this voy-age, Star-buck.”

“Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.”

“Some ships sail from their ports, and ever af-ter-wards are miss-ing,
Star-buck!”

“Truth, sir: sad-dest truth.”

“Some men die at ebb tide; some at low wa-ter; some at the full of the
flood;—and I feel now like a bil-low that’s all one cres-ted comb,
Star-buck. I am old;—shake hands with me, man.”

Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Star-buck’s tears the glue.

“Oh, my cap-tain, my cap-tain!—noble heart—go not—go not!—see, it’s a
brave man that weeps; how great the agony of the per-sua-sion then!”

“Lower away!”—cried Ahab, toss-ing the mate’s arm from him. “Stand by
the crew!”

In an in-stant the boat was pulling round close un-der the stern.

“The sharks! the sharks!” cried a voice from the low cabin-win-dow
there; “O mas-ter, my mas-ter, come back!”

But Ahab heard noth-ing; for his own voice was high-lif-ted then; and the
boat leaped on.

Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship, when
num-bers of sharks, seem-ingly rising from out the dark wa-ters be-neath
the hull, ma-li-ciously snapped at the blades of the oars, every time
they dipped in the wa-ter; and in this way ac-com-pan-ied the boat with
their bites. It is a thing not un-com-monly hap-pen-ing to the whale-boats
in those swarm-ing seas; the sharks at times ap-par-ently fol-low-ing them
in the same pres-ci-ent way that vul-tures hover over the ban-ners of
march-ing re-gi-ments in the east. But these were the first sharks that
had been ob-served by the Pequod since the White Whale had been first
descried; and whether it was that Ahab’s crew were all such
ti-ger-yel-low bar-bar-i-ans, and there-fore their flesh more musky to the
senses of the sharks—a mat-ter some-times well known to af-fect
them,—how-ever it was, they seemed to fol-low that one boat without
mo-lest-ing the oth-ers.

“Heart of wrought steel!” mur-mured Star-buck gaz-ing over the side, and
fol-low-ing with his eyes the re-ced-ing boat—“canst thou yet ring boldly
to that sight?—lower-ing thy keel among raven-ing sharks, and fol-lowed by
them, open-mouthed to the chase; and this the crit-ical third day?—For
when three days flow to-gether in one con-tinu-ous in-tense pur-suit; be
sure the first is the morn-ing, the second the noon, and the third the
even-ing and the end of that thing—be that end what it may. Oh! my God!
what is this that shoots through me, and leaves me so deadly calm, yet
ex-pect-ant,—fixed at the top of a shud-der! Fu-ture things swim be-fore me,
as in empty out-lines and skel-et-ons; all the past is some-how grown dim.
Mary, girl! thou fad-est in pale glor-ies be-hind me; boy! I seem to see
but thy eyes grown won-drous blue. Strangest prob-lems of life seem
clear-ing; but clouds sweep between—Is my jour-ney’s end com-ing? My legs
feel faint; like his who has footed it all day. Feel thy heart,—beats
it yet? Stir thy-self, Star-buck!—stave it off—move, move! speak
aloud!—Mast-head there! See ye my boy’s hand on the hill?—Crazed;—aloft
there!—keep thy keen-est eye upon the boats:—mark well the whale!—Ho!
again!—drive off that hawk! see! he pecks—he tears the vane”—point-ing
to the red flag fly-ing at the main-truck—“Ha! he soars away with
it!—Where’s the old man now? see’st thou that sight, oh Ahab!—shud-der,
shud-der!”

The boats had not gone very far, when by a sig-nal from the mast-heads—a
down-ward poin-ted arm, Ahab knew that the whale had soun-ded; but
in-tend-ing to be near him at the next rising, he held on his way a
little side-ways from the ves-sel; the becharmed crew main-tain-ing the
pro-found-est si-lence, as the head-beat waves hammered and hammered
against the op-pos-ing bow.

“Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their ut-ter-most heads
drive them in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin and
no hearse can be mine:—and hemp only can kill me! Ha! ha!”

Sud-denly the wa-ters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; then
quickly up-heaved, as if side-ways slid-ing from a sub-merged berg of ice,
swiftly rising to the sur-face. A low rum-bling sound was heard; a
sub-ter-raneous hum; and then all held their breaths; as be-draggled with
trail-ing ropes, and har-poons, and lances, a vast form shot length-wise,
but ob-liquely from the sea. Shrouded in a thin droop-ing veil of mist,
it hovered for a mo-ment in the rain-bowed air; and then fell swamp-ing
back into the deep. Crushed thirty feet up-wards, the wa-ters flashed for
an in-stant like heaps of foun-tains, then brokenly sank in a shower of
flakes, leav-ing the circ-ling sur-face creamed like new milk round the
marble trunk of the whale.

“Give way!” cried Ahab to the oars-men, and the boats dar-ted for-ward to
the at-tack; but maddened by yes-ter-day’s fresh irons that cor-roded in
him, Moby Dick seemed com-binedly pos-sessed by all the an-gels that fell
from heaven. The wide tiers of wel-ded ten-dons over-spread-ing his broad
white fore-head, be-neath the trans-par-ent skin, looked knit-ted to-gether;
as head on, he came churn-ing his tail among the boats; and once more
flailed them apart; spill-ing out the irons and lances from the two
mates’ boats, and dash-ing in one side of the up-per part of their bows,
but leav-ing Ahab’s al-most without a scar.

While Dag-goo and Queequeg were stop-ping the strained planks; and as the
whale swim-ming out from them, turned, and showed one en-tire flank as he
shot by them again; at that mo-ment a quick cry went up. Lashed round
and round to the fish’s back; pin-ioned in the turns upon turns in
which, dur-ing the past night, the whale had reeled the in-vol-u-tions of
the lines around him, the half torn body of the Parsee was seen; his
sable raiment frayed to shreds; his dis-ten-ded eyes turned full upon old
Ahab.

The har-poon dropped from his hand.

“Be-fooled, be-fooled!”—draw-ing in a long lean breath—“Aye, Parsee! I see
thee again.—Aye, and thou goest be-fore; and this, _this_ then is the
hearse that thou didst prom-ise. But I hold thee to the last let-ter of
thy word. Where is the second hearse? Away, mates, to the ship! those
boats are use-less now; re-pair them if ye can in time, and re-turn to me;
if not, Ahab is enough to die—Down, men! the first thing that but
of-fers to jump from this boat I stand in, that thing I har-poon. Ye are
not other men, but my arms and my legs; and so obey me.—Where’s the
whale? gone down again?”

But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon es-cap-ing with the
corpse he bore, and as if the par-tic-u-lar place of the last en-counter
had been but a stage in his lee-ward voy-age, Moby Dick was now again
stead-ily swim-ming for-ward; and had al-most passed the ship,—which thus
far had been sail-ing in the con-trary dir-ec-tion to him, though for the
present her head-way had been stopped. He seemed swim-ming with his
ut-most ve-lo-city, and now only in-tent upon pur-su-ing his own straight
path in the sea.

“Oh! Ahab,” cried Star-buck, “not too late is it, even now, the third
day, to de-sist. See! Moby Dick seeks thee not. It is thou, thou, that
madly seekest him!”

Set-ting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly im-pelled
to lee-ward, by both oars and can-vas. And at last when Ahab was slid-ing
by the ves-sel, so near as plainly to dis-tin-guish Star-buck’s face as he
leaned over the rail, he hailed him to turn the ves-sel about, and
fol-low him, not too swiftly, at a ju-di-cious in-ter-val. Glan-cing up-wards,
he saw Tasht-ego, Queequeg, and Dag-goo, eagerly mount-ing to the three
mast-heads; while the oars-men were rock-ing in the two staved boats
which had but just been hois-ted to the side, and were busily at work in
re-pair-ing them. One after the other, through the port-holes, as he
sped, he also caught fly-ing glimpses of Stubb and Flask, busy-ing
them-selves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances. As he saw all
this; as he heard the ham-mers in the broken boats; far other ham-mers
seemed driv-ing a nail into his heart. But he ral-lied. And now mark-ing
that the vane or flag was gone from the main-mast-head, he shouted to
Tasht-ego, who had just gained that perch, to des-cend again for an-other
flag, and a ham-mer and nails, and so nail it to the mast.

Whether fagged by the three days’ run-ning chase, and the res-ist-ance to
his swim-ming in the knot-ted hamper he bore; or whether it was some
lat-ent de-ceit-ful-ness and malice in him: whichever was true, the White
Whale’s way now began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat so rap-idly
near-ing him once more; though in-deed the whale’s last start had not
been so long a one as be-fore. And still as Ahab glided over the waves
the un-pity-ing sharks ac-com-pan-ied him; and so per-tina-ciously stuck to
the boat; and so con-tinu-ally bit at the ply-ing oars, that the blades
be-came jagged and crunched, and left small splin-ters in the sea, at
al-most every dip.

“Heed them not! those teeth but give new row-locks to your oars. Pull
on! ’tis the bet-ter rest, the shark’s jaw than the yield-ing wa-ter.”

“But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smal-ler and smal-ler!”

“They will last long enough! pull on!—But who can tell”—he
muttered—“whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on
Ahab?—But pull on! Aye, all alive, now—we near him. The helm! take the
helm! let me pass,”—and so say-ing two of the oars-men helped him for-ward
to the bows of the still fly-ing boat.

At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ran-ging along with
the White Whale’s flank, he seemed strangely ob-li-vi-ous of its
ad-vance—as the whale some-times will—and Ahab was fairly within the
smoky moun-tain mist, which, thrown off from the whale’s spout, curled
round his great, Mon-ad-nock hump; he was even thus close to him; when,
with body arched back, and both arms length-wise high-lif-ted to the
poise, he dar-ted his fierce iron, and his far fiercer curse into the
hated whale. As both steel and curse sank to the socket, as if sucked
into a mor-ass, Moby Dick side-ways writhed; spas-mod-ic-ally rolled his
nigh flank against the bow, and, without stav-ing a hole in it, so
sud-denly can-ted the boat over, that had it not been for the el-ev-ated
part of the gun-wale to which he then clung, Ahab would once more have
been tossed into the sea. As it was, three of the oars-men—who foreknew
not the pre-cise in-stant of the dart, and were there-fore un-pre-pared for
its ef-fects—these were flung out; but so fell, that, in an in-stant two
of them clutched the gun-wale again, and rising to its level on a
comb-ing wave, hurled them-selves bod-ily in-board again; the third man
help-lessly drop-ping astern, but still afloat and swim-ming.

Al-most sim-ul-tan-eously, with a mighty vo-li-tion of un-gradu-ated,
in-stant-an-eous swift-ness, the White Whale dar-ted through the wel-ter-ing
sea. But when Ahab cried out to the steers-man to take new turns with
the line, and hold it so; and com-manded the crew to turn round on their
seats, and tow the boat up to the mark; the mo-ment the treach-er-ous line
felt that double strain and tug, it snapped in the empty air!

“What breaks in me? Some sinew cracks!—’tis whole again; oars! oars!
Burst in upon him!”

Hear-ing the tre-mend-ous rush of the sea-crash-ing boat, the whale wheeled
round to present his blank fore-head at bay; but in that evol-u-tion,
catch-ing sight of the near-ing black hull of the ship; seem-ingly see-ing
in it the source of all his per-se-cu-tions; be-think-ing it—it may be—a
lar-ger and no-bler foe; of a sud-den, he bore down upon its ad-van-cing
prow, smit-ing his jaws amid fiery showers of foam.

Ahab staggered; his hand smote his fore-head. “I grow blind; hands!
stretch out be-fore me that I may yet grope my way. Is’t night?”

“The whale! The ship!” cried the cringing oars-men.

“Oars! oars! Slope down-wards to thy depths, O sea, that ere it be for
ever too late, Ahab may slide this last, last time upon his mark! I
see: the ship! the ship! Dash on, my men! Will ye not save my ship?”

But as the oars-men vi-ol-ently forced their boat through the
sledge-ham-mer-ing seas, the be-fore whale-smit-ten bow-ends of two planks
burst through, and in an in-stant al-most, the tem-por-ar-ily dis-abled boat
lay nearly level with the waves; its half-wad-ing, splash-ing crew,
try-ing hard to stop the gap and bale out the pour-ing wa-ter.

Mean-time, for that one be-hold-ing in-stant, Tasht-ego’s mast-head ham-mer
re-mained sus-pen-ded in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrap-ping him as
with a plaid, then streamed it-self straight out from him, as his own
for-ward-flow-ing heart; while Star-buck and Stubb, stand-ing upon the
bow-sprit be-neath, caught sight of the down-com-ing mon-ster just as soon
as he.

“The whale, the whale! Up helm, up helm! Oh, all ye sweet powers of
air, now hug me close! Let not Star-buck die, if die he must, in a
wo-man’s faint-ing fit. Up helm, I say—ye fools, the jaw! the jaw! Is
this the end of all my burst-ing pray-ers? all my life-long fi-del-it-ies?
Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work. Steady! helms-man, steady. Nay, nay! Up
helm again! He turns to meet us! Oh, his un-ap-peas-able brow drives on
to-wards one, whose duty tells him he can-not de-part. My God, stand by me
now!”

“Stand not by me, but stand un-der me, who-ever you are that will now
help Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here. I grin at thee, thou grin-ning
whale! Who ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, but Stubb’s own
un-wink-ing eye? And now poor Stubb goes to bed upon a mat-trass that is
all too soft; would it were stuffed with brush-wood! I grin at thee,
thou grin-ning whale! Look ye, sun, moon, and stars! I call ye as-sas-sins
of as good a fel-low as ever spouted up his ghost. For all that, I would
yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but hand the cup! Oh, oh! oh, oh!
thou grin-ning whale, but there’ll be plenty of gulp-ing soon! Why fly ye
not, O Ahab! For me, off shoes and jacket to it; let Stubb die in his
draw-ers! A most mouldy and over salted death, though;—cher-ries!
cher-ries! cher-ries! Oh, Flask, for one red cherry ere we die!”

“Cher-ries? I only wish that we were where they grow. Oh, Stubb, I hope
my poor mother’s drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few cop-pers will
now come to her, for the voy-age is up.”

From the ship’s bows, nearly all the sea-men now hung in-act-ive; ham-mers,
bits of plank, lances, and har-poons, mech-an-ic-ally re-tained in their
hands, just as they had dar-ted from their vari-ous em-ploy-ments; all
their en-chanted eyes in-tent upon the whale, which from side to side
strangely vi-brat-ing his pre-des-tin-at-ing head, sent a broad band of
over-spread-ing semi-cir-cu-lar foam be-fore him as he rushed. Retri-bu-tion,
swift ven-geance, eternal malice were in his whole as-pect, and spite of
all that mor-tal man could do, the solid white but-tress of his fore-head
smote the ship’s star-board bow, till men and tim-bers reeled. Some fell
flat upon their faces. Like dis-lodged trucks, the heads of the
har-poon-eers aloft shook on their bull-like necks. Through the breach,
they heard the wa-ters pour, as moun-tain tor-rents down a flume.

“The ship! The hearse!—the second hearse!” cried Ahab from the boat;
“its wood could only be Amer-ican!”

Div-ing be-neath the set-tling ship, the whale ran quiv-er-ing along its
keel; but turn-ing un-der wa-ter, swiftly shot to the sur-face again, far
off the other bow, but within a few yards of Ahab’s boat, where, for a
time, he lay qui-es-cent.

“I turn my body from the sun. What ho, Tasht-ego! let me hear thy
ham-mer. Oh! ye three un-sur-rendered spires of mine; thou un-cracked keel;
and only god-bul-lied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm, and
Pole-poin-ted prow,—death-glor-i-ous ship! must ye then per-ish, and
without me? Am I cut off from the last fond pride of mean-est
ship-wrecked cap-tains? Oh, lonely death on lonely life! Oh, now I feel
my top-most great-ness lies in my top-most grief. Ho, ho! from all your
fur-thest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold bil-lows of my whole fore-gone
life, and top this one piled comber of my death! Towards thee I roll,
thou all-des-troy-ing but un-con-quer-ing whale; to the last I grapple with
thee; from hell’s heart I stab at thee; for hate’s sake I spit my last
breath at thee. Sink all coffins and all hearses to one com-mon pool!
and since neither can be mine, let me then tow to pieces, while still
chas-ing thee, though tied to thee, thou damned whale! _Thus_, I give up
the spear!”

The har-poon was dar-ted; the stricken whale flew for-ward; with ig-nit-ing
ve-lo-city the line ran through the grooves;—ran foul. Ahab stooped to
clear it; he did clear it; but the fly-ing turn caught him round the
neck, and voice-lessly as Turk-ish mutes bow-string their vic-tim, he was
shot out of the boat, ere the crew knew he was gone. Next in-stant, the
heavy eye-splice in the rope’s fi-nal end flew out of the stark-empty
tub, knocked down an oars-man, and smit-ing the sea, dis-ap-peared in its
depths.

For an in-stant, the tranced boat’s crew stood still; then turned. “The
ship? Great God, where is the ship?” Soon they through dim, be-wil-der-ing
me-di-ums saw her side-long fad-ing phantom, as in the gaseous Fata
Mor-gana; only the up-per-most masts out of wa-ter; while fixed by
in-fatu-ation, or fi-del-ity, or fate, to their once lofty perches, the
pa-gan har-poon-eers still main-tained their sink-ing lookouts on the sea.
And now, con-cent-ric circles seized the lone boat it-self, and all its
crew, and each float-ing oar, and every lance-pole, and spin-ning,
an-im-ate and in-an-im-ate, all round and round in one vor-tex, car-ried the
smal-lest chip of the Pequod out of sight.

But as the last whelm-ings in-ter-mix-ingly poured them-selves over the
sunken head of the In-dian at the main-mast, leav-ing a few inches of the
erect spar yet vis-ible, to-gether with long stream-ing yards of the flag,
which calmly un-du-lated, with iron-ical co-in-cid-ings, over the des-troy-ing
bil-lows they al-most touched;—at that in-stant, a red arm and a ham-mer
hovered back-wardly up-lif-ted in the open air, in the act of nail-ing the
flag faster and yet faster to the sub-sid-ing spar. A sky-hawk that
taunt-ingly had fol-lowed the main-truck down-wards from its nat-ural home
among the stars, peck-ing at the flag, and in-com-mod-ing Tasht-ego there;
this bird now chanced to in-ter-cept its broad flut-ter-ing wing between
the ham-mer and the wood; and sim-ul-tan-eously feel-ing that eth-er-ial
thrill, the sub-merged sav-age be-neath, in his death-gasp, kept his
ham-mer frozen there; and so the bird of heaven, with archangelic
shrieks, and his im-per-ial beak thrust up-wards, and his whole cap-tive
form fol-ded in the flag of Ahab, went down with his ship, which, like
Satan, would not sink to hell till she had dragged a liv-ing part of
heaven along with her, and helmeted her-self with it.

Now small fowls flew scream-ing over the yet yawn-ing gulf; a sul-len
white surf beat against its steep sides; then all col-lapsed, and the
great shroud of the sea rolled on as it rolled five thou-sand years ago.


Epi-logue

“AND I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE” Job.

The drama’s done. Why then here does any one step forth?—Be-cause one
did sur-vive the wreck.

It so chanced, that after the Parsee’s dis-ap-pear-ance, I was he whom the
Fates or-dained to take the place of Ahab’s bow-sman, when that bow-sman
as-sumed the va-cant post; the same, who, when on the last day the three
men were tossed from out of the rock-ing boat, was dropped astern. So,
float-ing on the mar-gin of the en-su-ing scene, and in full sight of it,
when the half-spent suc-tion of the sunk ship reached me, I was then, but
slowly, drawn to-wards the clos-ing vor-tex. When I reached it, it had
sub-sided to a creamy pool. Round and round, then, and ever con-tract-ing
to-wards the but-ton-like black bubble at the axis of that slowly
wheel-ing circle, like an-other Ix-ion I did re-volve. Till, gain-ing that
vi-tal centre, the black bubble up-ward burst; and now, lib-er-ated by
reason of its cun-ning spring, and, ow-ing to its great buoy-ancy, rising
with great force, the coffin life-buoy shot length-wise from the sea,
fell over, and floated by my side. Buoyed up by that coffin, for al-most
one whole day and night, I floated on a soft and dirgelike main. The
un-harm-ing sharks, they glided by as if with pad-locks on their mouths;
the sav-age sea-hawks sailed with sheathed beaks. On the second day, a
sail drew near, nearer, and picked me up at last. It was the
de-vi-ous-cruis-ing Rachel, that in her re-tra-cing search after her miss-ing
chil-dren, only found an-other orphan.
