       DRACULA




CHAPTER I

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

(_Kept in short-hand._)


_3 May. Bis-tritz._--Left Mu-nich at 8:35 P. M., on 1st May, ar-riv-ing at
Vi-enna early next morn-ing; should have ar-rived at 6:46, but train was an
hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a won-der-ful place, from the glimpse which I
got of it from the train and the little I could walk through the
streets. I feared to go very far from the sta-tion, as we had ar-rived
late and would start as near the cor-rect time as pos-sible. The
im-pres-sion I had was that we were leav-ing the West and en-ter-ing the
East; the most west-ern of splen-did bridges over the Danube, which is
here of noble width and depth, took us among the tra-di-tions of Turk-ish
rule.

We left in pretty good time, and came after night-fall to Klausen-burgh.
Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel Roy-ale. I had for din-ner, or
rather sup-per, a chicken done up some way with red pep-per, which was
very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get re-cipe for Mina.) I asked the
waiter, and he said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was a
na-tional dish, I should be able to get it any-where along the
Carpath-i-ans. I found my smat-ter-ing of Ger-man very use-ful here; in-deed, I
don't know how I should be able to get on without it.

Hav-ing had some time at my dis-posal when in Lon-don, I had vis-ited the
Brit-ish Mu-seum, and made search among the books and maps in the lib-rary
re-gard-ing Transylvania; it had struck me that some fore-know-ledge of the
coun-try could hardly fail to have some im-port-ance in deal-ing with a
no-ble-man of that coun-try. I find that the dis-trict he named is in the
ex-treme east of the coun-try, just on the bor-ders of three states,
Transylvania, Mol-davia and Bukov-ina, in the midst of the Carpath-ian
moun-tains; one of the wild-est and least known por-tions of Europe. I was
not able to light on any map or work giv-ing the ex-act loc-al-ity of the
Castle Drac-ula, as there are no maps of this coun-try as yet to com-pare
with our own Ord-nance Sur-vey maps; but I found that Bis-tritz, the post
town named by Count Drac-ula, is a fairly well-known place. I shall enter
here some of my notes, as they may re-fresh my memory when I talk over my
travels with Mina.

In the pop-u-la-tion of Transylvania there are four dis-tinct na-tion-al-it-ies:
Sax-ons in the South, and mixed with them the Wal-lachs, who are the
des-cend-ants of the Da-cians; Mag-yars in the West, and Szekelys in the
East and North. I am go-ing among the lat-ter, who claim to be des-cen-ded
from At-tila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Mag-yars conquered
the coun-try in the el-ev-enth cen-tury they found the Huns settled in it. I
read that every known su-per-sti-tion in the world is gathered into the
horse-shoe of the Carpath-i-ans, as if it were the centre of some sort of
ima-gin-at-ive whirl-pool; if so my stay may be very in-ter-est-ing. (_Mem._, I
must ask the Count all about them.)

I did not sleep well, though my bed was com-fort-able enough, for I had
all sorts of queer dreams. There was a dog howl-ing all night un-der my
win-dow, which may have had some-thing to do with it; or it may have been
the paprika, for I had to drink up all the wa-ter in my carafe, and was
still thirsty. Towards morn-ing I slept and was wakened by the con-tinu-ous
knock-ing at my door, so I guess I must have been sleep-ing soundly then.
I had for break-fast more paprika, and a sort of por-ridge of maize flour
which they said was "mam-a-liga," and egg-plant stuffed with force-meat, a
very ex-cel-lent dish, which they call "im-pletata." (_Mem._, get re-cipe
for this also.) I had to hurry break-fast, for the train star-ted a little
be-fore eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rush-ing to
the sta-tion at 7:30 I had to sit in the car-riage for more than an hour
be-fore we began to move. It seems to me that the fur-ther east you go the
more un-punc-tual are the trains. What ought they to be in Ch-ina?

All day long we seemed to dawdle through a coun-try which was full of
beauty of every kind. So-me-times we saw little towns or castles on the
top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; some-times we ran by
rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony mar-gin on each side
of them to be sub-ject to great floods. It takes a lot of wa-ter, and
run-ning strong, to sweep the out-side edge of a river clear. At every
sta-tion there were groups of people, some-times crowds, and in all sorts
of at-tire. Some of them were just like the peas-ants at home or those I
saw com-ing through France and Ger-many, with short jack-ets and round hats
and home-made trousers; but oth-ers were very pic-tur-esque. The wo-men
looked pretty, ex-cept when you got near them, but they were very clumsy
about the waist. They had all full white sleeves of some kind or other,
and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of some-thing
flut-ter-ing from them like the dresses in a bal-let, but of course there
were pet-ti-coats un-der them. The strangest fig-ures we saw were the
Slovaks, who were more bar-bar-ian than the rest, with their big cow-boy
hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enorm-ous
heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all stud-ded over with brass
nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and
had long black hair and heavy black mous-taches. They are very
pic-tur-esque, but do not look pre-pos-sess-ing. On the stage they would be
set down at once as some old Ori-ental band of brig-ands. They are,
how-ever, I am told, very harm-less and rather want-ing in nat-ural
self-as-ser-tion.

It was on the dark side of twi-light when we got to Bis-tritz, which is a
very in-ter-est-ing old place. Be-ing prac-tic-ally on the fron-tier--for the
Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukov-ina--it has had a very stormy
ex-ist-ence, and it cer-tainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series
of great fires took place, which made ter-rible havoc on five sep-ar-ate
oc-ca-sions. At the very be-gin-ning of the sev-en-teenth cen-tury it un-der-went
a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the cas-u-al-ties of war
proper be-ing as-sisted by fam-ine and dis-ease.

Count Drac-ula had dir-ec-ted me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I
found, to my great de-light, to be thor-oughly old-fash-ioned, for of
course I wanted to see all I could of the ways of the coun-try. I was
evid-ently ex-pec-ted, for when I got near the door I faced a
cheery-look-ing eld-erly wo-man in the usual peas-ant dress--white
un-der-gar-ment with long double ap-ron, front, and back, of col-oured stuff
fit-ting al-most too tight for mod-esty. When I came close she bowed and
said, "The Herr Eng-lish-man?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She
smiled, and gave some mes-sage to an eld-erly man in white shirt-sleeves,
who had fol-lowed her to the door. He went, but im-me-di-ately re-turned with
a let-ter:--

     "My Friend.--Wel-come to the Carpath-i-ans. I am anxiously ex-pect-ing
     you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-mor-row the di-li-gence will
     start for Bukov-ina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo
     Pass my car-riage will await you and will bring you to me. I trust
     that your jour-ney from Lon-don has been a happy one, and that you
     will en-joy your stay in my beau-ti-ful land.

"Your friend,

"DRACULA."


_4 May._--I found that my land-lord had got a let-ter from the Count,
dir-ect-ing him to se-cure the best place on the coach for me; but on
mak-ing in-quir-ies as to de-tails he seemed some-what reti-cent, and
pre-ten-ded that he could not un-der-stand my Ger-man. This could not be
true, be-cause up to then he had un-der-stood it per-fectly; at least, he
answered my ques-tions ex-actly as if he did. He and his wife, the old
lady who had re-ceived me, looked at each other in a frightened sort of
way. He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a let-ter, and that
was all he knew. When I asked him if he knew Count Drac-ula, and could
tell me any-thing of his castle, both he and his wife crossed them-selves,
and, say-ing that they knew noth-ing at all, simply re-fused to speak
fur-ther. It was so near the time of start-ing that I had no time to ask
any one else, for it was all very mys-ter-i-ous and not by any means
com-fort-ing.

Just be-fore I was leav-ing, the old lady came up to my room and said in a
very hys-ter-ical way:

"Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?" She was in such an ex-cited
state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what Ger-man she knew, and
mixed it all up with some other lan-guage which I did not know at all. I
was just able to fol-low her by ask-ing many ques-tions. When I told her
that I must go at once, and that I was en-gaged on im-port-ant busi-ness,
she asked again:

"Do you know what day it is?" I answered that it was the fourth of May.
She shook her head as she said again:

"Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know what day it is?" On
my say-ing that I did not un-der-stand, she went on:

"It is the eve of St. Ge-orge's Day. Do you not know that to-night, when
the clock strikes mid-night, all the evil things in the world will have
full sway? Do you know where you are go-ing, and what you are go-ing to?"
She was in such evid-ent dis-tress that I tried to com-fort her, but
without ef-fect. Fin-ally she went down on her knees and im-plored me not
to go; at least to wait a day or two be-fore start-ing. It was all very
ri-dicu-lous but I did not feel com-fort-able. However, there was busi-ness
to be done, and I could al-low noth-ing to in-ter-fere with it. I there-fore
tried to raise her up, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked
her, but my duty was im-per-at-ive, and that I must go. She then rose and
dried her eyes, and tak-ing a cru-ci-fix from her neck offered it to me. I
did not know what to do, for, as an Eng-lish Church-man, I have been
taught to re-gard such things as in some meas-ure id-ol-at-rous, and yet it
seemed so un-gra-cious to re-fuse an old lady mean-ing so well and in such a
state of mind. She saw, I sup-pose, the doubt in my face, for she put the
ros-ary round my neck, and said, "For your mother's sake," and went out
of the room. I am writ-ing up this part of the di-ary whilst I am wait-ing
for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the cru-ci-fix is still
round my neck. Whether it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly
tra-di-tions of this place, or the cru-ci-fix it-self, I do not know, but I
am not feel-ing nearly as easy in my mind as usual. If this book should
ever reach Mina be-fore I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here comes the
coach!

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the morn-ing has passed, and the sun is
high over the dis-tant ho-ri-zon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or
hills I know not, for it is so far off that big things and little are
mixed. I am not sleepy, and, as I am not to be called till I awake,
nat-ur-ally I write till sleep comes. There are many odd things to put
down, and, lest who reads them may fancy that I dined too well be-fore I
left Bis-tritz, let me put down my din-ner ex-actly. I dined on what they
called "rob-ber steak"--bits of ba-con, onion, and beef, seasoned with red
pep-per, and strung on sticks and roas-ted over the fire, in the simple
style of the Lon-don cat's meat! The wine was Golden Me-diasch, which
pro-duces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, how-ever, not
dis-agree-able. I had only a couple of glasses of this, and noth-ing else.

When I got on the coach the driver had not taken his seat, and I saw him
talk-ing with the land-lady. They were evid-ently talk-ing of me, for every
now and then they looked at me, and some of the people who were sit-ting
on the bench out-side the door--which they call by a name mean-ing
"word-bearer"--came and listened, and then looked at me, most of them
pity-ingly. I could hear a lot of words of-ten re-peated, queer words, for
there were many na-tion-al-it-ies in the crowd; so I quietly got my poly-glot
dic-tion-ary from my bag and looked them out. I must say they were not
cheer-ing to me, for amongst them were "Or-dog"--Satan, "pokol"--hell,
"stregoica"--witch, "vro-lok" and "vlkoslak"--both of which mean the same
thing, one be-ing Slovak and the other Ser-vian for some-thing that is
either were-wolf or vam-pire. (_Mem._, I must ask the Count about these
su-per-sti-tions)

When we star-ted, the crowd round the inn door, which had by this time
swelled to a con-sid-er-able size, all made the sign of the cross and
poin-ted two fin-gers to-wards me. With some dif-fi-culty I got a
fel-low-pas-sen-ger to tell me what they meant; he would not an-swer at
first, but on learn-ing that I was Eng-lish, he ex-plained that it was a
charm or guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleas-ant for me,
just start-ing for an un-known place to meet an un-known man; but every one
seemed so kind-hearted, and so sor-row-ful, and so sym-path-etic that I
could not but be touched. I shall never for-get the last glimpse which I
had of the inn-yard and its crowd of pic-tur-esque fig-ures, all cross-ing
them-selves, as they stood round the wide arch-way, with its back-ground of
rich fo-liage of oleander and or-ange trees in green tubs clustered in the
centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen draw-ers covered
the whole front of the box-seat--"gotza" they call them--cracked his big
whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set off on
our jour-ney.

I soon lost sight and re-col-lec-tion of ghostly fears in the beauty of the
scene as we drove along, al-though had I known the lan-guage, or rather
lan-guages, which my fel-low-pas-sen-gers were speak-ing, I might not have
been able to throw them off so eas-ily. Be-fore us lay a green slop-ing
land full of forests and woods, with here and there steep hills, crowned
with clumps of trees or with farm-houses, the blank gable end to the
road. There was every-where a be-wil-der-ing mass of fruit blos-som--apple,
plum, pear, cherry; and as we drove by I could see the green grass un-der
the trees spangled with the fallen petals. In and out amongst these
green hills of what they call here the "Mit-tel Land" ran the road,
los-ing it-self as it swept round the grassy curve, or was shut out by the
strag-gling ends of pine woods, which here and there ran down the
hill-sides like tongues of flame. The road was rugged, but still we
seemed to fly over it with a fe-ver-ish haste. I could not un-der-stand then
what the haste meant, but the driver was evid-ently bent on los-ing no
time in reach-ing Borgo Prund. I was told that this road is in sum-mer-time
ex-cel-lent, but that it had not yet been put in or-der after the winter
snows. In this re-spect it is dif-fer-ent from the gen-eral run of roads in
the Carpath-i-ans, for it is an old tra-di-tion that they are not to be kept
in too good or-der. Of old the Hospadars would not re-pair them, lest the
Turk should think that they were pre-par-ing to bring in for-eign troops,
and so hasten the war which was al-ways really at load-ing point.

Bey-ond the green swell-ing hills of the Mit-tel Land rose mighty slopes
of forest up to the lofty steeps of the Carpath-i-ans them-selves. Right
and left of us they towered, with the af-ter-noon sun fall-ing full upon
them and bring-ing out all the glor-i-ous col-ours of this beau-ti-ful range,
deep blue and purple in the shad-ows of the peaks, green and brown where
grass and rock mingled, and an end-less per-spect-ive of jagged rock and
poin-ted crags, till these were them-selves lost in the dis-tance, where
the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the
moun-tains, through which, as the sun began to sink, we saw now and again
the white gleam of fall-ing wa-ter. One of my com-pan-ions touched my arm as
we swept round the base of a hill and opened up the lofty, snow-covered
peak of a moun-tain, which seemed, as we wound on our ser-pent-ine way, to
be right be-fore us:--

"Look! Isten szek!"--"God's seat!"--and he crossed him-self rev-er-ently.

As we wound on our end-less way, and the sun sank lower and lower be-hind
us, the shad-ows of the even-ing began to creep round us. This was
em-phas-ised by the fact that the snowy moun-tain-top still held the
sun-set, and seemed to glow out with a del-ic-ate cool pink. Here and there
we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in pic-tur-esque at-tire, but I no-ticed
that goitre was pain-fully pre-val-ent. By the road-side were many crosses,
and as we swept by, my com-pan-ions all crossed them-selves. Here and there
was a peas-ant man or wo-man kneel-ing be-fore a shrine, who did not even
turn round as we ap-proached, but seemed in the self-sur-render of
de-vo-tion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were
many things new to me: for in-stance, hay-ricks in the trees, and here
and there very beau-ti-ful masses of weep-ing birch, their white stems
shin-ing like sil-ver through the del-ic-ate green of the leaves. Now and
again we passed a leiter-wagon--the or-din-ary peas-ant's cart--with its
long, snake-like ver-tebra, cal-cu-lated to suit the in-equal-it-ies of the
road. On this were sure to be seated quite a group of home-com-ing
peas-ants, the Cszeks with their white, and the Slovaks with their
col-oured, sheep-skins, the lat-ter car-ry-ing lance-fash-ion their long
staves, with axe at end. As the even-ing fell it began to get very cold,
and the grow-ing twi-light seemed to merge into one dark misti-ness the
gloom of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the val-leys which
ran deep between the spurs of the hills, as we as-cen-ded through the
Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there against the back-ground of
late-ly-ing snow. So-me-times, as the road was cut through the pine woods
that seemed in the dark-ness to be clos-ing down upon us, great masses of
grey-ness, which here and there be-strewed the trees, pro-duced a
pe-cu-li-arly weird and sol-emn ef-fect, which car-ried on the thoughts and
grim fan-cies en-gendered earlier in the even-ing, when the fall-ing sun-set
threw into strange re-lief the ghost-like clouds which amongst the
Carpath-i-ans seem to wind cease-lessly through the val-leys. So-me-times the
hills were so steep that, des-pite our driver's haste, the horses could
only go slowly. I wished to get down and walk up them, as we do at home,
but the driver would not hear of it. "No, no," he said; "you must not
walk here; the dogs are too fierce"; and then he ad-ded, with what he
evid-ently meant for grim pleas-antry--for he looked round to catch the
ap-prov-ing smile of the rest--"and you may have enough of such mat-ters
be-fore you go to sleep." The only stop he would make was a mo-ment's
pause to light his lamps.

When it grew dark there seemed to be some ex-cite-ment amongst the
pas-sen-gers, and they kept speak-ing to him, one after the other, as
though ur-ging him to fur-ther speed. He lashed the horses un-mer-ci-fully
with his long whip, and with wild cries of en-cour-age-ment urged them on
to fur-ther ex-er-tions. Then through the dark-ness I could see a sort of
patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a cleft in the
hills. The ex-cite-ment of the pas-sen-gers grew greater; the crazy coach
rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a
stormy sea. I had to hold on. The road grew more level, and we ap-peared
to fly along. Then the moun-tains seemed to come nearer to us on each
side and to frown down upon us; we were en-ter-ing on the Borgo Pass. One
by one sev-eral of the pas-sen-gers offered me gifts, which they pressed
upon me with an earn-est-ness which would take no denial; these were
cer-tainly of an odd and var-ied kind, but each was given in simple good
faith, with a kindly word, and a bless-ing, and that strange mix-ture of
fear-mean-ing move-ments which I had seen out-side the hotel at
Bis-tritz--the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye.
Then, as we flew along, the driver leaned for-ward, and on each side the
pas-sen-gers, cran-ing over the edge of the coach, peered eagerly into the
dark-ness. It was evid-ent that some-thing very ex-cit-ing was either
hap-pen-ing or ex-pec-ted, but though I asked each pas-sen-ger, no one would
give me the slight-est ex-plan-a-tion. This state of ex-cite-ment kept on for
some little time; and at last we saw be-fore us the Pass open-ing out on
the east-ern side. There were dark, rolling clouds over-head, and in the
air the heavy, op-press-ive sense of thun-der. It seemed as though the
moun-tain range had sep-ar-ated two at-mo-spheres, and that now we had got
into the thun-der-ous one. I was now my-self look-ing out for the con-vey-ance
which was to take me to the Count. Each mo-ment I ex-pec-ted to see the
glare of lamps through the black-ness; but all was dark. The only light
was the flick-er-ing rays of our own lamps, in which the steam from our
hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. We could see now the sandy
road ly-ing white be-fore us, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle.
The pas-sen-gers drew back with a sigh of glad-ness, which seemed to mock
my own dis-ap-point-ment. I was already think-ing what I had best do, when
the driver, look-ing at his watch, said to the oth-ers some-thing which I
could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I
thought it was "An hour less than the time." Then turn-ing to me, he said
in Ger-man worse than my own:--

"There is no car-riage here. The Herr is not ex-pec-ted after all. He will
now come on to Bukov-ina, and re-turn to-mor-row or the next day; bet-ter
the next day." Whilst he was speak-ing the horses began to neigh and
snort and plunge wildly, so that the driver had to hold them up. Then,
amongst a chorus of screams from the peas-ants and a uni-ver-sal cross-ing
of them-selves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up be-hind us, over-took
us, and drew up be-side the coach. I could see from the flash of our
lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses were coal-black and
splen-did an-im-als. They were driven by a tall man, with a long brown
beard and a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. I
could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red
in the lamp-light, as he turned to us. He said to the driver:--

"You are early to-night, my friend." The man stammered in reply:--

"The Eng-lish Herr was in a hurry," to which the stranger replied:--

"That is why, I sup-pose, you wished him to go on to Bukov-ina. You can-not
de-ceive me, my friend; I know too much, and my horses are swift." As he
spoke he smiled, and the lamp-light fell on a hard-look-ing mouth, with
very red lips and sharp-look-ing teeth, as white as ivory. One of my
com-pan-ions whispered to an-other the line from Bur-ger's "Lenore":--

    "Denn die Todten re-iten schnell"--
    ("For the dead travel fast.")

The strange driver evid-ently heard the words, for he looked up with a
gleam-ing smile. The pas-sen-ger turned his face away, at the same time
put-ting out his two fin-gers and cross-ing him-self. "Give me the Herr's
lug-gage," said the driver; and with ex-ceed-ing alac-rity my bags were
handed out and put in the calèche. Then I des-cen-ded from the side of the
coach, as the calèche was close along-side, the driver help-ing me with a
hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must have been
prodi-gious. Without a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we
swept into the dark-ness of the Pass. As I looked back I saw the steam
from the horses of the coach by the light of the lamps, and pro-jec-ted
against it the fig-ures of my late com-pan-ions cross-ing them-selves. Then
the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off they swept
on their way to Bukov-ina. As they sank into the dark-ness I felt a
strange chill, and a lonely feel-ing came over me; but a cloak was thrown
over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in
ex-cel-lent Ger-man:--

"The night is chill, mein Herr, and my mas-ter the Count bade me take all
care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the
coun-try) un-der-neath the seat, if you should re-quire it." I did not take
any, but it was a com-fort to know it was there all the same. I felt a
little strangely, and not a little frightened. I think had there been
any al-tern-at-ive I should have taken it, in-stead of pro-sec-ut-ing that
un-known night jour-ney. The car-riage went at a hard pace straight along,
then we made a com-plete turn and went along an-other straight road. It
seemed to me that we were simply go-ing over and over the same ground
again; and so I took note of some sa-li-ent point, and found that this was
so. I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but
I really feared to do so, for I thought that, placed as I was, any
protest would have had no ef-fect in case there had been an in-ten-tion to
delay. By-and-by, how-ever, as I was curi-ous to know how time was
passing, I struck a match, and by its flame looked at my watch; it was
within a few minutes of mid-night. This gave me a sort of shock, for I
sup-pose the gen-eral su-per-sti-tion about mid-night was in-creased by my
re-cent ex-per-i-ences. I waited with a sick feel-ing of sus-pense.

Then a dog began to howl some-where in a farm-house far down the road--a
long, ag-on-ised wail-ing, as if from fear. The sound was taken up by
an-other dog, and then an-other and an-other, till, borne on the wind which
now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howl-ing began, which seemed
to come from all over the coun-try, as far as the ima-gin-a-tion could grasp
it through the gloom of the night. At the first howl the horses began to
strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them sooth-ingly, and they
quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a run-away from
sud-den fright. Then, far off in the dis-tance, from the moun-tains on each
side of us began a louder and a sharper howl-ing--that of wolves--which
af-fected both the horses and my-self in the same way--for I was minded to
jump from the calèche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged
madly, so that the driver had to use all his great strength to keep them
from bolt-ing. In a few minutes, how-ever, my own ears got ac-cus-tomed to
the sound, and the horses so far be-came quiet that the driver was able
to des-cend and to stand be-fore them. He pet-ted and soothed them, and
whispered some-thing in their ears, as I have heard of horse-tamers
do-ing, and with ex-traordin-ary ef-fect, for un-der his caresses they be-came
quite man-age-able again, though they still trembled. The driver again
took his seat, and shak-ing his reins, star-ted off at a great pace. This
time, after go-ing to the far side of the Pass, he sud-denly turned down a
nar-row road-way which ran sharply to the right.

Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over the
road-way till we passed as through a tun-nel; and again great frown-ing
rocks guarded us boldly on either side. Though we were in shel-ter, we
could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through the
rocks, and the branches of the trees crashed to-gether as we swept along.
It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall,
so that soon we and all around us were covered with a white blanket. The
keen wind still car-ried the howl-ing of the dogs, though this grew
fainter as we went on our way. The bay-ing of the wolves soun-ded nearer
and nearer, as though they were clos-ing round on us from every side. I
grew dread-fully afraid, and the horses shared my fear. The driver,
how-ever, was not in the least dis-turbed; he kept turn-ing his head to
left and right, but I could not see any-thing through the dark-ness.

Sud-denly, away on our left, I saw a faint flick-er-ing blue flame. The
driver saw it at the same mo-ment; he at once checked the horses, and,
jump-ing to the ground, dis-ap-peared into the dark-ness. I did not know
what to do, the less as the howl-ing of the wolves grew closer; but while
I wondered the driver sud-denly ap-peared again, and without a word took
his seat, and we re-sumed our jour-ney. I think I must have fallen asleep
and kept dream-ing of the in-cid-ent, for it seemed to be re-peated
end-lessly, and now look-ing back, it is like a sort of aw-ful night-mare.
Once the flame ap-peared so near the road, that even in the dark-ness
around us I could watch the driver's mo-tions. He went rap-idly to where
the blue flame arose--it must have been very faint, for it did not seem
to il-lu-mine the place around it at all--and gath-er-ing a few stones,
formed them into some device. Once there ap-peared a strange op-tical
ef-fect: when he stood between me and the flame he did not ob-struct it,
for I could see its ghostly flicker all the same. This startled me, but
as the ef-fect was only mo-ment-ary, I took it that my eyes de-ceived me
strain-ing through the dark-ness. Then for a time there were no blue
flames, and we sped on-wards through the gloom, with the howl-ing of the
wolves around us, as though they were fol-low-ing in a mov-ing circle.

At last there came a time when the driver went fur-ther afield than he
had yet gone, and dur-ing his ab-sence, the horses began to tremble worse
than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not see any cause
for it, for the howl-ing of the wolves had ceased al-to-gether; but just
then the moon, sail-ing through the black clouds, ap-peared be-hind the
jagged crest of a beet-ling, pine-clad rock, and by its light I saw
around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues,
with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hun-dred times more
ter-rible in the grim si-lence which held them than even when they howled.
For my-self, I felt a sort of para-lysis of fear. It is only when a man
feels him-self face to face with such hor-rors that he can un-der-stand
their true im-port.

All at once the wolves began to howl as though the moon-light had had
some pe-cu-liar ef-fect on them. The horses jumped about and reared, and
looked help-lessly round with eyes that rolled in a way pain-ful to see;
but the liv-ing ring of ter-ror en-com-passed them on every side; and they
had per-force to re-main within it. I called to the coach-man to come, for
it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the
ring and to aid his ap-proach. I shouted and beat the side of the
calèche, hop-ing by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as
to give him a chance of reach-ing the trap. How he came there, I know
not, but I heard his voice raised in a tone of im-per-i-ous com-mand, and
look-ing to-wards the sound, saw him stand in the road-way. As he swept his
long arms, as though brush-ing aside some im-palp-able obstacle, the wolves
fell back and back fur-ther still. Just then a heavy cloud passed across
the face of the moon, so that we were again in dark-ness.

When I could see again the driver was climb-ing into the calèche, and the
wolves had dis-ap-peared. This was all so strange and un-canny that a
dread-ful fear came upon me, and I was afraid to speak or move. The time
seemed in-ter-min-able as we swept on our way, now in al-most com-plete
dark-ness, for the rolling clouds ob-scured the moon. We kept on
as-cend-ing, with oc-ca-sional peri-ods of quick des-cent, but in the main
al-ways as-cend-ing. Sud-denly, I be-came con-scious of the fact that the
driver was in the act of pulling up the horses in the court-yard of a
vast ruined castle, from whose tall black win-dows came no ray of light,
and whose broken bat-tle-ments showed a jagged line against the moon-lit
sky.




CHAPTER II

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_con-tin-ued_


_5 May._--I must have been asleep, for cer-tainly if I had been fully
awake I must have no-ticed the ap-proach of such a re-mark-able place. In
the gloom the court-yard looked of con-sid-er-able size, and as sev-eral dark
ways led from it un-der great round arches, it per-haps seemed big-ger than
it really is. I have not yet been able to see it by day-light.

When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and held out his hand
to as-sist me to alight. Again I could not but no-tice his prodi-gious
strength. His hand ac-tu-ally seemed like a steel vice that could have
crushed mine if he had chosen. Then he took out my traps, and placed
them on the ground be-side me as I stood close to a great door, old and
stud-ded with large iron nails, and set in a pro-ject-ing door-way of
massive stone. I could see even in the dim light that the stone was
massively carved, but that the carving had been much worn by time and
weather. As I stood, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook the
reins; the horses star-ted for-ward, and trap and all dis-ap-peared down one
of the dark open-ings.

I stood in si-lence where I was, for I did not know what to do. Of bell
or knocker there was no sign; through these frown-ing walls and dark
win-dow open-ings it was not likely that my voice could pen-et-rate. The
time I waited seemed end-less, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon
me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of people?
What sort of grim ad-ven-ture was it on which I had em-barked? Was this a
cus-tom-ary in-cid-ent in the life of a so-li-citor's clerk sent out to
ex-plain the pur-chase of a Lon-don es-tate to a for-eigner? Soli-citor's
clerk! Mina would not like that. Soli-citor--for just be-fore leav-ing
Lon-don I got word that my ex-am-in-a-tion was suc-cess-ful; and I am now a
full-blown so-li-citor! I began to rub my eyes and pinch my-self to see if
I were awake. It all seemed like a hor-rible night-mare to me, and I
ex-pec-ted that I should sud-denly awake, and find my-self at home, with
the dawn strug-gling in through the win-dows, as I had now and again felt
in the morn-ing after a day of over-work. But my flesh answered the
pinch-ing test, and my eyes were not to be de-ceived. I was in-deed awake
and among the Carpath-i-ans. All I could do now was to be pa-tient, and to
wait the com-ing of the morn-ing.

Just as I had come to this con-clu-sion I heard a heavy step ap-proach-ing
be-hind the great door, and saw through the chinks the gleam of a com-ing
light. Then there was the sound of rat-tling chains and the clank-ing of
massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with the loud grat-ing noise
of long dis-use, and the great door swung back.

Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long white
mous-tache, and clad in black from head to foot, without a single speck
of col-our about him any-where. He held in his hand an an-tique sil-ver
lamp, in which the flame burned without chim-ney or globe of any kind,
throw-ing long quiv-er-ing shad-ows as it flickered in the draught of the
open door. The old man mo-tioned me in with his right hand with a courtly
ges-ture, say-ing in ex-cel-lent Eng-lish, but with a strange in-ton-a-tion:--

"Wel-come to my house! Enter freely and of your own will!" He made no
mo-tion of step-ping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his
ges-ture of wel-come had fixed him into stone. The in-stant, how-ever, that
I had stepped over the threshold, he moved im-puls-ively for-ward, and
hold-ing out his hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince,
an ef-fect which was not lessened by the fact that it seemed as cold as
ice--more like the hand of a dead than a liv-ing man. Again he said:--

"Wel-come to my house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave some-thing of the
hap-pi-ness you bring!" The strength of the hand-shake was so much akin to
that which I had no-ticed in the driver, whose face I had not seen, that
for a mo-ment I doubted if it were not the same per-son to whom I was
speak-ing; so to make sure, I said in-ter-rog-at-ively:--

"Count Drac-ula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:--

"I am Drac-ula; and I bid you wel-come, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in;
the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest." As he was
speak-ing, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and step-ping out,
took my lug-gage; he had car-ried it in be-fore I could fore-stall him. I
pro-tested but he in-sisted:--

"Nay, sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not
avail-able. Let me see to your com-fort my-self." He in-sisted on car-ry-ing
my traps along the pas-sage, and then up a great wind-ing stair, and
along an-other great pas-sage, on whose stone floor our steps rang
heav-ily. At the end of this he threw open a heavy door, and I re-joiced
to see within a well-lit room in which a table was spread for sup-per,
and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly re-plen-ished,
flamed and flared.

The Count hal-ted, put-ting down my bags, closed the door, and cross-ing
the room, opened an-other door, which led into a small oc-ta-gonal room lit
by a single lamp, and seem-ingly without a win-dow of any sort. Passing
through this, he opened an-other door, and mo-tioned me to enter. It was a
wel-come sight; for here was a great bed-room well lighted and warmed with
an-other log fire,--also ad-ded to but lately, for the top logs were
fresh--which sent a hol-low roar up the wide chim-ney. The Count him-self
left my lug-gage in-side and with-drew, say-ing, be-fore he closed the
door:--

"You will need, after your jour-ney, to re-fresh your-self by mak-ing your
toi-let. I trust you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come
into the other room, where you will find your sup-per pre-pared."

The light and warmth and the Count's cour-teous wel-come seemed to have
dis-sip-ated all my doubts and fears. Hav-ing then reached my nor-mal state,
I dis-covered that I was half fam-ished with hun-ger; so mak-ing a hasty
toi-let, I went into the other room.

I found sup-per already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the
great fire-place, lean-ing against the stone-work, made a grace-ful wave of
his hand to the table, and said:--

"I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust, ex-cuse
me that I do not join you; but I have dined already, and I do not sup."

I handed to him the sealed let-ter which Mr. Hawkins had en-trus-ted to me.
He opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charm-ing smile, he handed
it to me to read. One pas-sage of it, at least, gave me a thrill of
pleas-ure.

"I must re-gret that an at-tack of gout, from which mal-ady I am a con-stant
suf-ferer, for-bids ab-so-lutely any trav-el-ling on my part for some time to
come; but I am happy to say I can send a suf-fi-cient sub-sti-tute, one in
whom I have every pos-sible con-fid-ence. He is a young man, full of en-ergy
and tal-ent in his own way, and of a very faith-ful dis-pos-i-tion. He is
dis-creet and si-lent, and has grown into man-hood in my ser-vice. He shall
be ready to at-tend on you when you will dur-ing his stay, and shall take
your in-struc-tions in all mat-ters."

The Count him-self came for-ward and took off the cover of a dish, and I
fell to at once on an ex-cel-lent roast chicken. This, with some cheese
and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I had two glasses, was
my sup-per. Dur-ing the time I was eat-ing it the Count asked me many
ques-tions as to my jour-ney, and I told him by de-grees all I had
ex-per-i-enced.

By this time I had fin-ished my sup-per, and by my host's de-sire had drawn
up a chair by the fire and be-gun to smoke a ci-gar which he offered me,
at the same time ex-cus-ing him-self that he did not smoke. I had now an
op-por-tun-ity of ob-serving him, and found him of a very marked
physiognomy.

His face was a strong--a very strong--aquil-ine, with high bridge of the
thin nose and pe-cu-li-arly arched nos-trils; with lofty domed fore-head, and
hair grow-ing scantily round the temples but pro-fusely else-where. His
eye-brows were very massive, al-most meet-ing over the nose, and with bushy
hair that seemed to curl in its own pro-fu-sion. The mouth, so far as I
could see it un-der the heavy mous-tache, was fixed and rather
cruel-look-ing, with pe-cu-li-arly sharp white teeth; these pro-truded over
the lips, whose re-mark-able rud-di-ness showed as-ton-ish-ing vi-tal-ity in a
man of his years. For the rest, his ears were pale, and at the tops
ex-tremely poin-ted; the chin was broad and strong, and the cheeks firm
though thin. The gen-eral ef-fect was one of ex-traordin-ary pal-lor.

Hitherto I had no-ticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees
in the fire-light, and they had seemed rather white and fine; but see-ing
them now close to me, I could not but no-tice that they were rather
coarse--broad, with squat fin-gers. Strange to say, there were hairs in
the centre of the palm. The nails were long and fine, and cut to a sharp
point. As the Count leaned over me and his hands touched me, I could not
repress a shud-der. It may have been that his breath was rank, but a
hor-rible feel-ing of nausea came over me, which, do what I would, I could
not con-ceal. The Count, evid-ently no-ti-cing it, drew back; and with a
grim sort of smile, which showed more than he had yet done his
pro-tuber-ant teeth, sat him-self down again on his own side of the
fire-place. We were both si-lent for a while; and as I looked to-wards the
win-dow I saw the first dim streak of the com-ing dawn. There seemed a
strange still-ness over everything; but as I listened I heard as if from
down be-low in the val-ley the howl-ing of many wolves. The Count's eyes
gleamed, and he said:--

"Listen to them--the chil-dren of the night. What mu-sic they make!"
See-ing, I sup-pose, some ex-pres-sion in my face strange to him, he
ad-ded:--

"Ah, sir, you dwell-ers in the city can-not enter into the feel-ings of the
hunter." Then he rose and said:--

"But you must be tired. Your bed-room is all ready, and to-mor-row you
shall sleep as late as you will. I have to be away till the af-ter-noon;
so sleep well and dream well!" With a cour-teous bow, he opened for me
him-self the door to the oc-ta-gonal room, and I entered my bed-room....

I am all in a sea of won-ders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things,
which I dare not con-fess to my own soul. God keep me, if only for the
sake of those dear to me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_7 May._--It is again early morn-ing, but I have res-ted and en-joyed the
last twenty-four hours. I slept till late in the day, and awoke of my
own ac-cord. When I had dressed my-self I went into the room where we had
supped, and found a cold break-fast laid out, with cof-fee kept hot by the
pot be-ing placed on the hearth. There was a card on the table, on which
was writ-ten:--

"I have to be ab-sent for a while. Do not wait for me.--D." I set to and
en-joyed a hearty meal. When I had done, I looked for a bell, so that I
might let the ser-vants know I had fin-ished; but I could not find one.
There are cer-tainly odd de-fi-cien-cies in the house, con-sid-er-ing the
ex-traordin-ary evid-ences of wealth which are round me. The table ser-vice
is of gold, and so beau-ti-fully wrought that it must be of im-mense value.
The cur-tains and up-hol-stery of the chairs and so-fas and the hangings of
my bed are of the cost-li-est and most beau-ti-ful fab-rics, and must have
been of fab-ulous value when they were made, for they are cen-tur-ies old,
though in ex-cel-lent or-der. I saw some-thing like them in Hamp-ton Court,
but there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of
the rooms is there a mir-ror. There is not even a toi-let glass on my
table, and I had to get the little shav-ing glass from my bag be-fore I
could either shave or brush my hair. I have not yet seen a ser-vant
any-where, or heard a sound near the castle ex-cept the howl-ing of wolves.
Some time after I had fin-ished my meal--I do not know whether to call it
break-fast or din-ner, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had
it--I looked about for some-thing to read, for I did not like to go about
the castle un-til I had asked the Count's per-mis-sion. There was
ab-so-lutely noth-ing in the room, book, news-pa-per, or even writ-ing
ma-ter-i-als; so I opened an-other door in the room and found a sort of
lib-rary. The door op-pos-ite mine I tried, but found it locked.

In the lib-rary I found, to my great de-light, a vast num-ber of Eng-lish
books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and
news-pa-pers. A table in the centre was littered with Eng-lish magazines
and news-pa-pers, though none of them were of very re-cent date. The books
were of the most var-ied kind--his-tory, geo-graphy, polit-ics, polit-ical
eco-nomy, bot-any, geo-logy, law--all re-lat-ing to Eng-land and Eng-lish life
and cus-toms and man-ners. There were even such books of ref-er-ence as the
Lon-don Dir-ect-ory, the "Red" and "Blue" books, Whi-taker's Al-manac, the
Army and Navy Lists, and--it some-how gladdened my heart to see it--the
Law List.

Whilst I was look-ing at the books, the door opened, and the Count
entered. He sa-luted me in a hearty way, and hoped that I had had a good
night's rest. Then he went on:--

"I am glad you found your way in here, for I am sure there is much that
will in-terest you. These com-pan-ions"--and he laid his hand on some of
the books--"have been good friends to me, and for some years past, ever
since I had the idea of go-ing to Lon-don, have given me many, many hours
of pleas-ure. Through them I have come to know your great Eng-land; and to
know her is to love her. I long to go through the crowded streets of
your mighty Lon-don, to be in the midst of the whirl and rush of
hu-man-ity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that makes
it what it is. But alas! as yet I only know your tongue through books.
To you, my friend, I look that I know it to speak."

"But, Count," I said, "you know and speak Eng-lish thor-oughly!" He bowed
gravely.

"I thank you, my friend, for your all too-flat-ter-ing es-tim-ate, but yet I
fear that I am but a little way on the road I would travel. True, I know
the gram-mar and the words, but yet I know not how to speak them."

"Indeed," I said, "you speak ex-cel-lently."

"Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, did I move and speak in your
Lon-don, none there are who would not know me for a stranger. That is not
enough for me. Here I am noble; I am _boy-ar_; the com-mon people know me,
and I am mas-ter. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no one; men
know him not--and to know not is to care not for. I am con-tent if I am
like the rest, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his
speak-ing if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been so long
mas-ter that I would be mas-ter still--or at least that none other should
be mas-ter of me. You come to me not alone as agent of my friend Peter
Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about my new es-tate in Lon-don. You
shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our talk-ing I may
learn the Eng-lish in-ton-a-tion; and I would that you tell me when I make
er-ror, even of the smal-lest, in my speak-ing. I am sorry that I had to be
away so long to-day; but you will, I know, for-give one who has so many
im-port-ant af-fairs in hand."

Of course I said all I could about be-ing will-ing, and asked if I might
come into that room when I chose. He answered: "Yes, cer-tainly," and
ad-ded:--

"You may go any-where you wish in the castle, ex-cept where the doors are
locked, where of course you will not wish to go. There is reason that
all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes and know with
my know-ledge, you would per-haps bet-ter un-der-stand." I said I was sure of
this, and then he went on:--

"We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not Eng-land. Our ways are
not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from
what you have told me of your ex-per-i-ences already, you know some-thing of
what strange things there may be."

This led to much con-ver-sa-tion; and as it was evid-ent that he wanted to
talk, if only for talk-ing's sake, I asked him many ques-tions re-gard-ing
things that had already happened to me or come within my no-tice.
So-me-times he sheered off the sub-ject, or turned the con-ver-sa-tion by
pre-tend-ing not to un-der-stand; but gen-er-ally he answered all I asked most
frankly. Then as time went on, and I had got some-what bolder, I asked
him of some of the strange things of the pre-ced-ing night, as, for
in-stance, why the coach-man went to the places where he had seen the blue
flames. He then ex-plained to me that it was com-monly be-lieved that on a
cer-tain night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spir-its
are sup-posed to have un-checked sway--a blue flame is seen over any place
where treas-ure has been con-cealed. "That treas-ure has been hid-den," he
went on, "in the re-gion through which you came last night, there can be
but little doubt; for it was the ground fought over for cen-tur-ies by the
Wal-lachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly a foot of soil
in all this re-gion that has not been en-riched by the blood of men,
pat-ri-ots or in-vaders. In old days there were stir-ring times, when the
Aus-trian and the Hun-garian came up in hordes, and the pat-ri-ots went out
to meet them--men and wo-men, the aged and the chil-dren too--and waited
their com-ing on the rocks above the passes, that they might sweep
de-struc-tion on them with their ar-ti-fi-cial ava-lanches. When the in-vader
was tri-umphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been
sheltered in the friendly soil."

"But how," said I, "can it have re-mained so long un-dis-covered, when
there is a sure in-dex to it if men will but take the trouble to look?"
The Count smiled, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long,
sharp, can-ine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:--

"Be-cause your peas-ant is at heart a cow-ard and a fool! Those flames only
ap-pear on one night; and on that night no man of this land will, if he
can help it, stir without his doors. And, dear sir, even if he did he
would not know what to do. Why, even the peas-ant that you tell me of who
marked the place of the flame would not know where to look in day-light
even for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to
find these places again?"

"There you are right," I said. "I know no more than the dead where even
to look for them." Then we drif-ted into other mat-ters.

"Come," he said at last, "tell me of Lon-don and of the house which you
have pro-cured for me." With an apo-logy for my re-miss-ness, I went into my
own room to get the pa-pers from my bag. Whilst I was pla-cing them in
or-der I heard a rat-tling of china and sil-ver in the next room, and as I
passed through, no-ticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp
lit, for it was by this time deep into the dark. The lamps were also lit
in the study or lib-rary, and I found the Count ly-ing on the sofa,
read-ing, of all things in the world, an Eng-lish Brad-shaw's Guide. When I
came in he cleared the books and pa-pers from the table; and with him I
went into plans and deeds and fig-ures of all sorts. He was in-ter-ested in
everything, and asked me a myriad ques-tions about the place and its
sur-round-ings. He clearly had stud-ied be-fore-hand all he could get on the
sub-ject of the neigh-bour-hood, for he evid-ently at the end knew very much
more than I did. When I re-marked this, he answered:--

"Well, but, my friend, is it not need-ful that I should? When I go there
I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, par-don me, I
fall into my coun-try's habit of put-ting your pat-ronymic first--my friend
Jonathan Harker will not be by my side to cor-rect and aid me. He will be
in Exeter, miles away, prob-ably work-ing at pa-pers of the law with my
other friend, Peter Hawkins. So!"

We went thor-oughly into the busi-ness of the pur-chase of the es-tate at
Purfleet. When I had told him the facts and got his sig-na-ture to the
ne-ces-sary pa-pers, and had writ-ten a let-ter with them ready to post to
Mr. Hawkins, he began to ask me how I had come across so suit-able a
place. I read to him the notes which I had made at the time, and which I
in-scribe here:--

"At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to
be re-quired, and where was dis-played a dilap-id-ated no-tice that the place
was for sale. It is sur-roun-ded by a high wall, of an-cient struc-ture,
built of heavy stones, and has not been re-paired for a large num-ber of
years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with
rust.

"The es-tate is called Car-fax, no doubt a cor-rup-tion of the old _Quatre
Face_, as the house is four-sided, agree-ing with the car-dinal points of
the com-pass. It con-tains in all some twenty acres, quite sur-roun-ded by
the solid stone wall above men-tioned. There are many trees on it, which
make it in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-look-ing pond or
small lake, evid-ently fed by some springs, as the wa-ter is clear and
flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is very large and of all
peri-ods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone
im-mensely thick, with only a few win-dows high up and heav-ily barred with
iron. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old chapel or
church. I could not enter it, as I had not the key of the door lead-ing
to it from the house, but I have taken with my kodak views of it from
vari-ous points. The house has been ad-ded to, but in a very strag-gling
way, and I can only guess at the amount of ground it cov-ers, which must
be very great. There are but few houses close at hand, one be-ing a very
large house only re-cently ad-ded to and formed into a private lun-atic
asylum. It is not, how-ever, vis-ible from the grounds."

When I had fin-ished, he said:--

"I am glad that it is old and big. I my-self am of an old fam-ily, and to
live in a new house would kill me. A house can-not be made hab-it-able in a
day; and, after all, how few days go to make up a cen-tury. I re-joice
also that there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love
not to think that our bones may lie amongst the com-mon dead. I seek not
gaiety nor mirth, not the bright vo-lup-tu-ous-ness of much sun-shine and
spark-ling wa-ters which please the young and gay. I am no longer young;
and my heart, through weary years of mourn-ing over the dead, is not
at-tuned to mirth. Moreover, the walls of my castle are broken; the
shad-ows are many, and the wind breathes cold through the broken
bat-tle-ments and case-ments. I love the shade and the shadow, and would
be alone with my thoughts when I may." Some-how his words and his look
did not seem to ac-cord, or else it was that his cast of face made his
smile look ma-lig-nant and sat-urnine.

Presently, with an ex-cuse, he left me, ask-ing me to put all my pa-pers
to-gether. He was some little time away, and I began to look at some of
the books around me. One was an at-las, which I found opened nat-ur-ally at
Eng-land, as if that map had been much used. On look-ing at it I found in
cer-tain places little rings marked, and on ex-amin-ing these I no-ticed
that one was near Lon-don on the east side, mani-festly where his new
es-tate was situ-ated; the other two were Exeter, and Whitby on the
York-shire coast.

It was the bet-ter part of an hour when the Count re-turned. "Aha!" he
said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not work al-ways. Come; I
am in-formed that your sup-per is ready." He took my arm, and we went into
the next room, where I found an ex-cel-lent sup-per ready on the table. The
Count again ex-cused him-self, as he had dined out on his be-ing away from
home. But he sat as on the pre-vi-ous night, and chat-ted whilst I ate.
After sup-per I smoked, as on the last even-ing, and the Count stayed with
me, chat-ting and ask-ing ques-tions on every con-ceiv-able sub-ject, hour
after hour. I felt that it was get-ting very late in-deed, but I did not
say any-thing, for I felt un-der ob-lig-a-tion to meet my host's wishes in
every way. I was not sleepy, as the long sleep yes-ter-day had for-ti-fied
me; but I could not help ex-per-i-en-cing that chill which comes over one at
the com-ing of the dawn, which is like, in its way, the turn of the tide.
They say that people who are near death die gen-er-ally at the change to
the dawn or at the turn of the tide; any one who has when tired, and
tied as it were to his post, ex-per-i-enced this change in the at-mo-sphere
can well be-lieve it. All at once we heard the crow of a cock com-ing up
with preter-nat-ural shrill-ness through the clear morn-ing air; Count
Drac-ula, jump-ing to his feet, said:--

"Why, there is the morn-ing again! How re-miss I am to let you stay up so
long. You must make your con-ver-sa-tion re-gard-ing my dear new coun-try of
Eng-land less in-ter-est-ing, so that I may not for-get how time flies by
us," and, with a courtly bow, he quickly left me.

I went into my own room and drew the cur-tains, but there was little to
no-tice; my win-dow opened into the court-yard, all I could see was the
warm grey of quick-en-ing sky. So I pulled the cur-tains again, and have
writ-ten of this day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 May._--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was get-ting too
dif-fuse; but now I am glad that I went into de-tail from the first, for
there is some-thing so strange about this place and all in it that I
can-not but feel un-easy. I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had
never come. It may be that this strange night-ex-ist-ence is telling on
me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to I
could bear it, but there is no one. I have only the Count to speak with,
and he!--I fear I am my-self the only liv-ing soul within the place. Let
me be pro-saic so far as facts can be; it will help me to bear up, and
ima-gin-a-tion must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say
at once how I stand--or seem to.

I only slept a few hours when I went to bed, and feel-ing that I could
not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shav-ing glass by the win-dow,
and was just be-gin-ning to shave. Sud-denly I felt a hand on my shoulder,
and heard the Count's voice say-ing to me, "Good-morn-ing." I star-ted, for
it amazed me that I had not seen him, since the re-flec-tion of the glass
covered the whole room be-hind me. In start-ing I had cut my-self slightly,
but did not no-tice it at the mo-ment. Hav-ing answered the Count's
sa-luta-tion, I turned to the glass again to see how I had been mis-taken.
This time there could be no er-ror, for the man was close to me, and I
could see him over my shoulder. But there was no re-flec-tion of him in
the mir-ror! The whole room be-hind me was dis-played; but there was no
sign of a man in it, ex-cept my-self. This was start-ling, and, com-ing on
the top of so many strange things, was be-gin-ning to in-crease that vague
feel-ing of un-eas-i-ness which I al-ways have when the Count is near; but at
the in-stant I saw that the cut had bled a little, and the blood was
trick-ling over my chin. I laid down the razor, turn-ing as I did so half
round to look for some stick-ing plaster. When the Count saw my face, his
eyes blazed with a sort of de-moniac fury, and he sud-denly made a grab at
my throat. I drew away, and his hand touched the string of beads which
held the cru-ci-fix. It made an in-stant change in him, for the fury passed
so quickly that I could hardly be-lieve that it was ever there.

"Take care," he said, "take care how you cut your-self. It is more
dan-ger-ous than you think in this coun-try." Then seiz-ing the shav-ing
glass, he went on: "And this is the wretched thing that has done the
mis-chief. It is a foul bauble of man's van-ity. Away with it!" and
open-ing the heavy win-dow with one wrench of his ter-rible hand, he flung
out the glass, which was shattered into a thou-sand pieces on the stones
of the court-yard far be-low. Then he with-drew without a word. It is very
an-noy-ing, for I do not see how I am to shave, un-less in my watch-case or
the bot-tom of the shav-ing-pot, which is for-tu-nately of metal.

When I went into the din-ing-room, break-fast was pre-pared; but I could
not find the Count any-where. So I break-fas-ted alone. It is strange that
as yet I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a very
pe-cu-liar man! After break-fast I did a little ex-plor-ing in the castle. I
went out on the stairs, and found a room look-ing to-wards the South. The
view was mag-ni-fi-cent, and from where I stood there was every op-por-tun-ity
of see-ing it. The castle is on the very edge of a ter-rible pre-cip-ice. A
stone fall-ing from the win-dow would fall a thou-sand feet without
touch-ing any-thing! As far as the eye can reach is a sea of green tree
tops, with oc-ca-sion-ally a deep rift where there is a chasm. Here and
there are sil-ver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through
the forests.

But I am not in heart to de-scribe beauty, for when I had seen the view I
ex-plored fur-ther; doors, doors, doors every-where, and all locked and
bolted. In no place save from the win-dows in the castle walls is there
an avail-able exit.

The castle is a ver-it-able prison, and I am a pris-oner!




CHAPTER III

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_con-tin-ued_


When I found that I was a pris-oner a sort of wild feel-ing came over me.
I rushed up and down the stairs, try-ing every door and peer-ing out of
every win-dow I could find; but after a little the con-vic-tion of my
help-less-ness over-powered all other feel-ings. When I look back after a
few hours I think I must have been mad for the time, for I be-haved much
as a rat does in a trap. When, how-ever, the con-vic-tion had come to me
that I was help-less I sat down quietly--as quietly as I have ever done
any-thing in my life--and began to think over what was best to be done. I
am think-ing still, and as yet have come to no def-in-ite con-clu-sion. Of
one thing only am I cer-tain; that it is no use mak-ing my ideas known to
the Count. He knows well that I am im-prisoned; and as he has done it
him-self, and has doubt-less his own motives for it, he would only de-ceive
me if I trus-ted him fully with the facts. So far as I can see, my only
plan will be to keep my know-ledge and my fears to my-self, and my eyes
open. I am, I know, either be-ing de-ceived, like a baby, by my own fears,
or else I am in des-per-ate straits; and if the lat-ter be so, I need, and
shall need, all my brains to get through.

I had hardly come to this con-clu-sion when I heard the great door be-low
shut, and knew that the Count had re-turned. He did not come at once into
the lib-rary, so I went cau-tiously to my own room and found him mak-ing
the bed. This was odd, but only con-firmed what I had all along
thought--that there were no ser-vants in the house. When later I saw him
through the chink of the hinges of the door lay-ing the table in the
din-ing-room, I was as-sured of it; for if he does him-self all these
menial of-fices, surely it is proof that there is no one else to do them.
This gave me a fright, for if there is no one else in the castle, it
must have been the Count him-self who was the driver of the coach that
brought me here. This is a ter-rible thought; for if so, what does it
mean that he could con-trol the wolves, as he did, by only hold-ing up his
hand in si-lence. How was it that all the people at Bis-tritz and on the
coach had some ter-rible fear for me? What meant the giv-ing of the
cru-ci-fix, of the gar-lic, of the wild rose, of the moun-tain ash? Bless
that good, good wo-man who hung the cru-ci-fix round my neck! for it is a
com-fort and a strength to me whenever I touch it. It is odd that a thing
which I have been taught to re-gard with dis-fa-vour and as id-ol-at-rous
should in a time of loneli-ness and trouble be of help. Is it that there
is some-thing in the es-sence of the thing it-self, or that it is a me-dium,
a tan-gible help, in con-vey-ing memor-ies of sym-pathy and com-fort? Some
time, if it may be, I must ex-am-ine this mat-ter and try to make up my
mind about it. In the mean-time I must find out all I can about Count
Drac-ula, as it may help me to un-der-stand. To-night he may talk of
him-self, if I turn the con-ver-sa-tion that way. I must be very care-ful,
how-ever, not to awake his sus-pi-cion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mid-night._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him a few
ques-tions on Transylvania his-tory, and he warmed up to the sub-ject
won-der-fully. In his speak-ing of things and people, and es-pe-cially of
battles, he spoke as if he had been present at them all. This he
af-ter-wards ex-plained by say-ing that to a _boy-ar_ the pride of his house
and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their
fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house he al-ways said "we,"
and spoke al-most in the plural, like a king speak-ing. I wish I could put
down all he said ex-actly as he said it, for to me it was most
fas-cin-at-ing. It seemed to have in it a whole his-tory of the coun-try. He
grew ex-cited as he spoke, and walked about the room pulling his great
white mous-tache and grasp-ing any-thing on which he laid his hands as
though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I
shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of
his race:--

"We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood
of many brave races who fought as the lion fights, for lord-ship. Here,
in the whirl-pool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from
Ice-land the fight-ing spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their
Berserkers dis-played to such fell in-tent on the sea-boards of Europe, ay,
and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the
were-wolves them-selves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found
the Huns, whose war-like fury had swept the earth like a liv-ing flame,
till the dy-ing peoples held that in their veins ran the blood of those
old witches, who, ex-pelled from Scythia had mated with the dev-ils in the
desert. Fools, fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great as
At-tila, whose blood is in these veins?" He held up his arms. "Is it a
won-der that we were a con-quer-ing race; that we were proud; that when the
Mag-yar, the Lom-bard, the Avar, the Bul-gar, or the Turk poured his
thou-sands on our fron-ti-ers, we drove them back? Is it strange that when
Arpad and his le-gions swept through the Hun-garian fath-er-land he found us
here when he reached the fron-tier; that the Hon-foglalas was com-pleted
there? And when the Hun-garian flood swept east-ward, the Szekelys were
claimed as kindred by the vic-tori-ous Mag-yars, and to us for cen-tur-ies
was trus-ted the guard-ing of the fron-tier of Tur-key-land; ay, and more
than that, end-less duty of the fron-tier guard, for, as the Turks say,
'wa-ter sleeps, and en-emy is sleep-less.' Who more gladly than we
through-out the Four Na-tions re-ceived the 'bloody sword,' or at its
war-like call flocked quicker to the stand-ard of the King? When was
re-deemed that great shame of my na-tion, the shame of Cas-sova, when the
flags of the Wal-lach and the Mag-yar went down be-neath the Cres-cent? Who
was it but one of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube and beat
the Turk on his own ground? This was a Drac-ula in-deed! Woe was it that
his own un-worthy brother, when he had fallen, sold his people to the
Turk and brought the shame of slavery on them! Was it not this Drac-ula,
in-deed, who in-spired that other of his race who in a later age again and
again brought his forces over the great river into Tur-key-land; who,
when he was beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had
to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were be-ing
slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ul-ti-mately tri-umph! They
said that he thought only of him-self. Bah! what good are peas-ants
without a leader? Where ends the war without a brain and heart to
con-duct it? Again, when, after the battle of Mo-hács, we threw off the
Hun-garian yoke, we of the Drac-ula blood were amongst their lead-ers, for
our spirit would not brook that we were not free. Ah, young sir, the
Szekelys--and the Drac-ula as their heart's blood, their brains, and
their swords--can boast a re-cord that mush-room growths like the
Haps-burgs and the Ro-man-offs can never reach. The war-like days are over.
Blood is too pre-cious a thing in these days of dis-hon-our-able peace; and
the glor-ies of the great races are as a tale that is told."

It was by this time close on morn-ing, and we went to bed. (_Mem._, this
di-ary seems hor-ribly like the be-gin-ning of the "Ar-a-bian Nights," for
everything has to break off at cock-crow--or like the ghost of Ham-let's
father.)

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 May._--Let me be-gin with facts--bare, mea-gre facts, veri-fied by
books and fig-ures, and of which there can be no doubt. I must not
con-fuse them with ex-per-i-ences which will have to rest on my own
ob-ser-va-tion, or my memory of them. Last even-ing when the Count came from
his room he began by ask-ing me ques-tions on legal mat-ters and on the
do-ing of cer-tain kinds of busi-ness. I had spent the day wear-ily over
books, and, simply to keep my mind oc-cu-pied, went over some of the
mat-ters I had been ex-amined in at Lin-coln's Inn. There was a cer-tain
method in the Count's in-quir-ies, so I shall try to put them down in
se-quence; the know-ledge may some-how or some time be use-ful to me.

First, he asked if a man in Eng-land might have two so-li-cit-ors or more. I
told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would not be
wise to have more than one so-li-citor en-gaged in one trans-ac-tion, as only
one could act at a time, and that to change would be cer-tain to mil-it-ate
against his in-terest. He seemed thor-oughly to un-der-stand, and went on to
ask if there would be any prac-tical dif-fi-culty in hav-ing one man to
at-tend, say, to bank-ing, and an-other to look after ship-ping, in case
local help were needed in a place far from the home of the bank-ing
so-li-citor. I asked him to ex-plain more fully, so that I might not by any
chance mis-lead him, so he said:--

"I shall il-lus-trate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from un-der
the shadow of your beau-ti-ful cathed-ral at Exeter, which is far from
Lon-don, buys for me through your good self my place at Lon-don. Good! Now
here let me say frankly, lest you should think it strange that I have
sought the ser-vices of one so far off from Lon-don in-stead of some one
res-id-ent there, that my motive was that no local in-terest might be
served save my wish only; and as one of Lon-don res-id-ence might, per-haps,
have some pur-pose of him-self or friend to serve, I went thus afield to
seek my agent, whose la-bours should be only to my in-terest. Now, sup-pose
I, who have much of af-fairs, wish to ship goods, say, to New-castle, or
Durham, or Har-wich, or Dover, might it not be that it could with more
ease be done by con-sign-ing to one in these ports?" I answered that
cer-tainly it would be most easy, but that we so-li-cit-ors had a sys-tem of
agency one for the other, so that local work could be done loc-ally on
in-struc-tion from any so-li-citor, so that the cli-ent, simply pla-cing
him-self in the hands of one man, could have his wishes car-ried out by
him without fur-ther trouble.

"But," said he, "I could be at liberty to dir-ect my-self. Is it not so?"

"Of course," I replied; and "such is of-ten done by men of busi-ness, who
do not like the whole of their af-fairs to be known by any one per-son."

"Good!" he said, and then went on to ask about the means of mak-ing
con-sign-ments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of
dif-fi-culties which might arise, but by fore-thought could be guarded
against. I ex-plained all these things to him to the best of my abil-ity,
and he cer-tainly left me un-der the im-pres-sion that he would have made a
won-der-ful so-li-citor, for there was noth-ing that he did not think of or
fore-see. For a man who was never in the coun-try, and who did not
evid-ently do much in the way of busi-ness, his know-ledge and acu-men were
won-der-ful. When he had sat-is-fied him-self on these points of which he had
spoken, and I had veri-fied all as well as I could by the books
avail-able, he sud-denly stood up and said:--

"Have you writ-ten since your first let-ter to our friend Mr. Peter
Hawkins, or to any other?" It was with some bit-ter-ness in my heart that
I answered that I had not, that as yet I had not seen any op-por-tun-ity of
send-ing let-ters to any-body.

"Then write now, my young friend," he said, lay-ing a heavy hand on my
shoulder: "write to our friend and to any other; and say, if it will
please you, that you shall stay with me un-til a month from now."

"Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart grew cold at the
thought.

"I de-sire it much; nay, I will take no re-fusal. When your mas-ter,
em-ployer, what you will, en-gaged that someone should come on his be-half,
it was un-der-stood that my needs only were to be con-sul-ted. I have not
stin-ted. Is it not so?"

What could I do but bow ac-cept-ance? It was Mr. Hawkins's in-terest, not
mine, and I had to think of him, not my-self; and be-sides, while Count
Drac-ula was speak-ing, there was that in his eyes and in his bear-ing
which made me re-mem-ber that I was a pris-oner, and that if I wished it I
could have no choice. The Count saw his vic-tory in my bow, and his
mas-tery in the trouble of my face, for he began at once to use them, but
in his own smooth, res-ist-less way:--

"I pray you, my good young friend, that you will not dis-course of things
other than busi-ness in your let-ters. It will doubt-less please your
friends to know that you are well, and that you look for-ward to get-ting
home to them. Is it not so?" As he spoke he handed me three sheets of
note-pa-per and three en-vel-opes. They were all of the thin-nest for-eign
post, and look-ing at them, then at him, and no-ti-cing his quiet smile,
with the sharp, can-ine teeth ly-ing over the red un-der-lip, I un-der-stood
as well as if he had spoken that I should be care-ful what I wrote, for
he would be able to read it. So I de-term-ined to write only formal notes
now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina, for
to her I could write in short-hand, which would puzzle the Count, if he
did see it. When I had writ-ten my two let-ters I sat quiet, read-ing a
book whilst the Count wrote sev-eral notes, re-fer-ring as he wrote them to
some books on his table. Then he took up my two and placed them with his
own, and put by his writ-ing ma-ter-i-als, after which, the in-stant the door
had closed be-hind him, I leaned over and looked at the let-ters, which
were face down on the table. I felt no com-punc-tion in do-ing so, for
un-der the cir-cum-stances I felt that I should pro-tect my-self in every way
I could.

One of the let-ters was dir-ec-ted to Samuel F. Bil-ling-ton, No. 7, The
Cres-cent, Whitby, an-other to Herr Leut-ner, Varna; the third was to
Coutts & Co., Lon-don, and the fourth to Her-ren Klop-stock & Billreuth,
bankers, Buda-Pesth. The second and fourth were un-sealed. I was just
about to look at them when I saw the door-handle move. I sank back in my
seat, hav-ing just had time to re-place the let-ters as they had been and
to re-sume my book be-fore the Count, hold-ing still an-other let-ter in his
hand, entered the room. He took up the let-ters on the table and stamped
them care-fully, and then turn-ing to me, said:--

"I trust you will for-give me, but I have much work to do in private this
even-ing. You will, I hope, find all things as you wish." At the door he
turned, and after a mo-ment's pause said:--

"Let me ad-vise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all
ser-i-ous-ness, that should you leave these rooms you will not by any
chance go to sleep in any other part of the castle. It is old, and has
many memor-ies, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep un-wisely. Be
warned! Should sleep now or ever over-come you, or be like to do, then
haste to your own cham-ber or to these rooms, for your rest will then be
safe. But if you be not care-ful in this re-spect, then"--He fin-ished his
speech in a grue-some way, for he mo-tioned with his hands as if he were
wash-ing them. I quite un-der-stood; my only doubt was as to whether any
dream could be more ter-rible than the un-nat-ural, hor-rible net of gloom
and mys-tery which seemed clos-ing around me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I en-dorse the last words writ-ten, but this time there is no
doubt in ques-tion. I shall not fear to sleep in any place where he is
not. I have placed the cru-ci-fix over the head of my bed--I ima-gine that
my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall re-main.

When he left me I went to my room. After a little while, not hear-ing any
sound, I came out and went up the stone stair to where I could look out
to-wards the South. There was some sense of free-dom in the vast ex-panse,
in-ac-cess-ible though it was to me, as com-pared with the nar-row dark-ness
of the court-yard. Look-ing out on this, I felt that I was in-deed in
prison, and I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of
the night. I am be-gin-ning to feel this noc-turnal ex-ist-ence tell on me.
It is des-troy-ing my nerve. I start at my own shadow, and am full of all
sorts of hor-rible ima-gin-ings. God knows that there is ground for my
ter-rible fear in this ac-cursed place! I looked out over the beau-ti-ful
ex-panse, bathed in soft yel-low moon-light till it was al-most as light as
day. In the soft light the dis-tant hills be-came melted, and the shad-ows
in the val-leys and gorges of vel-vety black-ness. The mere beauty seemed
to cheer me; there was peace and com-fort in every breath I drew. As I
leaned from the win-dow my eye was caught by some-thing mov-ing a storey
be-low me, and some-what to my left, where I ima-gined, from the or-der of
the rooms, that the win-dows of the Count's own room would look out. The
win-dow at which I stood was tall and deep, stone-mul-lioned, and though
weather-worn, was still com-plete; but it was evid-ently many a day since
the case had been there. I drew back be-hind the stone-work, and looked
care-fully out.

What I saw was the Count's head com-ing out from the win-dow. I did not
see the face, but I knew the man by the neck and the move-ment of his
back and arms. In any case I could not mis-take the hands which I had had
so many op-por-tun-it-ies of study-ing. I was at first in-ter-ested and
some-what amused, for it is won-der-ful how small a mat-ter will in-terest
and amuse a man when he is a pris-oner. But my very feel-ings changed to
re-pul-sion and ter-ror when I saw the whole man slowly emerge from the
win-dow and be-gin to crawl down the castle wall over that dread-ful abyss,
_face down_ with his cloak spread-ing out around him like great wings. At
first I could not be-lieve my eyes. I thought it was some trick of the
moon-light, some weird ef-fect of shadow; but I kept look-ing, and it could
be no de-lu-sion. I saw the fin-gers and toes grasp the corners of the
stones, worn clear of the mor-tar by the stress of years, and by thus
us-ing every pro-jec-tion and in-equal-ity move down-wards with con-sid-er-able
speed, just as a liz-ard moves along a wall.

What man-ner of man is this, or what man-ner of creature is it in the
semb-lance of man? I feel the dread of this hor-rible place over-power-ing
me; I am in fear--in aw-ful fear--and there is no es-cape for me; I am
en-com-passed about with ter-rors that I dare not think of....

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 May._--Once more have I seen the Count go out in his liz-ard fash-ion.
He moved down-wards in a side-long way, some hun-dred feet down, and a good
deal to the left. He van-ished into some hole or win-dow. When his head
had dis-ap-peared, I leaned out to try and see more, but without
avail--the dis-tance was too great to al-low a proper angle of sight. I
knew he had left the castle now, and thought to use the op-por-tun-ity to
ex-plore more than I had dared to do as yet. I went back to the room, and
tak-ing a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked, as I had
ex-pec-ted, and the locks were com-par-at-ively new; but I went down the
stone stairs to the hall where I had entered ori-gin-ally. I found I could
pull back the bolts eas-ily enough and un-hook the great chains; but the
door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in the Count's
room; I must watch should his door be un-locked, so that I may get it and
es-cape. I went on to make a thor-ough ex-am-in-a-tion of the vari-ous stairs
and pas-sages, and to try the doors that opened from them. One or two
small rooms near the hall were open, but there was noth-ing to see in
them ex-cept old fur-niture, dusty with age and moth-eaten. At last,
how-ever, I found one door at the top of the stair-way which, though it
seemed to be locked, gave a little un-der pres-sure. I tried it harder,
and found that it was not really locked, but that the res-ist-ance came
from the fact that the hinges had fallen some-what, and the heavy door
res-ted on the floor. Here was an op-por-tun-ity which I might not have
again, so I ex-er-ted my-self, and with many ef-forts forced it back so that
I could enter. I was now in a wing of the castle fur-ther to the right
than the rooms I knew and a storey lower down. From the win-dows I could
see that the suite of rooms lay along to the south of the castle, the
win-dows of the end room look-ing out both west and south. On the lat-ter
side, as well as to the former, there was a great pre-cip-ice. The castle
was built on the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was
quite im-preg-nable, and great win-dows were placed here where sling, or
bow, or cul-verin could not reach, and con-sequently light and com-fort,
im-possible to a po-s-i-tion which had to be guarded, were se-cured. To the
west was a great val-ley, and then, rising far away, great jagged
moun-tain fast-nesses, rising peak on peak, the sheer rock stud-ded with
moun-tain ash and thorn, whose roots clung in cracks and crevices and
cran-nies of the stone. This was evid-ently the por-tion of the castle
oc-cu-pied by the ladies in by-gone days, for the fur-niture had more air of
com-fort than any I had seen. The win-dows were cur-tain-less, and the
yel-low moon-light, flood-ing in through the dia-mond panes, en-abled one to
see even col-ours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over
all and dis-guised in some meas-ure the rav-ages of time and the moth. My
lamp seemed to be of little ef-fect in the bril-liant moon-light, but I was
glad to have it with me, for there was a dread loneli-ness in the place
which chilled my heart and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was bet-ter
than liv-ing alone in the rooms which I had come to hate from the
pres-ence of the Count, and after try-ing a little to school my nerves, I
found a soft quiet-ude come over me. Here I am, sit-ting at a little oak
table where in old times pos-sibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much
thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-let-ter, and writ-ing in my
di-ary in short-hand all that has happened since I closed it last. It is
nine-teenth cen-tury up-to-date with a ven-geance. And yet, un-less my
senses de-ceive me, the old cen-tur-ies had, and have, powers of their own
which mere "mod-ern-ity" can-not kill.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later: the Morn-ing of 16 May._--God pre-serve my san-ity, for to this I
am re-duced. Safety and the as-sur-ance of safety are things of the past.
Whilst I live on here there is but one thing to hope for, that I may not
go mad, if, in-deed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it
is mad-den-ing to think that of all the foul things that lurk in this
hate-ful place the Count is the least dread-ful to me; that to him alone I
can look for safety, even though this be only whilst I can serve his
pur-pose. Great God! mer-ci-ful God! Let me be calm, for out of that way
lies mad-ness in-deed. I be-gin to get new lights on cer-tain things which
have puzzled me. Up to now I never quite knew what Shakespeare meant
when he made Ham-let say:--

    "My tab-lets! quick, my tab-lets!
    'Tis meet that I put it down," etc.,

for now, feel-ing as though my own brain were un-hinged or as if the shock
had come which must end in its un-do-ing, I turn to my di-ary for re-pose.
The habit of en-ter-ing ac-cur-ately must help to soothe me.

The Count's mys-ter-i-ous warn-ing frightened me at the time; it fright-ens
me more now when I think of it, for in fu-ture he has a fear-ful hold upon
me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say!

When I had writ-ten in my di-ary and had for-tu-nately re-placed the book and
pen in my pocket I felt sleepy. The Count's warn-ing came into my mind,
but I took a pleas-ure in dis-obey-ing it. The sense of sleep was upon me,
and with it the ob-stin-acy which sleep brings as out-rider. The soft
moon-light soothed, and the wide ex-panse without gave a sense of free-dom
which re-freshed me. I de-term-ined not to re-turn to-night to the
gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat
and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for
their men-folk away in the midst of re-morse-less wars. I drew a great
couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I lay, I could look
at the lovely view to east and south, and un-think-ing of and un-car-ing for
the dust, com-posed my-self for sleep. I sup-pose I must have fallen
asleep; I hope so, but I fear, for all that fol-lowed was start-lingly
real--so real that now sit-ting here in the broad, full sun-light of the
morn-ing, I can-not in the least be-lieve that it was all sleep.

I was not alone. The room was the same, un-changed in any way since I
came into it; I could see along the floor, in the bril-liant moon-light,
my own foot-steps marked where I had dis-turbed the long ac-cu-mu-la-tion of
dust. In the moon-light op-pos-ite me were three young wo-men, ladies by
their dress and man-ner. I thought at the time that I must be dream-ing
when I saw them, for, though the moon-light was be-hind them, they threw
no shadow on the floor. They came close to me, and looked at me for some
time, and then whispered to-gether. Two were dark, and had high aquil-ine
noses, like the Count, and great dark, pier-cing eyes that seemed to be
al-most red when con-tras-ted with the pale yel-low moon. The other was
fair, as fair as can be, with great wavy masses of golden hair and eyes
like pale sap-phires. I seemed some-how to know her face, and to know it
in con-nec-tion with some dreamy fear, but I could not re-col-lect at the
mo-ment how or where. All three had bril-liant white teeth that shone like
pearls against the ruby of their vo-lup-tu-ous lips. There was some-thing
about them that made me un-easy, some long-ing and at the same time some
deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burn-ing de-sire that they would
kiss me with those red lips. It is not good to note this down, lest some
day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is the truth.
They whispered to-gether, and then they all three laughed--such a
sil-very, mu-sical laugh, but as hard as though the sound never could have
come through the soft-ness of hu-man lips. It was like the in-tol-er-able,
tingling sweet-ness of wa-ter-glasses when played on by a cun-ning hand.
The fair girl shook her head coquet-tishly, and the other two urged her
on. One said:--

"Go on! You are first, and we shall fol-low; yours is the right to
be-gin." The other ad-ded:--

"He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet,
look-ing out un-der my eye-lashes in an agony of de-light-ful an-ti-cip-a-tion.
The fair girl ad-vanced and bent over me till I could feel the move-ment
of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent
the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bit-ter
un-der-ly-ing the sweet, a bit-ter of-fens-ive-ness, as one smells in blood.

I was afraid to raise my eye-lids, but looked out and saw per-fectly un-der
the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over me, simply
gloat-ing. There was a de-lib-er-ate vo-lup-tu-ous-ness which was both thrill-ing
and re-puls-ive, and as she arched her neck she ac-tu-ally licked her lips
like an an-imal, till I could see in the moon-light the mois-ture shin-ing
on the scar-let lips and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp
teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips went be-low the range of
my mouth and chin and seemed about to fasten on my throat. Then she
paused, and I could hear the churn-ing sound of her tongue as it licked
her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the
skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that
is to tickle it ap-proaches nearer--nearer. I could feel the soft,
shiv-er-ing touch of the lips on the su-per-sens-it-ive skin of my throat,
and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touch-ing and paus-ing there.
I closed my eyes in a lan-guor-ous ec-stasy and waited--waited with beat-ing
heart.

But at that in-stant, an-other sen-sa-tion swept through me as quick as
light-ning. I was con-scious of the pres-ence of the Count, and of his
be-ing as if lapped in a storm of fury. As my eyes opened in-vol-un-tar-ily I
saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the fair wo-man and with
gi-ant's power draw it back, the blue eyes trans-formed with fury, the
white teeth champ-ing with rage, and the fair cheeks blaz-ing red with
pas-sion. But the Count! Never did I ima-gine such wrath and fury, even to
the demons of the pit. His eyes were pos-it-ively blaz-ing. The red light
in them was lurid, as if the flames of hell-fire blazed be-hind them. His
face was deathly pale, and the lines of it were hard like drawn wires;
the thick eye-brows that met over the nose now seemed like a heav-ing bar
of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm, he hurled the wo-man
from him, and then mo-tioned to the oth-ers, as though he were beat-ing
them back; it was the same im-per-i-ous ges-ture that I had seen used to the
wolves. In a voice which, though low and al-most in a whis-per seemed to
cut through the air and then ring round the room he said:--

"How dare you touch him, any of you? How dare you cast eyes on him when
I had for-bid-den it? Back, I tell you all! This man be-longs to me! Be-ware
how you meddle with him, or you'll have to deal with me." The fair girl,
with a laugh of rib-ald coquetry, turned to an-swer him:--

"You your-self never loved; you never love!" On this the other wo-men
joined, and such a mirth-less, hard, soul-less laughter rang through the
room that it al-most made me faint to hear; it seemed like the pleas-ure
of fiends. Then the Count turned, after look-ing at my face at-tent-ively,
and said in a soft whis-per:--

"Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it
not so? Well, now I prom-ise you that when I am done with him you shall
kiss him at your will. Now go! go! I must awaken him, for there is work
to be done."

"Are we to have noth-ing to-night?" said one of them, with a low laugh,
as she poin-ted to the bag which he had thrown upon the floor, and which
moved as though there were some liv-ing thing within it. For an-swer he
nod-ded his head. One of the wo-men jumped for-ward and opened it. If my
ears did not de-ceive me there was a gasp and a low wail, as of a
half-smothered child. The wo-men closed round, whilst I was aghast with
hor-ror; but as I looked they dis-ap-peared, and with them the dread-ful
bag. There was no door near them, and they could not have passed me
without my no-ti-cing. They simply seemed to fade into the rays of the
moon-light and pass out through the win-dow, for I could see out-side the
dim, shad-owy forms for a mo-ment be-fore they en-tirely faded away.

Then the hor-ror over-came me, and I sank down un-con-scious.




CHAPTER IV

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_con-tin-ued_


I awoke in my own bed. If it be that I had not dreamt, the Count must
have car-ried me here. I tried to sat-isfy my-self on the sub-ject, but
could not ar-rive at any un-ques-tion-able res-ult. To be sure, there were
cer-tain small evid-ences, such as that my clothes were fol-ded and laid by
in a man-ner which was not my habit. My watch was still un-wound, and I am
rig-or-ously ac-cus-tomed to wind it the last thing be-fore go-ing to bed, and
many such de-tails. But these things are no proof, for they may have been
evid-ences that my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or
an-other, I had cer-tainly been much up-set. I must watch for proof. Of one
thing I am glad: if it was that the Count car-ried me here and un-dressed
me, he must have been hur-ried in his task, for my pock-ets are in-tact. I
am sure this di-ary would have been a mys-tery to him which he would not
have brooked. He would have taken or des-troyed it. As I look round this
room, al-though it has been to me so full of fear, it is now a sort of
sanc-tu-ary, for noth-ing can be more dread-ful than those aw-ful wo-men, who
were--who _are_--wait-ing to suck my blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 May._--I have been down to look at that room again in day-light, for
I _must_ know the truth. When I got to the door-way at the top of the
stairs I found it closed. It had been so for-cibly driven against the
jamb that part of the wood-work was splintered. I could see that the bolt
of the lock had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the in-side.
I fear it was no dream, and must act on this sur-mise.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me in
the suavest tones to write three let-ters, one say-ing that my work here
was nearly done, and that I should start for home within a few days,
an-other that I was start-ing on the next morn-ing from the time of the
let-ter, and the third that I had left the castle and ar-rived at
Bis-tritz. I would fain have re-belled, but felt that in the present state
of things it would be mad-ness to quar-rel openly with the Count whilst I
am so ab-so-lutely in his power; and to re-fuse would be to ex-cite his
sus-pi-cion and to arouse his an-ger. He knows that I know too much, and
that I must not live, lest I be dan-ger-ous to him; my only chance is to
pro-long my op-por-tun-it-ies. So-mething may oc-cur which will give me a
chance to es-cape. I saw in his eyes some-thing of that gath-er-ing wrath
which was mani-fest when he hurled that fair wo-man from him. He ex-plained
to me that posts were few and un-cer-tain, and that my writ-ing now would
en-sure ease of mind to my friends; and he as-sured me with so much
im-press-ive-ness that he would coun-ter-mand the later let-ters, which would
be held over at Bis-tritz un-til due time in case chance would ad-mit of my
pro-long-ing my stay, that to op-pose him would have been to cre-ate new
sus-pi-cion. I there-fore pre-ten-ded to fall in with his views, and asked
him what dates I should put on the let-ters. He cal-cu-lated a minute, and
then said:--

"The first should be June 12, the second June 19, and the third June
29."

I know now the span of my life. God help me!

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 May._--There is a chance of es-cape, or at any rate of be-ing able to
send word home. A band of Szgany have come to the castle, and are
en-camped in the court-yard. These Szgany are gip-sies; I have notes of
them in my book. They are pe-cu-liar to this part of the world, though
al-lied to the or-din-ary gip-sies all the world over. There are thou-sands
of them in Hun-gary and Transylvania, who are al-most out-side all law.
They at-tach them-selves as a rule to some great noble or _boy-ar_, and
call them-selves by his name. They are fear-less and without re-li-gion,
save su-per-sti-tion, and they talk only their own vari-et-ies of the Ro-many
tongue.

I shall write some let-ters home, and shall try to get them to have them
pos-ted. I have already spoken them through my win-dow to be-gin
ac-quaint-ance-ship. They took their hats off and made obeis-ance and many
signs, which, how-ever, I could not un-der-stand any more than I could
their spoken lan-guage....

       *       *       *       *       *

I have writ-ten the let-ters. Mina's is in short-hand, and I simply ask Mr.
Hawkins to com-mu-nic-ate with her. To her I have ex-plained my situ-ation,
but without the hor-rors which I may only sur-mise. It would shock and
frighten her to death were I to ex-pose my heart to her. Should the
let-ters not carry, then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the
ex-tent of my know-ledge....

       *       *       *       *       *

I have given the let-ters; I threw them through the bars of my win-dow
with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them pos-ted. The
man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and then put them
in his cap. I could do no more. I stole back to the study, and began to
read. As the Count did not come in, I have writ-ten here....

       *       *       *       *       *

The Count has come. He sat down be-side me, and said in his smoothest
voice as he opened two let-ters:--

"The Szgany has given me these, of which, though I know not whence they
come, I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at
it--"one is from you, and to my friend Peter Hawkins; the other"--here
he caught sight of the strange sym-bols as he opened the en-vel-ope, and
the dark look came into his face, and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the
other is a vile thing, an out-rage upon friend-ship and hos-pit-al-ity! It is
not signed. Well! so it can-not mat-ter to us." And he calmly held let-ter
and en-vel-ope in the flame of the lamp till they were con-sumed. Then he
went on:--

"The let-ter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, since it is
yours. Your let-ters are sac-red to me. Your par-don, my friend, that
un-know-ingly I did break the seal. Will you not cover it again?" He held
out the let-ter to me, and with a cour-teous bow handed me a clean
en-vel-ope. I could only re-dir-ect it and hand it to him in si-lence. When
he went out of the room I could hear the key turn softly. A minute later
I went over and tried it, and the door was locked.

When, an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room, his
com-ing awakened me, for I had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very
cour-teous and very cheery in his man-ner, and see-ing that I had been
sleep-ing, he said:--

"So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I
may not have the pleas-ure to talk to-night, since there are many la-bours
to me; but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and went to bed,
and, strange to say, slept without dream-ing. Despair has its own calms.

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 May._--This morn-ing when I woke I thought I would provide my-self
with some pa-per and en-vel-opes from my bag and keep them in my pocket, so
that I might write in case I should get an op-por-tun-ity, but again a
sur-prise, again a shock!

Every scrap of pa-per was gone, and with it all my notes, my memor-anda,
re-lat-ing to rail-ways and travel, my let-ter of credit, in fact all that
might be use-ful to me were I once out-side the castle. I sat and pondered
awhile, and then some thought oc-curred to me, and I made search of my
port-manteau and in the ward-robe where I had placed my clothes.

The suit in which I had trav-elled was gone, and also my over-coat and
rug; I could find no trace of them any-where. This looked like some new
scheme of vil-lainy....

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 June._--This morn-ing, as I was sit-ting on the edge of my bed
cudgel-ling my brains, I heard without a crack-ing of whips and pound-ing
and scrap-ing of horses' feet up the rocky path bey-ond the court-yard.
With joy I hur-ried to the win-dow, and saw drive into the yard two great
leiter-wag-ons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the head of
each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-stud-ded belt, dirty
sheep-skin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I
ran to the door, in-tend-ing to des-cend and try and join them through the
main hall, as I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a
shock: my door was fastened on the out-side.

Then I ran to the win-dow and cried to them. They looked up at me
stu-pidly and poin-ted, but just then the "het-man" of the Szgany came out,
and see-ing them point-ing to my win-dow, said some-thing, at which they
laughed. Hence-forth no ef-fort of mine, no piteous cry or ag-on-ised
en-treaty, would make them even look at me. They res-ol-utely turned away.
The leiter-wag-ons con-tained great, square boxes, with handles of thick
rope; these were evid-ently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks
handled them, and by their res-on-ance as they were roughly moved. When
they were all un-loaded and packed in a great heap in one corner of the
yard, the Slovaks were given some money by the Szgany, and spit-ting on
it for luck, lazily went each to his horse's head. Shortly af-ter-wards, I
heard the crack-ing of their whips die away in the dis-tance.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 June, be-fore morn-ing._--Last night the Count left me early, and
locked him-self into his own room. As soon as I dared I ran up the
wind-ing stair, and looked out of the win-dow, which opened south. I
thought I would watch for the Count, for there is some-thing go-ing on.
The Szgany are quartered some-where in the castle and are do-ing work of
some kind. I know it, for now and then I hear a far-away muffled sound
as of mat-tock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be the end of some
ruth-less vil-lainy.

I had been at the win-dow some-what less than half an hour, when I saw
some-thing com-ing out of the Count's win-dow. I drew back and watched
care-fully, and saw the whole man emerge. It was a new shock to me to
find that he had on the suit of clothes which I had worn whilst
trav-el-ling here, and slung over his shoulder the ter-rible bag which I
had seen the wo-men take away. There could be no doubt as to his quest,
and in my garb, too! This, then, is his new scheme of evil: that he will
al-low oth-ers to see me, as they think, so that he may both leave
evid-ence that I have been seen in the towns or vil-lages post-ing my own
let-ters, and that any wicked-ness which he may do shall by the local
people be at-trib-uted to me.

It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst I am shut up
here, a ver-it-able pris-oner, but without that pro-tec-tion of the law which
is even a crim-inal's right and con-sol-a-tion.

I thought I would watch for the Count's re-turn, and for a long time sat
dog-gedly at the win-dow. Then I began to no-tice that there were some
quaint little specks float-ing in the rays of the moon-light. They were
like the ti-ni-est grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in
clusters in a neb-u-lous sort of way. I watched them with a sense of
sooth-ing, and a sort of calm stole over me. I leaned back in the
em-bras-ure in a more com-fort-able po-s-i-tion, so that I could en-joy more
fully the aërial gam-bolling.

So-mething made me start up, a low, piteous howl-ing of dogs some-where far
be-low in the val-ley, which was hid-den from my sight. Louder it seemed to
ring in my ears, and the float-ing motes of dust to take new shapes to
the sound as they danced in the moon-light. I felt my-self strug-gling to
awake to some call of my in-stincts; nay, my very soul was strug-gling,
and my half-re-membered sens-ib-il-it-ies were striv-ing to an-swer the call. I
was be-com-ing hyp-not-ised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the
moon-beams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the mass of gloom
bey-ond. More and more they gathered till they seemed to take dim phantom
shapes. And then I star-ted, broad awake and in full pos-ses-sion of my
senses, and ran scream-ing from the place. The phantom shapes, which were
be-com-ing gradu-ally ma-ter-i-al-ised from the moon-beams, were those of the
three ghostly wo-men to whom I was doomed. I fled, and felt some-what
safer in my own room, where there was no moon-light and where the lamp
was burn-ing brightly.

When a couple of hours had passed I heard some-thing stir-ring in the
Count's room, some-thing like a sharp wail quickly sup-pressed; and then
there was si-lence, deep, aw-ful si-lence, which chilled me. With a
beat-ing heart, I tried the door; but I was locked in my prison, and
could do noth-ing. I sat down and simply cried.

As I sat I heard a sound in the court-yard without--the ag-on-ised cry of a
wo-man. I rushed to the win-dow, and throw-ing it up, peered out between
the bars. There, in-deed, was a wo-man with dishevelled hair, hold-ing her
hands over her heart as one dis-tressed with run-ning. She was lean-ing
against a corner of the gate-way. When she saw my face at the win-dow she
threw her-self for-ward, and shouted in a voice laden with men-ace:--

"Mon-ster, give me my child!"

She threw her-self on her knees, and rais-ing up her hands, cried the same
words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she tore her hair and beat her
breast, and aban-doned her-self to all the vi-ol-ences of ex-tra-vag-ant
emo-tion. Fin-ally, she threw her-self for-ward, and, though I could not see
her, I could hear the beat-ing of her na-ked hands against the door.

Some-where high over-head, prob-ably on the tower, I heard the voice of the
Count call-ing in his harsh, metal-lic whis-per. His call seemed to be
answered from far and wide by the howl-ing of wolves. Be-fore many minutes
had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when lib-er-ated,
through the wide en-trance into the court-yard.

There was no cry from the wo-man, and the howl-ing of the wolves was but
short. Be-fore long they streamed away singly, lick-ing their lips.

I could not pity her, for I knew now what had be-come of her child, and
she was bet-ter dead.

What shall I do? what can I do? How can I es-cape from this dread-ful
thing of night and gloom and fear?

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 June, morn-ing._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night
how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morn-ing can be. When the
sun grew so high this morn-ing that it struck the top of the great
gate-way op-pos-ite my win-dow, the high spot which it touched seemed to me
as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me as
if it had been a va-por-ous gar-ment which dis-solved in the warmth. I must
take ac-tion of some sort whilst the cour-age of the day is upon me. Last
night one of my post-dated let-ters went to post, the first of that fatal
series which is to blot out the very traces of my ex-ist-ence from the
earth.

Let me not think of it. Ac-tion!

It has al-ways been at night-time that I have been mo-les-ted or
threatened, or in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen the
Count in the day-light. Can it be that he sleeps when oth-ers wake, that
he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only get into his room!
But there is no pos-sible way. The door is al-ways locked, no way for me.

Yes, there is a way, if one dares to take it. Where his body has gone
why may not an-other body go? I have seen him my-self crawl from his
win-dow. Why should not I im-it-ate him, and go in by his win-dow? The
chances are des-per-ate, but my need is more des-per-ate still. I shall risk
it. At the worst it can only be death; and a man's death is not a
calf's, and the dreaded Here-after may still be open to me. God help me
in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faith-ful friend and
second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina!

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, later._--I have made the ef-fort, and God, help-ing me, have
come safely back to this room. I must put down every de-tail in or-der. I
went whilst my cour-age was fresh straight to the win-dow on the south
side, and at once got out-side on the nar-row ledge of stone which runs
around the build-ing on this side. The stones are big and roughly cut,
and the mor-tar has by pro-cess of time been washed away between them. I
took off my boots, and ven-tured out on the des-per-ate way. I looked down
once, so as to make sure that a sud-den glimpse of the aw-ful depth would
not over-come me, but after that kept my eyes away from it. I knew pretty
well the dir-ec-tion and dis-tance of the Count's win-dow, and made for it
as well as I could, hav-ing re-gard to the op-por-tun-it-ies avail-able. I did
not feel dizzy--I sup-pose I was too ex-cited--and the time seemed
ri-dicu-lously short till I found my-self stand-ing on the win-dow-sill and
try-ing to raise up the sash. I was filled with agit-a-tion, how-ever, when
I bent down and slid feet fore-most in through the win-dow. Then I looked
around for the Count, but, with sur-prise and glad-ness, made a dis-cov-ery.
The room was empty! It was barely fur-nished with odd things, which
seemed to have never been used; the fur-niture was some-thing the same
style as that in the south rooms, and was covered with dust. I looked
for the key, but it was not in the lock, and I could not find it
any-where. The only thing I found was a great heap of gold in one
corner--gold of all kinds, Ro-man, and Brit-ish, and Aus-trian, and
Hun-garian, and Greek and Turk-ish money, covered with a film of dust, as
though it had lain long in the ground. None of it that I no-ticed was
less than three hun-dred years old. There were also chains and or-na-ments,
some jew-elled, but all of them old and stained.

At one corner of the room was a heavy door. I tried it, for, since I
could not find the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which
was the main ob-ject of my search, I must make fur-ther ex-am-in-a-tion, or
all my ef-forts would be in vain. It was open, and led through a stone
pas-sage to a cir-cu-lar stair-way, which went steeply down. I des-cen-ded,
mind-ing care-fully where I went, for the stairs were dark, be-ing only lit
by loop-holes in the heavy ma-sonry. At the bot-tom there was a dark,
tun-nel-like pas-sage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the
odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the pas-sage the smell
grew closer and heav-ier. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood
ajar, and found my-self in an old, ruined chapel, which had evid-ently
been used as a grave-yard. The roof was broken, and in two places were
steps lead-ing to vaults, but the ground had re-cently been dug over, and
the earth placed in great wooden boxes, mani-festly those which had been
brought by the Slovaks. There was nobody about, and I made search for
any fur-ther out-let, but there was none. Then I went over every inch of
the ground, so as not to lose a chance. I went down even into the
vaults, where the dim light struggled, al-though to do so was a dread to
my very soul. Into two of these I went, but saw noth-ing ex-cept frag-ments
of old coffins and piles of dust; in the third, how-ever, I made a
dis-cov-ery.

There, in one of the great boxes, of which there were fifty in all, on a
pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count! He was either dead or asleep, I
could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the
glassi-ness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all
their pal-lor; the lips were as red as ever. But there was no sign of
move-ment, no pulse, no breath, no beat-ing of the heart. I bent over him,
and tried to find any sign of life, but in vain. He could not have lain
there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in a few hours.
By the side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there.
I thought he might have the keys on him, but when I went to search I saw
the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of hate,
though un-con-scious of me or my pres-ence, that I fled from the place, and
leav-ing the Count's room by the win-dow, crawled again up the castle
wall. Re-gain-ing my room, I threw my-self pant-ing upon the bed and tried
to think....

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 June._--To-day is the date of my last let-ter, and the Count has
taken steps to prove that it was genu-ine, for again I saw him leave the
castle by the same win-dow, and in my clothes. As he went down the wall,
liz-ard fash-ion, I wished I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might
des-troy him; but I fear that no weapon wrought alone by man's hand would
have any ef-fect on him. I dared not wait to see him re-turn, for I feared
to see those weird sis-ters. I came back to the lib-rary, and read there
till I fell asleep.

I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me as grimly as a man can
look as he said:--

"To-mor-row, my friend, we must part. You re-turn to your beau-ti-ful
Eng-land, I to some work which may have such an end that we may never
meet. Your let-ter home has been des-patched; to-mor-row I shall not be
here, but all shall be ready for your jour-ney. In the morn-ing come the
Szgany, who have some la-bours of their own here, and also come some
Slovaks. When they have gone, my car-riage shall come for you, and shall
bear you to the Borgo Pass to meet the di-li-gence from Bukov-ina to
Bis-tritz. But I am in hopes that I shall see more of you at Castle
Drac-ula." I sus-pec-ted him, and de-term-ined to test his sin-cer-ity.
Sin-cer-ity! It seems like a profan-a-tion of the word to write it in
con-nec-tion with such a mon-ster, so asked him point-blank:--

"Why may I not go to-night?"

"Be-cause, dear sir, my coach-man and horses are away on a mis-sion."

"But I would walk with pleas-ure. I want to get away at once." He smiled,
such a soft, smooth, diabol-ical smile that I knew there was some trick
be-hind his smooth-ness. He said:--

"And your bag-gage?"

"I do not care about it. I can send for it some other time."

The Count stood up, and said, with a sweet cour-tesy which made me rub my
eyes, it seemed so real:--

"You Eng-lish have a say-ing which is close to my heart, for its spirit is
that which rules our _boy-ars_: 'Wel-come the com-ing; speed the part-ing
guest.' Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall you wait
in my house against your will, though sad am I at your go-ing, and that
you so sud-denly de-sire it. Come!" With a stately grav-ity, he, with the
lamp, pre-ceded me down the stairs and along the hall. Sud-denly he
stopped.

"Hark!"

Close at hand came the howl-ing of many wolves. It was al-most as if the
sound sprang up at the rising of his hand, just as the mu-sic of a great
or-ches-tra seems to leap un-der the bâton of the con-ductor. After a pause
of a mo-ment, he pro-ceeded, in his stately way, to the door, drew back
the pon-der-ous bolts, un-hooked the heavy chains, and began to draw it
open.

To my in-tense as-ton-ish-ment I saw that it was un-locked. Sus-pi-ciously, I
looked all round, but could see no key of any kind.

As the door began to open, the howl-ing of the wolves without grew louder
and an-grier; their red jaws, with champ-ing teeth, and their blunt-clawed
feet as they leaped, came in through the open-ing door. I knew then that
to struggle at the mo-ment against the Count was use-less. With such
al-lies as these at his com-mand, I could do noth-ing. But still the door
con-tin-ued slowly to open, and only the Count's body stood in the gap.
Sud-denly it struck me that this might be the mo-ment and means of my
doom; I was to be given to the wolves, and at my own in-stig-a-tion. There
was a diabol-ical wicked-ness in the idea great enough for the Count, and
as a last chance I cried out:--

"Shut the door; I shall wait till morn-ing!" and covered my face with my
hands to hide my tears of bit-ter dis-ap-point-ment. With one sweep of his
power-ful arm, the Count threw the door shut, and the great bolts clanged
and echoed through the hall as they shot back into their places.

In si-lence we re-turned to the lib-rary, and after a minute or two I went
to my own room. The last I saw of Count Drac-ula was his kiss-ing his hand
to me; with a red light of tri-umph in his eyes, and with a smile that
Ju-das in hell might be proud of.

When I was in my room and about to lie down, I thought I heard a
whis-per-ing at my door. I went to it softly and listened. Un-less my ears
de-ceived me, I heard the voice of the Count:--

"Back, back, to your own place! Your time is not yet come. Wait! Have
pa-tience! To-night is mine. To-mor-row night is yours!" There was a low,
sweet ripple of laughter, and in a rage I threw open the door, and saw
without the three ter-rible wo-men lick-ing their lips. As I ap-peared they
all joined in a hor-rible laugh, and ran away.

I came back to my room and threw my-self on my knees. It is then so near
the end? To-mor-row! to-mor-row! Lord, help me, and those to whom I am
dear!

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 June, morn-ing._--These may be the last words I ever write in this
di-ary. I slept till just be-fore the dawn, and when I woke threw my-self
on my knees, for I de-term-ined that if Death came he should find me
ready.

At last I felt that subtle change in the air, and knew that the morn-ing
had come. Then came the wel-come cock-crow, and I felt that I was safe.
With a glad heart, I opened my door and ran down to the hall. I had seen
that the door was un-locked, and now es-cape was be-fore me. With hands
that trembled with eager-ness, I un-hooked the chains and drew back the
massive bolts.

But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at
the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its
case-ment. I could see the bolt shot. It had been locked after I left the
Count.

Then a wild de-sire took me to ob-tain that key at any risk, and I
de-term-ined then and there to scale the wall again and gain the Count's
room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the hap-pier choice of
evils. Without a pause I rushed up to the east win-dow, and scrambled
down the wall, as be-fore, into the Count's room. It was empty, but that
was as I ex-pec-ted. I could not see a key any-where, but the heap of gold
re-mained. I went through the door in the corner and down the wind-ing
stair and along the dark pas-sage to the old chapel. I knew now well
enough where to find the mon-ster I sought.

The great box was in the same place, close against the wall, but the lid
was laid on it, not fastened down, but with the nails ready in their
places to be hammered home. I knew I must reach the body for the key, so
I raised the lid, and laid it back against the wall; and then I saw
some-thing which filled my very soul with hor-ror. There lay the Count,
but look-ing as if his youth had been half re-newed, for the white hair
and mous-tache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks were fuller,
and the white skin seemed ruby-red un-der-neath; the mouth was red-der than
ever, for on the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the
corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck. Even the deep,
burn-ing eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the lids and pouches
un-der-neath were bloated. It seemed as if the whole aw-ful creature were
simply gorged with blood. He lay like a filthy leech, ex-hausted with his
re-ple-tion. I shuddered as I bent over to touch him, and every sense in
me re-vol-ted at the con-tact; but I had to search, or I was lost. The
com-ing night might see my own body a ban-quet in a sim-ilar way to those
hor-rid three. I felt all over the body, but no sign could I find of the
key. Then I stopped and looked at the Count. There was a mock-ing smile
on the bloated face which seemed to drive me mad. This was the be-ing I
was help-ing to trans-fer to Lon-don, where, per-haps, for cen-tur-ies to come
he might, amongst its teem-ing mil-lions, sa-ti-ate his lust for blood, and
cre-ate a new and ever-widen-ing circle of semi-demons to bat-ten on the
help-less. The very thought drove me mad. A ter-rible de-sire came upon me
to rid the world of such a mon-ster. There was no lethal weapon at hand,
but I seized a shovel which the work-men had been us-ing to fill the
cases, and lift-ing it high, struck, with the edge down-ward, at the
hate-ful face. But as I did so the head turned, and the eyes fell full
upon me, with all their blaze of ba-silisk hor-ror. The sight seemed to
para-lyse me, and the shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the face,
merely mak-ing a deep gash above the fore-head. The shovel fell from my
hand across the box, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade
caught the edge of the lid which fell over again, and hid the hor-rid
thing from my sight. The last glimpse I had was of the bloated face,
blood-stained and fixed with a grin of malice which would have held its
own in the neth-er-most hell.

I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed
on fire, and I waited with a des-pair-ing feel-ing grow-ing over me. As I
waited I heard in the dis-tance a gipsy song sung by merry voices com-ing
closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the
crack-ing of whips; the Szgany and the Slovaks of whom the Count had
spoken were com-ing. With a last look around and at the box which
con-tained the vile body, I ran from the place and gained the Count's
room, de-term-ined to rush out at the mo-ment the door should be opened.
With strained ears, I listened, and heard down-stairs the grind-ing of the
key in the great lock and the fall-ing back of the heavy door. There must
have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key for one of
the locked doors. Then there came the sound of many feet tramp-ing and
dy-ing away in some pas-sage which sent up a clanging echo. I turned to
run down again to-wards the vault, where I might find the new en-trance;
but at the mo-ment there seemed to come a vi-ol-ent puff of wind, and the
door to the wind-ing stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from
the lin-tels fly-ing. When I ran to push it open, I found that it was
hope-lessly fast. I was again a pris-oner, and the net of doom was clos-ing
round me more closely.

As I write there is in the pas-sage be-low a sound of many tramp-ing feet
and the crash of weights be-ing set down heav-ily, doubt-less the boxes,
with their freight of earth. There is a sound of ham-mer-ing; it is the
box be-ing nailed down. Now I can hear the heavy feet tramp-ing again
along the hall, with many other idle feet com-ing be-hind them.

The door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a grind-ing of the key
in the lock; I can hear the key with-draw: then an-other door opens and
shuts; I hear the creak-ing of lock and bolt.

Hark! in the court-yard and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels,
the crack of whips, and the chorus of the Szgany as they pass into the
dis-tance.

I am alone in the castle with those aw-ful wo-men. Faugh! Mina is a wo-man,
and there is nought in com-mon. They are dev-ils of the Pit!

I shall not re-main alone with them; I shall try to scale the castle wall
farther than I have yet at-temp-ted. I shall take some of the gold with
me, lest I want it later. I may find a way from this dread-ful place.

And then away for home! away to the quick-est and nearest train! away
from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil and his
chil-dren still walk with earthly feet!

At least God's mercy is bet-ter than that of these mon-sters, and the
pre-cip-ice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man.
Good-bye, all! Mina!




CHAPTER V

_Let-ter from Miss Mina Mur-ray to Miss Lucy Westenra._


"_9 May._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"For-give my long delay in writ-ing, but I have been simply over-whelmed
with work. The life of an as-sist-ant school-mis-tress is some-times try-ing.
I am long-ing to be with you, and by the sea, where we can talk to-gether
freely and build our castles in the air. I have been work-ing very hard
lately, be-cause I want to keep up with Jonathan's stud-ies, and I have
been prac-tising short-hand very as-sidu-ously. When we are mar-ried I shall
be able to be use-ful to Jonathan, and if I can ste-no-graph well enough I
can take down what he wants to say in this way and write it out for
him on the type-writer, at which also I am prac-tising very hard. He
and I some-times write let-ters in short-hand, and he is keep-ing a
ste-no-graphic journal of his travels abroad. When I am with you I
shall keep a di-ary in the same way. I don't mean one of those
two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner di-ar-ies, but a
sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel in-clined. I do not
sup-pose there will be much of in-terest to other people; but it is not
in-ten-ded for them. I may show it to Jonathan some day if there is in it
any-thing worth shar-ing, but it is really an ex-er-cise book. I shall try
to do what I see lady journ-al-ists do: in-ter-view-ing and writ-ing
de-scrip-tions and try-ing to re-mem-ber con-ver-sa-tions. I am told that, with
a little prac-tice, one can re-mem-ber all that goes on or that one hears
said dur-ing a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you of my little
plans when we meet. I have just had a few hur-ried lines from Jonathan
from Transylvania. He is well, and will be re-turn-ing in about a week. I
am long-ing to hear all his news. It must be so nice to see strange
coun-tries. I won-der if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall ever see them
to-gether. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye.

"Your lov-ing

"MINA.

"Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me any-thing for
a long time. I hear ru-mours, and es-pe-cially of a tall, hand-some,
curly-haired man???"


_Let-ter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Mur-ray_.

"_17, Chatham Street_,

"_Wed-nes-day_.

"My dearest Mina,--

"I must say you tax me _very_ un-fairly with be-ing a bad cor-res-pond-ent. I
wrote to you _twice_ since we par-ted, and your last let-ter was only your
_second_. Besides, I have noth-ing to tell you. There is really noth-ing
to in-terest you. Town is very pleas-ant just now, and we go a good deal
to pic-ture-gal-ler-ies and for walks and rides in the park. As to the
tall, curly-haired man, I sup-pose it was the one who was with me at the
last Pop. Some one has evid-ently been telling tales. That was Mr.
Holm-wood. He of-ten comes to see us, and he and mamma get on very well
to-gether; they have so many things to talk about in com-mon. We met some
time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if you were not already
en-gaged to Jonathan. He is an ex-cel-lent _parti_, be-ing hand-some, well
off, and of good birth. He is a doc-tor and really clever. Just fancy! He
is only nine-and-twenty, and he has an im-mense lun-atic asylum all un-der
his own care. Mr. Holm-wood in-tro-duced him to me, and he called here to
see us, and of-ten comes now. I think he is one of the most res-ol-ute men
I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He seems ab-so-lutely im-per-turb-able. I
can fancy what a won-der-ful power he must have over his pa-tients. He has
a curi-ous habit of look-ing one straight in the face, as if try-ing to
read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but I flat-ter
my-self he has got a tough nut to crack. I know that from my glass. Do
you ever try to read your own face? _I do_, and I can tell you it is not
a bad study, and gives you more trouble than you can well fancy if you
have never tried it. He says that I af-ford him a curi-ous psy-cho-lo-gical
study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, as you know, take suf-fi-cient
in-terest in dress to be able to de-scribe the new fash-ions. Dress is a
bore. That is slang again, but never mind; Ar-thur says that every day.
There, it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other
since we were _chil-dren_; we have slept to-gether and eaten to-gether, and
laughed and cried to-gether; and now, though I have spoken, I would like
to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blush-ing
as I write, for al-though I _think_ he loves me, he has not told me so in
words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him! There, that
does me good. I wish I were with you, dear, sit-ting by the fire
un-dress-ing, as we used to sit; and I would try to tell you what I feel.
I do not know how I am writ-ing this even to you. I am afraid to stop,
or I should tear up the let-ter, and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so
want to tell you all. Let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all
that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in your
pray-ers; and, Mina, pray for my hap-pi-ness.

"LUCY.

"P.S.--I need not tell you this is a secret. Good-night again.

"L."

_Let-ter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Mur-ray_.

"_24 May_.

"My dearest Mina,--

"Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet let-ter. It was so
nice to be able to tell you and to have your sym-pathy.

"My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old pro-verbs are.
Here am I, who shall be twenty in Septem-ber, and yet I never had a
pro-posal till to-day, not a real pro-posal, and to-day I have had three.
Just fancy! THREE pro-pos-als in one day! Isn't it aw-ful! I feel sorry,
really and truly sorry, for two of the poor fel-lows. Oh, Mina, I am so
happy that I don't know what to do with my-self. And three pro-pos-als!
But, for good-ness' sake, don't tell any of the girls, or they would be
get-ting all sorts of ex-tra-vag-ant ideas and ima-gin-ing them-selves in-jured
and slighted if in their very first day at home they did not get six at
least. Some girls are so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who are en-gaged and
are go-ing to settle down soon soberly into old mar-ried wo-men, can
des-pise van-ity. Well, I must tell you about the three, but you must keep
it a secret, dear, from _every one_, ex-cept, of course, Jonathan. You
will tell him, be-cause I would, if I were in your place, cer-tainly tell
Ar-thur. A wo-man ought to tell her hus-band everything--don't you think
so, dear?--and I must be fair. Men like wo-men, cer-tainly their wives, to
be quite as fair as they are; and wo-men, I am afraid, are not al-ways
quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, num-ber One came just
be-fore lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Se-ward, the lun-atic-asylum
man, with the strong jaw and the good fore-head. He was very cool
out-wardly, but was nervous all the same. He had evid-ently been school-ing
him-self as to all sorts of little things, and re-membered them; but he
al-most man-aged to sit down on his silk hat, which men don't gen-er-ally do
when they are cool, and then when he wanted to ap-pear at ease he kept
play-ing with a lan-cet in a way that made me nearly scream. He spoke to
me, Mina, very straight-for-wardly. He told me how dear I was to him,
though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me to
help and cheer him. He was go-ing to tell me how un-happy he would be if I
did not care for him, but when he saw me cry he said that he was a brute
and would not add to my present trouble. Then he broke off and asked if
I could love him in time; and when I shook my head his hands trembled,
and then with some hes-it-a-tion he asked me if I cared already for any one
else. He put it very nicely, say-ing that he did not want to wring my
con-fid-ence from me, but only to know, be-cause if a wo-man's heart was
free a man might have hope. And then, Mina, I felt a sort of duty to
tell him that there was some one. I only told him that much, and then he
stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my
hands in his and said he hoped I would be happy, and that if I ever
wanted a friend I must count him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't
help cry-ing: and you must ex-cuse this let-ter be-ing all blot-ted. Be-ing
pro-posed to is all very nice and all that sort of thing, but it isn't at
all a happy thing when you have to see a poor fel-low, whom you know
loves you hon-estly, go-ing away and look-ing all broken-hearted, and to
know that, no mat-ter what he may say at the mo-ment, you are passing
quite out of his life. My dear, I must stop here at present, I feel so
miser-able, though I am so happy.

"_Even-ing._

"Ar-thur has just gone, and I feel in bet-ter spir-its than when I left
off, so I can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, num-ber Two
came after lunch. He is such a nice fel-low, an Amer-ican from Texas, and
he looks so young and so fresh that it seems al-most im-possible that he
has been to so many places and has had such ad-ven-tures. I sym-path-ise
with poor Des-de-mona when she had such a dan-ger-ous stream poured in her
ear, even by a black man. I sup-pose that we wo-men are such cow-ards that
we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now
what I would do if I were a man and wanted to make a girl love me. No, I
don't, for there was Mr. Mor-ris telling us his stor-ies, and Ar-thur never
told any, and yet---- My dear, I am some-what pre-vi-ous. Mr. Quin-cey P.
Mor-ris found me alone. It seems that a man al-ways does find a girl
alone. No, he doesn't, for Ar-thur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I
help-ing him all I could; I am not ashamed to say it now. I must tell you
be-fore-hand that Mr. Mor-ris doesn't al-ways speak slang--that is to say,
he never does so to strangers or be-fore them, for he is really well
edu-cated and has ex-quis-ite man-ners--but he found out that it amused me
to hear him talk Amer-ican slang, and whenever I was present, and there
was no one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am afraid, my
dear, he has to in-vent it all, for it fits ex-actly into whatever else he
has to say. But this is a way slang has. I do not know my-self if I shall
ever speak slang; I do not know if Ar-thur likes it, as I have never
heard him use any as yet. Well, Mr. Mor-ris sat down be-side me and looked
as happy and jolly as he could, but I could see all the same that he was
very nervous. He took my hand in his, and said ever so sweetly:--

"'Miss Lucy, I know I ain't good enough to reg-u-late the fixin's of your
little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you
will go join them seven young wo-men with the lamps when you quit. Won't
you just hitch up along-side of me and let us go down the long road
to-gether, driv-ing in double har-ness?'

"Well, he did look so good-hu-moured and so jolly that it didn't seem
half so hard to re-fuse him as it did poor Dr. Se-ward; so I said, as
lightly as I could, that I did not know any-thing of hitch-ing, and that I
wasn't broken to har-ness at all yet. Then he said that he had spoken in
a light man-ner, and he hoped that if he had made a mis-take in do-ing so
on so grave, so mo-ment-ous, an oc-ca-sion for him, I would for-give him. He
really did look ser-i-ous when he was say-ing it, and I couldn't help
feel-ing a bit ser-i-ous too--I know, Mina, you will think me a hor-rid
flirt--though I couldn't help feel-ing a sort of ex-ulta-tion that he was
num-ber two in one day. And then, my dear, be-fore I could say a word he
began pour-ing out a per-fect tor-rent of love-mak-ing, lay-ing his very
heart and soul at my feet. He looked so earn-est over it that I shall
never again think that a man must be play-ful al-ways, and never earn-est,
be-cause he is merry at times. I sup-pose he saw some-thing in my face
which checked him, for he sud-denly stopped, and said with a sort of
manly fer-vour that I could have loved him for if I had been free:--

"'Lucy, you are an hon-est-hearted girl, I know. I should not be here
speak-ing to you as I am now if I did not be-lieve you clean grit, right
through to the very depths of your soul. Tell me, like one good fel-low
to an-other, is there any one else that you care for? And if there is
I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will
let me, a very faith-ful friend.'

"My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we wo-men are so little worthy
of them? Here was I al-most mak-ing fun of this great-hearted, true
gen-tle-man. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think
this a very sloppy let-ter in more ways than one--and I really felt very
badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want
her, and save all this trouble? But this is heresy, and I must not say
it. I am glad to say that, though I was cry-ing, I was able to look into
Mr. Mor-ris's brave eyes, and I told him out straight:--

"'Yes, there is some one I love, though he has not told me yet that he
even loves me.' I was right to speak to him so frankly, for quite a
light came into his face, and he put out both his hands and took mine--I
think I put them into his--and said in a hearty way:--

"'That's my brave girl. It's bet-ter worth be-ing late for a chance of
win-ning you than be-ing in time for any other girl in the world. Don't
cry, my dear. If it's for me, I'm a hard nut to crack; and I take it
stand-ing up. If that other fel-low doesn't know his hap-pi-ness, well, he'd
bet-ter look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with me. Little girl,
your hon-esty and pluck have made me a friend, and that's rarer than a
lover; it's more un-selfish any-how. My dear, I'm go-ing to have a pretty
lonely walk between this and King-dom Come. Won't you give me one kiss?
It'll be some-thing to keep off the dark-ness now and then. You can, you
know, if you like, for that other good fel-low--he must be a good fel-low,
my dear, and a fine fel-low, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken
yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and
noble, too, to a rival--wasn't it?--and he so sad; so I leant over and
kissed him. He stood up with my two hands in his, and as he looked down
into my face--I am afraid I was blush-ing very much--he said:--

"'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if these
things don't make us friends noth-ing ever will. Thank you for your sweet
hon-esty to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and tak-ing up his hat,
went straight out of the room without look-ing back, without a tear or a
quiver or a pause; and I am cry-ing like a baby. Oh, why must a man like
that be made un-happy when there are lots of girls about who would
wor-ship the very ground he trod on? I know I would if I were free--only
I don't want to be free. My dear, this quite up-set me, and I feel I
can-not write of hap-pi-ness just at once, after telling you of it; and I
don't wish to tell of the num-ber three un-til it can be all happy.

"Ever your lov-ing

"LUCY.

"P.S.--Oh, about num-ber Three--I needn't tell you of num-ber Three, need
I? Besides, it was all so con-fused; it seemed only a mo-ment from his
com-ing into the room till both his arms were round me, and he was
kiss-ing me. I am very, very happy, and I don't know what I have done to
de-serve it. I must only try in the fu-ture to show that I am not
un-grate-ful to God for all His good-ness to me in send-ing to me such a
lover, such a hus-band, and such a friend.

"Good-bye."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

(Kept in phono-graph)

_25 May._--Ebb tide in ap-pet-ite to-day. Can-not eat, can-not rest, so
di-ary in-stead. Since my re-buff of yes-ter-day I have a sort of empty
feel-ing; noth-ing in the world seems of suf-fi-cient im-port-ance to be worth
the do-ing.... As I knew that the only cure for this sort of thing was
work, I went down amongst the pa-tients. I picked out one who has
af-forded me a study of much in-terest. He is so quaint that I am
de-term-ined to un-der-stand him as well as I can. To-day I seemed to get
nearer than ever be-fore to the heart of his mys-tery.

I ques-tioned him more fully than I had ever done, with a view to mak-ing
my-self mas-ter of the facts of his hal-lu-cin-a-tion. In my man-ner of do-ing
it there was, I now see, some-thing of cruelty. I seemed to wish to keep
him to the point of his mad-ness--a thing which I avoid with the pa-tients
as I would the mouth of hell.

(_Mem._, un-der what cir-cum-stances would I _not_ avoid the pit of hell?)
_Om-nia Romæ venalia sunt._ Hell has its price! _verb. sap._ If there be
any-thing be-hind this in-stinct it will be valu-able to trace it af-ter-wards
_ac-cur-ately_, so I had bet-ter com-mence to do so, there-fore--

R. M. Ren-field, ætat 59.--San-guine tem-pera-ment; great phys-ical strength;
mor-bidly ex-cit-able; peri-ods of gloom, end-ing in some fixed idea which I
can-not make out. I pre-sume that the san-guine tem-pera-ment it-self and the
dis-turb-ing in-flu-ence end in a men-tally-ac-com-plished fin-ish; a pos-sibly
dan-ger-ous man, prob-ably dan-ger-ous if un-selfish. In selfish men cau-tion
is as se-cure an ar-mour for their foes as for them-selves. What I think of
on this point is, when self is the fixed point the cent-ri-petal force is
bal-anced with the cent-ri-fu-gal; when duty, a cause, etc., is the fixed
point, the lat-ter force is para-mount, and only ac-ci-dent or a series of
ac-ci-dents can bal-ance it.


_Let-ter, Quin-cey P. Mor-ris to Hon. Ar-thur Holm-wood._

"_25 May._

"My dear Art,--

"We've told yarns by the camp-fire in the prair-ies; and dressed one
an-other's wounds after try-ing a land-ing at the Mar-que-sas; and drunk
healths on the shore of Tit-ic-aca. There are more yarns to be told, and
other wounds to be healed, and an-other health to be drunk. Won't you let
this be at my camp-fire to-mor-row night? I have no hes-it-a-tion in ask-ing
you, as I know a cer-tain lady is en-gaged to a cer-tain din-ner-party, and
that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the
Korea, Jack Se-ward. He's com-ing, too, and we both want to mingle our
weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to
the hap-pi-est man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart
that God has made and the best worth win-ning. We prom-ise you a hearty
wel-come, and a lov-ing greet-ing, and a health as true as your own right
hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to
a cer-tain pair of eyes. Come!

"Yours, as ever and al-ways,

"QUINCEY P. MORRIS."


_Tele-gram from Ar-thur Holm-wood to Quin-cey P. Mor-ris._

"_26 May._

"Count me in every time. I bear mes-sages which will make both your ears
tingle.

"ART."




CHAPTER VI

MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


_24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at the sta-tion, look-ing sweeter and
love-lier than ever, and we drove up to the house at the Cres-cent in
which they have rooms. This is a lovely place. The little river, the
Esk, runs through a deep val-ley, which broadens out as it comes near the
har-bour. A great via-duct runs across, with high piers, through which the
view seems some-how fur-ther away than it really is. The val-ley is
beau-ti-fully green, and it is so steep that when you are on the high land
on either side you look right across it, un-less you are near enough to
see down. The houses of the old town--the side away from us--are all
red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other any-how, like the
pic-tures we see of Nurem-berg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby
Ab-bey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of part of
"Marmion," where the girl was built up in the wall. It is a most noble
ruin, of im-mense size, and full of beau-ti-ful and ro-mantic bits; there is
a le-gend that a white lady is seen in one of the win-dows. Between it and
the town there is an-other church, the par-ish one, round which is a big
grave-yard, all full of tomb-stones. This is to my mind the nicest spot in
Whitby, for it lies right over the town, and has a full view of the
har-bour and all up the bay to where the head-land called Ket-tle-ness
stretches out into the sea. It des-cends so steeply over the har-bour that
part of the bank has fallen away, and some of the graves have been
des-troyed. In one place part of the stone-work of the graves stretches
out over the sandy path-way far be-low. There are walks, with seats be-side
them, through the church-yard; and people go and sit there all day long
look-ing at the beau-ti-ful view and en-joy-ing the breeze. I shall come and
sit here very of-ten my-self and work. Indeed, I am writ-ing now, with my
book on my knee, and listen-ing to the talk of three old men who are
sit-ting be-side me. They seem to do noth-ing all day but sit up here and
talk.

The har-bour lies be-low me, with, on the far side, one long gran-ite wall
stretch-ing out into the sea, with a curve out-wards at the end of it, in
the middle of which is a light-house. A heavy sea-wall runs along out-side
of it. On the near side, the sea-wall makes an el-bow crooked in-versely,
and its end too has a light-house. Between the two piers there is a
nar-row open-ing into the har-bour, which then sud-denly widens.

It is nice at high wa-ter; but when the tide is out it shoals away to
noth-ing, and there is merely the stream of the Esk, run-ning between
banks of sand, with rocks here and there. Out-side the har-bour on this
side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of
which runs straight out from be-hind the south light-house. At the end of
it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a
mourn-ful sound on the wind. They have a le-gend here that when a ship is
lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the old man about this; he
is com-ing this way....

He is a funny old man. He must be aw-fully old, for his face is all
gnarled and twis-ted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that he is
nearly a hun-dred, and that he was a sailor in the Green-land fish-ing
fleet when Water-loo was fought. He is, I am afraid, a very scep-tical
per-son, for when I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady
at the ab-bey he said very brusquely:--

"I wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. Them things be all wore out.
Mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do say that they wasn't in
my time. They be all very well for comers and trip-pers, an' the like,
but not for a nice young lady like you. Them feet-folks from York and
Leeds that be al-ways eatin' cured her-rin's an' drinkin' tea an' lookin'
out to buy cheap jet would creed aught. I won-der masel' who'd be
bothered tel-lin' lies to them--even the news-pa-pers, which is full of
fool-talk." I thought he would be a good per-son to learn in-ter-est-ing
things from, so I asked him if he would mind telling me some-thing about
the whale-fish-ing in the old days. He was just set-tling him-self to be-gin
when the clock struck six, whereupon he la-boured to get up, and said:--

"I must gang ageean-wards home now, miss. My grand-daugh-ter doesn't like
to be kept waitin' when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to
crammle aboon the grees, for there be a many of 'em; an', miss, I lack
belly-tim-ber sairly by the clock."

He hobbled away, and I could see him hur-ry-ing, as well as he could, down
the steps. The steps are a great fea-ture on the place. They lead from
the town up to the church, there are hun-dreds of them--I do not know how
many--and they wind up in a del-ic-ate curve; the slope is so gentle that
a horse could eas-ily walk up and down them. I think they must ori-gin-ally
have had some-thing to do with the ab-bey. I shall go home too. Lucy went
out vis-it-ing with her mother, and as they were only duty calls, I did
not go. They will be home by this.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 August._--I came up here an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a most
in-ter-est-ing talk with my old friend and the two oth-ers who al-ways come
and join him. He is evid-ently the Sir Oracle of them, and I should think
must have been in his time a most dic-tat-orial per-son. He will not ad-mit
any-thing, and down-faces every-body. If he can't out-ar-gue them he bul-lies
them, and then takes their si-lence for agree-ment with his views. Lucy
was look-ing sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got a
beau-ti-ful col-our since she has been here. I no-ticed that the old men did
not lose any time in com-ing up and sit-ting near her when we sat down.
She is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love with her
on the spot. Even my old man suc-cumbed and did not con-tra-dict her, but
gave me double share in-stead. I got him on the sub-ject of the le-gends,
and he went off at once into a sort of ser-mon. I must try to re-mem-ber it
and put it down:--

"It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and bar-rel; that's what it be, an'
nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' bar-guests an' bogles
an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy wo-men
a-bel-d-erin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs
an' warnin's, be all in-ven-ted by par-sons an' ill-some beuk-bod-ies an'
rail-way touters to skeer an' scun-ner haff-lin's, an' to get folks to do
somethin' that they don't other in-cline to. It makes me ire-ful to think
o' them. Why, it's them that, not con-tent with printin' lies on pa-per
an' preachin' them out of pul-pits, does want to be cut-tin' them on the
tomb-stones. Look here all around you in what airt ye will; all them
steans, holdin' up their heads as well as they can out of their pride,
is acant--simply tum-blin' down with the weight o' the lies wrote on
them, 'Here lies the body' or 'Sacred to the memory' wrote on all of
them, an' yet in nigh half of them there bean't no bod-ies at all; an'
the memor-ies of them bean't cared a pinch of snuff about, much less
sac-red. Lies all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or an-other! My
gog, but it'll be a quare scow-der-ment at the Day of Judg-ment when they
come tum-blin' up in their death-sarks, all jouped to-gether an' tryin' to
drag their tomb-steans with them to prove how good they was; some of them
trimmlin' and ditherin', with their hands that dozzened an' slippy from
lyin' in the sea that they can't even keep their grup o' them."

I could see from the old fel-low's self-sat-is-fied air and the way in
which he looked round for the ap-proval of his cronies that he was
"show-ing off," so I put in a word to keep him go-ing:--

"Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be ser-i-ous. Surely these tomb-stones are not
all wrong?"

"Yab-blins! There may be a poor-ish few not wrong, savin' where they make
out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be
like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only lies. Now
look you here; you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I
nod-ded, for I thought it bet-ter to as-sent, though I did not quite
un-der-stand his dia-lect. I knew it had some-thing to do with the church.
He went on: "And you con-sate that all these steans be aboon folk that be
happed here, snod an' snog?" I as-sen-ted again. "Then that be just where
the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as
old Dun's 'bacca-box on Fri-day night." He nudged one of his com-pan-ions,
and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be oth-er-wise? Look at
that one, the af-t-est abaft the bier-bank: read it!" I went over and
read:--

"Ed-ward Spencelagh, mas-ter mar-iner, murdered by pir-ates off the coast of
Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30." When I came back Mr. Swales went on:--

"Who brought him home, I won-der, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast
of Andres! an' you con-sated his body lay un-der! Why, I could name ye a
dozen whose bones lie in the Green-land seas above"--he poin-ted
north-wards--"or where the cur-rents may have drif-ted them. There be the
steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of
the lies from here. This Braith-waite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in
the _Lively_ off Green-land in '20; or Andrew Wood-house, drowned in the
same seas in 1777; or John Pax-ton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year
later; or old John Rawl-ings, whose grand-father sailed with me, drowned
in the Gulf of Fin-land in '50. Do ye think that all these men will have
to make a rush to Whitby when the trum-pet sounds? I have me an-ther-ums
aboot it! I tell ye that when they got here they'd be jommlin' an'
jost-lin' one an-other that way that it 'ud be like a fight up on the ice
in the old days, when we'd be at one an-other from day-light to dark, an'
tryin' to tie up our cuts by the light of the au-rora borealis." This was
evid-ently local pleas-antry, for the old man cackled over it, and his
cronies joined in with gusto.

"But," I said, "surely you are not quite cor-rect, for you start on the
as-sump-tion that all the poor people, or their spir-its, will have to
take their tomb-stones with them on the Day of Judg-ment. Do you think
that will be really ne-ces-sary?"

"Well, what else be they tomb-stones for? An-swer me that, miss!"

"To please their re-l-at-ives, I sup-pose."

"To please their re-l-at-ives, you sup-pose!" This he said with in-tense
scorn. "How will it pleas-ure their re-l-at-ives to know that lies is wrote
over them, and that every-body in the place knows that they be lies?" He
poin-ted to a stone at our feet which had been laid down as a slab, on
which the seat was res-ted, close to the edge of the cliff. "Read the
lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The let-ters were up-side down to me
from where I sat, but Lucy was more op-pos-ite to them, so she leant over
and read:--

"Sacred to the memory of Ge-orge Canon, who died, in the hope of a
glor-i-ous re-sur-rec-tion, on July, 29, 1873, fall-ing from the rocks at
Ket-tle-ness. This tomb was erec-ted by his sor-row-ing mother to her dearly
be-loved son. 'He was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.'
Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see any-thing very funny in that!" She spoke
her com-ment very gravely and some-what severely.

"Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's be-cause ye don't gawm the
sor-rowin' mother was a hell-cat that hated him be-cause he was
acrewk'd--a reg-u-lar lam-iter he was--an' he hated her so that he
com-mit-ted sui-cide in or-der that she mightn't get an in-sur-ance she put on
his life. He blew nigh the top of his head off with an old mus-ket that
they had for scarin' the crows with. 'Twarn't for crows then, for it
brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he fell off the
rocks. And, as to hopes of a glor-i-ous re-sur-rec-tion, I've of-ten heard him
say masel' that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was so pi-ous
that she'd be sure to go to heaven, an' he didn't want to addle where
she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his
stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gab-riel keckle
when Ge-ordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tomb-stean bal-anced on
his hump, and asks it to be took as evid-ence!"

I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the con-ver-sa-tion as she
said, rising up:--

"Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is my fa-vour-ite seat, and I can-not
leave it; and now I find I must go on sit-ting over the grave of a
sui-cide."

"That won't harm ye, my pretty; an' it may make poor Ge-ordie glad-some to
have so trim a lass sit-tin' on his lap. That won't hurt ye. Why, I've
sat here off an' on for nigh twenty years past, an' it hasn't done me
no harm. Don't ye fash about them as lies un-der ye, or that doesn' lie
there either! It'll be time for ye to be get-ting scart when ye see the
tomb-steans all run away with, and the place as bare as a stubble-field.
There's the clock, an' I must gang. My ser-vice to ye, ladies!" And off
he hobbled.

Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was all so beau-ti-ful be-fore us that we
took hands as we sat; and she told me all over again about Ar-thur and
their com-ing mar-riage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I
haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The same day._ I came up here alone, for I am very sad. There was no
let-ter for me. I hope there can-not be any-thing the mat-ter with Jonathan.
The clock has just struck nine. I see the lights scattered all over the
town, some-times in rows where the streets are, and some-times singly;
they run right up the Esk and die away in the curve of the val-ley. To my
left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old house next
the ab-bey. The sheep and lambs are bleat-ing in the fields away be-hind
me, and there is a clat-ter of a don-key's hoofs up the paved road be-low.
The band on the pier is play-ing a harsh waltz in good time, and fur-ther
along the quay there is a Sal-va-tion Army meet-ing in a back street.
Neither of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see them
both. I won-der where Jonathan is and if he is think-ing of me! I wish he
were here.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_5 June._--The case of Ren-field grows more in-ter-est-ing the more I get to
un-der-stand the man. He has cer-tain qual-it-ies very largely de-veloped;
selfish-ness, secrecy, and pur-pose. I wish I could get at what is the
ob-ject of the lat-ter. He seems to have some settled scheme of his own,
but what it is I do not yet know. His re-deem-ing qual-ity is a love of
an-im-als, though, in-deed, he has such curi-ous turns in it that I
some-times ima-gine he is only ab-nor-mally cruel. His pets are of odd
sorts. Just now his hobby is catch-ing flies. He has at present such a
quant-ity that I have had my-self to ex-pos-tu-late. To my as-ton-ish-ment, he
did not break out into a fury, as I ex-pec-ted, but took the mat-ter in
simple ser-i-ous-ness. He thought for a mo-ment, and then said: "May I have
three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that would do. I
must watch him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_18 June._--He has turned his mind now to spiders, and has got sev-eral
very big fel-lows in a box. He keeps feed-ing them with his flies, and
the num-ber of the lat-ter is be-com-ing sens-ibly di-min-ished, al-though he
has used half his food in at-tract-ing more flies from out-side to his
room.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 July._--His spiders are now be-com-ing as great a nuis-ance as his
flies, and to-day I told him that he must get rid of them. He looked
very sad at this, so I said that he must clear out some of them, at all
events. He cheer-fully ac-qui-esced in this, and I gave him the same time
as be-fore for re-duc-tion. He dis-gus-ted me much while with him, for when a
hor-rid blow-fly, bloated with some car-rion food, buzzed into the room,
he caught it, held it ex-ult-antly for a few mo-ments between his fin-ger
and thumb, and, be-fore I knew what he was go-ing to do, put it in his
mouth and ate it. I scol-ded him for it, but he ar-gued quietly that it
was very good and very whole-some; that it was life, strong life, and
gave life to him. This gave me an idea, or the rudi-ment of one. I must
watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evid-ently some deep prob-lem
in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he is al-ways
jot-ting down some-thing. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of
fig-ures, gen-er-ally single num-bers ad-ded up in batches, and then the
totals ad-ded in batches again, as though he were "fo-cus-sing" some
ac-count, as the aud-it-ors put it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_8 July._--There is a method in his mad-ness, and the rudi-ment-ary idea in
my mind is grow-ing. It will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh,
un-con-scious cereb-ra-tion! you will have to give the wall to your
con-scious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few days, so that I
might no-tice if there were any change. Th-ings re-main as they were ex-cept
that he has par-ted with some of his pets and got a new one. He has
man-aged to get a spar-row, and has already par-tially tamed it. His means
of tam-ing is simple, for already the spiders have di-min-ished. Those that
do re-main, how-ever, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by
tempt-ing them with his food.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 July._--We are pro-gress-ing. My friend has now a whole colony of
spar-rows, and his flies and spiders are al-most ob-lit-er-ated. When I came
in he ran to me and said he wanted to ask me a great fa-vour--a very,
very great fa-vour; and as he spoke he fawned on me like a dog. I asked
him what it was, and he said, with a sort of rap-ture in his voice and
bear-ing:--

"A kit-ten, a nice little, sleek play-ful kit-ten, that I can play with,
and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not un-pre-pared for this
re-quest, for I had no-ticed how his pets went on in-creas-ing in size and
vi-va-city, but I did not care that his pretty fam-ily of tame spar-rows
should be wiped out in the same man-ner as the flies and the spiders; so
I said I would see about it, and asked him if he would not rather have a
cat than a kit-ten. His eager-ness be-trayed him as he answered:--

"Oh, yes, I would like a cat! I only asked for a kit-ten lest you should
re-fuse me a cat. No one would re-fuse me a kit-ten, would they?" I shook
my head, and said that at present I feared it would not be pos-sible, but
that I would see about it. His face fell, and I could see a warn-ing of
danger in it, for there was a sud-den fierce, side-long look which meant
killing. The man is an un-developed hom-icidal ma-niac. I shall test him
with his present crav-ing and see how it will work out; then I shall know
more.

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 p. m._--I have vis-ited him again and found him sit-ting in a corner
brood-ing. When I came in he threw him-self on his knees be-fore me and
im-plored me to let him have a cat; that his sal-va-tion de-pended upon it.
I was firm, how-ever, and told him that he could not have it, whereupon
he went without a word, and sat down, gnaw-ing his fin-gers, in the corner
where I had found him. I shall see him in the morn-ing early.

       *       *       *       *       *

_20 July._--Vis-ited Ren-field very early, be-fore the at-tend-ant went his
rounds. Found him up and hum-ming a tune. He was spread-ing out his sugar,
which he had saved, in the win-dow, and was mani-festly be-gin-ning his
fly-catch-ing again; and be-gin-ning it cheer-fully and with a good grace. I
looked around for his birds, and not see-ing them, asked him where they
were. He replied, without turn-ing round, that they had all flown away.
There were a few feath-ers about the room and on his pil-low a drop of
blood. I said noth-ing, but went and told the keeper to re-port to me if
there were any-thing odd about him dur-ing the day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 a. m._--The at-tend-ant has just been to me to say that Ren-field has
been very sick and has dis-gorged a whole lot of feath-ers. "My be-lief is,
doc-tor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he just took
and ate them raw!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 p. m._--I gave Ren-field a strong opi-ate to-night, enough to make
even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at it. The thought
that has been buzz-ing about my brain lately is com-plete, and the the-ory
proved. My hom-icidal ma-niac is of a pe-cu-liar kind. I shall have to
in-vent a new clas-si-fic-a-tion for him, and call him a zoöphag-ous
(life-eat-ing) ma-niac; what he de-sires is to ab-sorb as many lives as he
can, and he has laid him-self out to achieve it in a cu-mu-lat-ive way. He
gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then
wanted a cat to eat the many birds. What would have been his later
steps? It would al-most be worth while to com-plete the ex-per-i-ment. It
might be done if there were only a suf-fi-cient cause. Men sneered at
vi-vi-sec-tion, and yet look at its res-ults to-day! Why not ad-vance sci-ence
in its most dif-fi-cult and vi-tal as-pect--the know-ledge of the brain? Had
I even the secret of one such mind--did I hold the key to the fancy of
even one lun-atic--I might ad-vance my own branch of sci-ence to a pitch
com-pared with which Bur-don-Sander-son's physiology or Fer-rier's
brain-know-ledge would be as noth-ing. If only there were a suf-fi-cient
cause! I must not think too much of this, or I may be temp-ted; a good
cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an
ex-cep-tional brain, con-gen-it-ally?

How well the man reasoned; lun-at-ics al-ways do within their own scope. I
won-der at how many lives he val-ues a man, or if at only one. He has
closed the ac-count most ac-cur-ately, and to-day be-gun a new re-cord. How
many of us be-gin a new re-cord with each day of our lives?

To me it seems only yes-ter-day that my whole life ended with my new hope,
and that truly I began a new re-cord. So it will be un-til the Great
Re-corder sums me up and closes my ledger ac-count with a bal-ance to
profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I can-not be angry with you, nor can I be
angry with my friend whose hap-pi-ness is yours; but I must only wait on
hope-less and work. Work! work!

If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a
good, un-selfish cause to make me work--that would be in-deed hap-pi-ness.


_Mina Mur-ray's Journal._

_26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to ex-press my-self here; it
is like whis-per-ing to one's self and listen-ing at the same time. And
there is also some-thing about the short-hand sym-bols that makes it
dif-fer-ent from writ-ing. I am un-happy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I
had not heard from Jonathan for some time, and was very con-cerned; but
yes-ter-day dear Mr. Hawkins, who is al-ways so kind, sent me a let-ter from
him. I had writ-ten ask-ing him if he had heard, and he said the en-closed
had just been re-ceived. It is only a line dated from Castle Drac-ula,
and says that he is just start-ing for home. That is not like Jonathan;
I do not un-der-stand it, and it makes me un-easy. Then, too, Lucy,
al-though she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walk-ing in
her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have de-cided
that I am to lock the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has
got an idea that sleep-walk-ers al-ways go out on roofs of houses and
along the edges of cliffs and then get sud-denly wakened and fall over
with a des-pair-ing cry that echoes all over the place. Poor dear, she is
nat-ur-ally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that her hus-band, Lucy's
father, had the same habit; that he would get up in the night and dress
him-self and go out, if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be mar-ried in the
au-tumn, and she is already plan-ning out her dresses and how her house is
to be ar-ranged. I sym-path-ise with her, for I do the same, only Jonathan
and I will start in life in a very simple way, and shall have to try to
make both ends meet. Mr. Holm-wood--he is the Hon. Ar-thur Holm-wood, only
son of Lord Godalm-ing--is com-ing up here very shortly--as soon as he can
leave town, for his father is not very well, and I think dear Lucy is
count-ing the mo-ments till he comes. She wants to take him up to the seat
on the church-yard cliff and show him the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it
is the wait-ing which dis-turbs her; she will be all right when he
ar-rives.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am get-ting quite un-easy about him,
though why I should I do not know; but I do wish that he would write, if
it were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and each night I
am awakened by her mov-ing about the room. For-tunately, the weather is so
hot that she can-not get cold; but still the anxi-ety and the per-petu-ally
be-ing wakened is be-gin-ning to tell on me, and I am get-ting nervous and
wake-ful my-self. Thank God, Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Holm-wood has been
sud-denly called to Ring to see his father, who has been taken ser-i-ously
ill. Lucy frets at the post-pone-ment of see-ing him, but it does not touch
her looks; she is a trifle stouter, and her cheeks are a lovely
rose-pink. She has lost that an-æmic look which she had. I pray it will
all last.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 August._--Another week gone, and no news from Jonathan, not even to
Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope he is not ill. He
surely would have writ-ten. I look at that last let-ter of his, but
some-how it does not sat-isfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it is
his writ-ing. There is no mis-take of that. Lucy has not walked much in
her sleep the last week, but there is an odd con-cen-tra-tion about her
which I do not un-der-stand; even in her sleep she seems to be watch-ing
me. She tries the door, and find-ing it locked, goes about the room
search-ing for the key.

_6 August._--Another three days, and no news. This sus-pense is get-ting
dread-ful. If I only knew where to write to or where to go to, I should
feel easier; but no one has heard a word of Jonathan since that last
let-ter. I must only pray to God for pa-tience. Lucy is more ex-cit-able
than ever, but is oth-er-wise well. Last night was very threat-en-ing, and
the fish-er-men say that we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it and
learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun as I write is
hid-den in thick clouds, high over Ket-tle-ness. Everything is grey--ex-cept
the green grass, which seems like em-er-ald amongst it; grey earthy rock;
grey clouds, tinged with the sun-burst at the far edge, hang over the
grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fin-gers. The sea
is tum-bling in over the shal-lows and the sandy flats with a roar,
muffled in the sea-mists drift-ing in-land. The ho-ri-zon is lost in a grey
mist. All is vast-ness; the clouds are piled up like gi-ant rocks, and
there is a "brool" over the sea that sounds like some pres-age of doom.
Dark fig-ures are on the beach here and there, some-times half shrouded in
the mist, and seem "men like trees walk-ing." The fish-ing-boats are
ra-cing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into
the har-bour, bend-ing to the scup-pers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is
mak-ing straight for me, and I can see, by the way he lifts his hat, that
he wants to talk....

I have been quite touched by the change in the poor old man. When he sat
down be-side me, he said in a very gentle way:--

"I want to say some-thing to you, miss." I could see he was not at ease,
so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to speak
fully; so he said, leav-ing his hand in mine:--

"I'm afraid, my deary, that I must have shocked you by all the wicked
things I've been sayin' about the dead, and such like, for weeks past;
but I didn't mean them, and I want ye to re-mem-ber that when I'm gone. We
aud folks that be daffled, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't
al-to-gether like to think of it, and we don't want to feel scart of it;
an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I'd cheer up my
own heart a bit. But, Lord love ye, miss, I ain't afraid of dyin', not a
bit; only I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at
hand now, for I be aud, and a hun-dred years is too much for any man to
ex-pect; and I'm so nigh it that the Aud Man is already whet-tin' his
scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at
once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the An-gel of
Death will sound his trum-pet for me. But don't ye dooal an' greet, my
deary!"--for he saw that I was cry-ing--"if he should come this very
night I'd not re-fuse to an-swer his call. For life be, after all, only a
waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that
we can rightly de-pend on. But I'm con-tent, for it's comin' to me, my
deary, and comin' quick. It may be comin' while we be lookin' and
won-derin'. Maybe it's in that wind out over the sea that's bringin' with
it loss and wreck, and sore dis-tress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he
cried sud-denly. "There's some-thing in that wind and in the hoast beyont
that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the
air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me an-swer cheer-ful when my call
comes!" He held up his arms de-voutly, and raised his hat. His mouth
moved as though he were pray-ing. After a few minutes' si-lence, he got
up, shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled
off. It all touched me, and up-set me very much.

I was glad when the coast-guard came along, with his spy-glass un-der his
arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he al-ways does, but all the time
kept look-ing at a strange ship.

"I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Rus-sian, by the look of her;
but she's knock-ing about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind
a bit; she seems to see the storm com-ing, but can't de-cide whether to
run up north in the open, or to put in here. Look there again! She is
steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel;
changes about with every puff of wind. We'll hear more of her be-fore
this time to-mor-row."




CHAPTER VII

CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST


(_Pas-ted in Mina Mur-ray's Journal._)

From a Cor-res-pond-ent.

_Whit-by_.

One of the greatest and sudden-est storms on re-cord has just been
ex-per-i-enced here, with res-ults both strange and unique. The weather had
been some-what sul-try, but not to any de-gree un-com-mon in the month of
August. Saturday even-ing was as fine as was ever known, and the great
body of hol-i-day-makers laid out yes-ter-day for vis-its to Mul-grave Woods,
Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Run-swick, Staithes, and the vari-ous trips in
the neigh-bour-hood of Whitby. The steam-ers _Em-ma_ and _S-car-bor-ough_ made
trips up and down the coast, and there was an un-usual amount of
"trip-ping" both to and from Whitby. The day was un-usu-ally fine till the
af-ter-noon, when some of the gos-sips who fre-quent the East Cliff
church-yard, and from that com-mand-ing em-in-ence watch the wide sweep of
sea vis-ible to the north and east, called at-ten-tion to a sud-den show of
"mares'-tails" high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then
blow-ing from the south-west in the mild de-gree which in ba-ro-met-rical
lan-guage is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coast-guard on duty at once
made re-port, and one old fish-er-man, who for more than half a cen-tury has
kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, fore-told in an em-phatic
man-ner the com-ing of a sud-den storm. The ap-proach of sun-set was so very
beau-ti-ful, so grand in its masses of splen-didly-col-oured clouds, that
there was quite an as-semblage on the walk along the cliff in the old
church-yard to en-joy the beauty. Be-fore the sun dipped be-low the black
mass of Ket-tle-ness, stand-ing boldly athwart the west-ern sky, its
down-ward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sun-set-col-our--flame,
purple, pink, green, vi-olet, and all the tints of gold; with here and
there masses not large, but of seem-ingly ab-so-lute black-ness, in all
sorts of shapes, as well out-lined as co-lossal sil-hou-ettes. The
ex-per-i-ence was not lost on the paint-ers, and doubt-less some of the
sketches of the "Pre-lude to the Great Storm" will grace the R. A. and R.
I. walls in May next. More than one cap-tain made up his mind then and
there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the dif-fer-ent
classes of boats, would re-main in the har-bour till the storm had passed.
The wind fell away en-tirely dur-ing the even-ing, and at mid-night there
was a dead calm, a sul-try heat, and that pre-vail-ing in-tens-ity which, on
the ap-proach of thun-der, af-fects per-sons of a sens-it-ive nature. There
were but few lights in sight at sea, for even the coast-ing steam-ers,
which usu-ally "hug" the shore so closely, kept well to sea-ward, and but
few fish-ing-boats were in sight. The only sail no-tice-able was a for-eign
schooner with all sails set, which was seem-ingly go-ing west-wards. The
fool-hardi-ness or ig-nor-ance of her of-ficers was a pro-lific theme for
com-ment whilst she re-mained in sight, and ef-forts were made to sig-nal
her to re-duce sail in face of her danger. Be-fore the night shut down she
was seen with sails idly flap-ping as she gently rolled on the un-du-lat-ing
swell of the sea,

    "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean."

Shortly be-fore ten o'clock the still-ness of the air grew quite
op-press-ive, and the si-lence was so marked that the bleat-ing of a sheep
in-land or the bark-ing of a dog in the town was dis-tinctly heard, and the
band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a dis-cord in the
great har-mony of nature's si-lence. A little after mid-night came a
strange sound from over the sea, and high over-head the air began to
carry a strange, faint, hol-low boom-ing.

Then without warn-ing the tem-pest broke. With a rapid-ity which, at the
time, seemed in-cred-ible, and even af-ter-wards is im-possible to real-ize,
the whole as-pect of nature at once be-came con-vulsed. The waves rose in
grow-ing fury, each over-top-ping its fel-low, till in a very few minutes
the lately glassy sea was like a roar-ing and de-vour-ing mon-ster.
White-cres-ted waves beat madly on the level sands and rushed up the
shelving cliffs; oth-ers broke over the piers, and with their spume swept
the lanthorns of the light-houses which rise from the end of either pier
of Whitby Har-bour. The wind roared like thun-der, and blew with such
force that it was with dif-fi-culty that even strong men kept their feet,
or clung with grim clasp to the iron stan-chions. It was found ne-ces-sary
to clear the en-tire piers from the mass of on-look-ers, or else the
fatal-it-ies of the night would have been in-creased man-i-fold. To add to
the dif-fi-culties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog came
drift-ing in-land--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly fash-ion,
so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little ef-fort of
ima-gin-a-tion to think that the spir-its of those lost at sea were
touch-ing their liv-ing brethren with the clammy hands of death, and many
a one shuddered as the wreaths of sea-mist swept by. At times the mist
cleared, and the sea for some dis-tance could be seen in the glare of the
light-ning, which now came thick and fast, fol-lowed by such sud-den peals
of thun-der that the whole sky over-head seemed trem-bling un-der the shock
of the foot-steps of the storm.

Some of the scenes thus re-vealed were of im-meas-ur-able grandeur and of
ab-sorb-ing in-terest--the sea, run-ning moun-tains high, threw sky-wards with
each wave mighty masses of white foam, which the tem-pest seemed to
snatch at and whirl away into space; here and there a fish-ing-boat, with
a rag of sail, run-ning madly for shel-ter be-fore the blast; now and again
the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the sum-mit of the East
Cliff the new search-light was ready for ex-per-i-ment, but had not yet been
tried. The of-ficers in charge of it got it into work-ing or-der, and in
the pauses of the in-rush-ing mist swept with it the sur-face of the sea.
Once or twice its ser-vice was most ef-fect-ive, as when a fish-ing-boat,
with gun-wale un-der wa-ter, rushed into the har-bour, able, by the guid-ance
of the shel-ter-ing light, to avoid the danger of dash-ing against the
piers. As each boat achieved the safety of the port there was a shout of
joy from the mass of people on shore, a shout which for a mo-ment seemed
to cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush.

Be-fore long the search-light dis-covered some dis-tance away a schooner
with all sails set, ap-par-ently the same ves-sel which had been no-ticed
earlier in the even-ing. The wind had by this time backed to the east,
and there was a shud-der amongst the watch-ers on the cliff as they
real-ized the ter-rible danger in which she now was. Between her and the
port lay the great flat reef on which so many good ships have from time
to time suffered, and, with the wind blow-ing from its present quarter,
it would be quite im-possible that she should fetch the en-trance of the
har-bour. It was now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves were so
great that in their troughs the shal-lows of the shore were al-most
vis-ible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rush-ing with such
speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up some-where,
if it was only in hell." Then came an-other rush of sea-fog, greater than
any hitherto--a mass of dank mist, which seemed to close on all things
like a grey pall, and left avail-able to men only the or-gan of hear-ing,
for the roar of the tem-pest, and the crash of the thun-der, and the
boom-ing of the mighty bil-lows came through the damp ob-li-vion even louder
than be-fore. The rays of the search-light were kept fixed on the har-bour
mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was ex-pec-ted, and men waited
breath-less. The wind sud-denly shif-ted to the north-east, and the rem-nant
of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dic-tu_, between
the piers, leap-ing from wave to wave as it rushed at head-long speed,
swept the strange schooner be-fore the blast, with all sail set, and
gained the safety of the har-bour. The search-light fol-lowed her, and a
shud-der ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a
corpse, with droop-ing head, which swung hor-ribly to and fro at each
mo-tion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great
awe came on all as they real-ised that the ship, as if by a mir-acle, had
found the har-bour, un-steered save by the hand of a dead man! However,
all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words. The
schooner paused not, but rush-ing across the har-bour, pitched her-self on
that ac-cu-mu-la-tion of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many
storms into the south-east corner of the pier jut-ting un-der the East
Cliff, known loc-ally as Tate Hill Pier.

There was of course a con-sid-er-able con-cus-sion as the ves-sel drove up on
the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the
"top-ham-mer" came crash-ing down. But, strangest of all, the very in-stant
the shore was touched, an im-mense dog sprang up on deck from be-low, as
if shot up by the con-cus-sion, and run-ning for-ward, jumped from the bow
on the sand. Mak-ing straight for the steep cliff, where the church-yard
hangs over the lane-way to the East Pier so steeply that some of the flat
tomb-stones--"thruff-steans" or "through-stones," as they call them in
the Whitby ver-nacu-lar--ac-tu-ally pro-ject over where the sus-tain-ing cliff
has fallen away, it dis-ap-peared in the dark-ness, which seemed
in-tens-i-fied just bey-ond the fo-cus of the search-light.

It so happened that there was no one at the mo-ment on Tate Hill Pier, as
all those whose houses are in close prox-im-ity were either in bed or were
out on the heights above. Thus the coast-guard on duty on the east-ern
side of the har-bour, who at once ran down to the little pier, was the
first to climb on board. The men work-ing the search-light, after scour-ing
the en-trance of the har-bour without see-ing any-thing, then turned the
light on the derel-ict and kept it there. The coast-guard ran aft, and
when he came be-side the wheel, bent over to ex-am-ine it, and re-coiled at
once as though un-der some sud-den emo-tion. This seemed to pique gen-eral
curi-os-ity, and quite a num-ber of people began to run. It is a good way
round from the West Cliff by the Draw-bridge to Tate Hill Pier, but your
cor-res-pond-ent is a fairly good run-ner, and came well ahead of the crowd.
When I ar-rived, how-ever, I found already as-sembled on the pier a crowd,
whom the coast-guard and po-lice re-fused to al-low to come on board. By the
cour-tesy of the chief boat-man, I was, as your cor-res-pond-ent, per-mit-ted
to climb on deck, and was one of a small group who saw the dead sea-man
whilst ac-tu-ally lashed to the wheel.

It was no won-der that the coast-guard was sur-prised, or even awed, for
not of-ten can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened
by his hands, tied one over the other, to a spoke of the wheel. Between
the in-ner hand and the wood was a cru-ci-fix, the set of beads on which it
was fastened be-ing around both wrists and wheel, and all kept fast by
the bind-ing cords. The poor fel-low may have been seated at one time, but
the flap-ping and buf-feting of the sails had worked through the rud-der of
the wheel and dragged him to and fro, so that the cords with which he
was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Ac-cur-ate note was made of the
state of things, and a doc-tor--Sur-geon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East El-liot
Place--who came im-me-di-ately after me, de-clared, after mak-ing
ex-am-in-a-tion, that the man must have been dead for quite two days. In his
pocket was a bottle, care-fully corked, empty save for a little roll of
pa-per, which proved to be the ad-dendum to the log. The coast-guard said
the man must have tied up his own hands, fasten-ing the knots with his
teeth. The fact that a coast-guard was the first on board may save some
com-plic-a-tions, later on, in the Ad-mir-alty Court; for coast-guards can-not
claim the sal-vage which is the right of the first ci-vil-ian en-ter-ing on a
derel-ict. Already, how-ever, the legal tongues are wag-ging, and one young
law stu-dent is loudly as-sert-ing that the rights of the owner are already
com-pletely sac-ri-ficed, his prop-erty be-ing held in con-tra-ven-tion of the
stat-utes of mort-main, since the tiller, as em-blem-ship, if not proof, of
del-eg-ated pos-ses-sion, is held in a _dead hand_. It is need-less to say
that the dead steers-man has been rev-er-ently re-moved from the place where
he held his hon-our-able watch and ward till death--a stead-fast-ness as
noble as that of the young Cas-a-bi-anca--and placed in the mor-tu-ary to
await in-quest.

Already the sud-den storm is passing, and its fierce-ness is abat-ing;
crowds are scat-ter-ing home-ward, and the sky is be-gin-ning to red-den over
the York-shire wolds. I shall send, in time for your next is-sue, fur-ther
de-tails of the derel-ict ship which found her way so mi-ra-cu-lously into
har-bour in the storm.

_Whit-by_

_9 August._--The se-quel to the strange ar-rival of the derel-ict in the
storm last night is al-most more start-ling than the thing it-self. It
turns out that the schooner is a Rus-sian from Varna, and is called the
_De-meter_. She is al-most en-tirely in bal-last of sil-ver sand, with only a
small amount of cargo--a num-ber of great wooden boxes filled with mould.
This cargo was con-signed to a Whitby so-li-citor, Mr. S. F. Bil-ling-ton, of
7, The Cres-cent, who this morn-ing went aboard and form-ally took
pos-ses-sion of the goods con-signed to him. The Rus-sian con-sul, too,
act-ing for the charter-party, took formal pos-ses-sion of the ship, and
paid all har-bour dues, etc. Noth-ing is talked about here to-day ex-cept
the strange co-in-cid-ence; the of-fi-cials of the Board of Trade have been
most ex-act-ing in see-ing that every com-pli-ance has been made with
ex-ist-ing reg-u-la-tions. As the mat-ter is to be a "nine days' won-der," they
are evid-ently de-term-ined that there shall be no cause of after
com-plaint. A good deal of in-terest was abroad con-cern-ing the dog which
landed when the ship struck, and more than a few of the mem-bers of the
S. P. C. A., which is very strong in Whitby, have tried to be-friend the
an-imal. To the gen-eral dis-ap-point-ment, how-ever, it was not to be found;
it seems to have dis-ap-peared en-tirely from the town. It may be that it
was frightened and made its way on to the moors, where it is still
hid-ing in ter-ror. There are some who look with dread on such a
pos-sib-il-ity, lest later on it should in it-self be-come a danger, for it
is evid-ently a fierce brute. Early this morn-ing a large dog, a half-bred
mastiff be-long-ing to a coal mer-chant close to Tate Hill Pier, was found
dead in the road-way op-pos-ite to its mas-ter's yard. It had been fight-ing,
and mani-festly had had a sav-age op-pon-ent, for its throat was torn away,
and its belly was slit open as if with a sav-age claw.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--By the kind-ness of the Board of Trade in-spector, I have been
per-mit-ted to look over the log-book of the _De-meter_, which was in or-der
up to within three days, but con-tained noth-ing of spe-cial in-terest
ex-cept as to facts of miss-ing men. The greatest in-terest, how-ever, is
with re-gard to the pa-per found in the bottle, which was to-day pro-duced
at the in-quest; and a more strange nar-rat-ive than the two between them
un-fold it has not been my lot to come across. As there is no motive for
con-ceal-ment, I am per-mit-ted to use them, and ac-cord-ingly send you a
re-script, simply omit-ting tech-nical de-tails of seaman-ship and
su-per-cargo. It al-most seems as though the cap-tain had been seized with
some kind of mania be-fore he had got well into blue wa-ter, and that
this had de-veloped per-sist-ently through-out the voy-age. Of course my
state-ment must be taken _cum grano_, since I am writ-ing from the
dic-ta-tion of a clerk of the Rus-sian con-sul, who kindly trans-lated for
me, time be-ing short.

                         LOG OF THE "DEMETER."


_Varna to Whitby._

_Writ-ten 18 July, things so strange hap-pen-ing, that I shall keep
ac-cur-ate note hence-forth till we land._

       *       *       *       *       *

On 6 July we fin-ished tak-ing in cargo, sil-ver sand and boxes of earth.
At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates,
cook, and my-self (cap-tain).

       *       *       *       *       *

On 11 July at dawn entered Bos-phorus. Boarded by Turk-ish Cus-toms
of-ficers. Back-sheesh. All cor-rect. Under way at 4 p. m.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 12 July through Dard-anelles. More Cus-toms of-ficers and flag-boat of
guard-ing squad-ron. Back-sheesh again. Work of of-ficers thor-ough, but
quick. Want us off soon. At dark passed into Ar-chipelago.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dis-sat-is-fied about some-thing.
Seemed scared, but would not speak out.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 14 July was some-what anxious about crew. Men all steady fel-lows, who
sailed with me be-fore. Mate could not make out what was wrong; they only
told him there was _something_, and crossed them-selves. Mate lost tem-per
with one of them that day and struck him. Ex-pec-ted fierce quar-rel, but
all was quiet.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 16 July mate re-por-ted in the morn-ing that one of crew, Pet-ro-f-sky, was
miss-ing. Could not ac-count for it. Took lar-board watch eight bells last
night; was re-lieved by Abramoff, but did not go to bunk. Men more
down-cast than ever. All said they ex-pec-ted some-thing of the kind, but
would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate get-ting very
im-pa-tient with them; feared some trouble ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

On 17 July, yes-ter-day, one of the men, Ol-garen, came to my cabin, and in
an awe-struck way con-fided to me that he thought there was a strange man
aboard the ship. He said that in his watch he had been shel-ter-ing
be-hind the deck-house, as there was a rain-storm, when he saw a tall,
thin man, who was not like any of the crew, come up the com-pan-ion-way,
and go along the deck for-ward, and dis-ap-pear. He fol-lowed cau-tiously,
but when he got to bows found no one, and the hatch-ways were all closed.
He was in a panic of su-per-sti-tious fear, and I am afraid the panic may
spread. To al-lay it, I shall to-day search en-tire ship care-fully from
stem to stern.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later in the day I got to-gether the whole crew, and told them, as they
evid-ently thought there was some one in the ship, we would search from
stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to such
fool-ish ideas would de-mor-al-ise the men; said he would en-gage to keep
them out of trouble with a hand-spike. I let him take the helm, while the
rest began thor-ough search, all keep-ing abreast, with lan-terns: we left
no corner un-searched. As there were only the big wooden boxes, there
were no odd corners where a man could hide. Men much re-lieved when
search over, and went back to work cheer-fully. First mate scowled, but
said noth-ing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_22 July_.--Rough weather last three days, and all hands busy with
sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have for-got-ten their dread.
Mate cheer-ful again, and all on good terms. Praised men for work in bad
weather. Passed Gibral-ter and out through Straits. All well.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short,
and en-ter-ing on the Bay of Bis-cay with wild weather ahead, and yet last
night an-other man lost--dis-ap-peared. Like the first, he came off his
watch and was not seen again. Men all in a panic of fear; sent a round
robin, ask-ing to have double watch, as they fear to be alone. Mate
angry. Fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do
some vi-ol-ence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_28 July_.--Four days in hell, knock-ing about in a sort of mael-strom,
and the wind a tem-pest. No sleep for any one. Men all worn out. Hardly
know how to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. Se-cond mate
vo-lun-teered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours' sleep.
Wind abat-ing; seas still ter-rific, but feel them less, as ship is
stead-ier.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 July_.--Another tragedy. Had single watch to-night, as crew too
tired to double. When morn-ing watch came on deck could find no one
ex-cept steers-man. Raised out-cry, and all came on deck. Thor-ough search,
but no one found. Are now without second mate, and crew in a panic. Mate
and I agreed to go armed hence-forth and wait for any sign of cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 July_.--Last night. Re-joiced we are near-ing Eng-land. Weather fine,
all sails set. Re-tired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling
me that both man of watch and steers-man miss-ing. Only self and mate and
two hands left to work ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in
the Eng-lish Chan-nel to be able to sig-nal for help or get in some-where.
Not hav-ing power to work sails, have to run be-fore wind. Dare not lower,
as could not raise them again. We seem to be drift-ing to some ter-rible
doom. Mate now more de-mor-al-ised than either of men. His stronger nature
seems to have worked in-wardly against him-self. Men are bey-ond fear,
work-ing stolidly and pa-tiently, with minds made up to worst. They are
Rus-sian, he Rou-manian.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 August, mid-night_.--Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hear-ing a cry,
seem-ingly out-side my port. Could see noth-ing in fog. Rushed on deck, and
ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of man on
watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be past Straits
of Dover, as in a mo-ment of fog lift-ing he saw North Fore-land, just as
he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the North Sea, and
only God can guide us in the fog, which seems to move with us; and God
seems to have deser-ted us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 August_.--At mid-night I went to re-lieve the man at the wheel, and
when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we ran
be-fore it there was no yaw-ing. I dared not leave it, so shouted for the
mate. After a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flan-nels. He
looked wild-eyed and hag-gard, and I greatly fear his reason has given
way. He came close to me and whispered hoarsely, with his mouth to my
ear, as though fear-ing the very air might hear: "_It_ is here; I know
it, now. On the watch last night I saw It, like a man, tall and thin,
and ghastly pale. It was in the bows, and look-ing out. I crept be-hind
It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the
air." And as he spoke he took his knife and drove it sav-agely into
space. Then he went on: "But It is here, and I'll find It. It is in the
hold, per-haps in one of those boxes. I'll un-screw them one by one and
see. You work the helm." And, with a warn-ing look and his fin-ger on his
lip, he went be-low. There was spring-ing up a choppy wind, and I could
not leave the helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest
and a lan-tern, and go down the for-ward hatch-way. He is mad, stark,
rav-ing mad, and it's no use my try-ing to stop him. He can't hurt those
big boxes: they are in-voiced as "clay," and to pull them about is as
harm-less a thing as he can do. So here I stay, and mind the helm, and
write these notes. I can only trust in God and wait till the fog clears.
Then, if I can't steer to any har-bour with the wind that is, I shall cut
down sails and lie by, and sig-nal for help....

       *       *       *       *       *

It is nearly all over now. Just as I was be-gin-ning to hope that the mate
would come out calmer--for I heard him knock-ing away at some-thing in the
hold, and work is good for him--there came up the hatch-way a sud-den,
startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he
came as if shot from a gun--a ra-ging mad-man, with his eyes rolling and
his face con-vulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and then
looked round on the blanket of fog. His hor-ror turned to des-pair, and in
a steady voice he said: "You had bet-ter come too, cap-tain, be-fore it is
too late. _He_ is there. I know the secret now. The sea will save me
from Him, and it is all that is left!" Be-fore I could say a word, or
move for-ward to seize him, he sprang on the bul-wark and de-lib-er-ately
threw him-self into the sea. I sup-pose I know the secret too, now. It was
this mad-man who had got rid of the men one by one, and now he has
fol-lowed them him-self. God help me! How am I to ac-count for all these
hor-rors when I get to port? _When_ I get to port! Will that ever be?

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 August._--Still fog, which the sun-rise can-not pierce. I know there is
sun-rise be-cause I am a sailor, why else I know not. I dared not go
be-low, I dared not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in
the dim-ness of the night I saw It--Him! God for-give me, but the mate was
right to jump over-board. It was bet-ter to die like a man; to die like a
sailor in blue wa-ter no man can ob-ject. But I am cap-tain, and I must not
leave my ship. But I shall baffle this fiend or mon-ster, for I shall tie
my hands to the wheel when my strength be-gins to fail, and along with
them I shall tie that which He--It!--dare not touch; and then, come good
wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my hon-our as a cap-tain. I am
grow-ing weaker, and the night is com-ing on. If He can look me in the
face again, I may not have time to act.... If we are wrecked, may-hap
this bottle may be found, and those who find it may un-der-stand; if not,
... well, then all men shall know that I have been true to my trust. God
and the Blessed Vir-gin and the saints help a poor ig-nor-ant soul try-ing
to do his duty....

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course the ver-dict was an open one. There is no evid-ence to ad-duce;
and whether or not the man him-self com-mit-ted the murders there is now
none to say. The folk here hold al-most uni-ver-sally that the cap-tain is
simply a hero, and he is to be given a pub-lic fu-neral. Already it is
ar-ranged that his body is to be taken with a train of boats up the Esk
for a piece and then brought back to Tate Hill Pier and up the ab-bey
steps; for he is to be bur-ied in the church-yard on the cliff. The own-ers
of more than a hun-dred boats have already given in their names as
wish-ing to fol-low him to the grave.

No trace has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much
mourn-ing, for, with pub-lic opin-ion in its present state, he would, I
be-lieve, be ad-op-ted by the town. To-mor-row will see the fu-neral; and so
will end this one more "mys-tery of the sea."


_Mina Mur-ray's Journal._

_8 August._--Lucy was very rest-less all night, and I, too, could not
sleep. The storm was fear-ful, and as it boomed loudly among the
chim-ney-pots, it made me shud-der. When a sharp puff came it seemed to be
like a dis-tant gun. Strangely enough, Lucy did not wake; but she got up
twice and dressed her-self. For-tunately, each time I awoke in time and
man-aged to un-dress her without wak-ing her, and got her back to bed. It
is a very strange thing, this sleep-walk-ing, for as soon as her will is
thwarted in any phys-ical way, her in-ten-tion, if there be any,
dis-ap-pears, and she yields her-self al-most ex-actly to the routine of her
life.

Early in the morn-ing we both got up and went down to the har-bour to see
if any-thing had happened in the night. There were very few people about,
and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big,
grim-look-ing waves, that seemed dark them-selves be-cause the foam that
topped them was like snow, forced them-selves in through the nar-row mouth
of the har-bour--like a bul-ly-ing man go-ing through a crowd. Some-how I
felt glad that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but on land. But,
oh, is he on land or sea? Where is he, and how? I am get-ting fear-fully
anxious about him. If I only knew what to do, and could do any-thing!

       *       *       *       *       *

_10 August._--The fu-neral of the poor sea-cap-tain to-day was most
touch-ing. Every boat in the har-bour seemed to be there, and the coffin
was car-ried by cap-tains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the
church-yard. Lucy came with me, and we went early to our old seat, whilst
the cortège of boats went up the river to the Via-duct and came down
again. We had a lovely view, and saw the pro-ces-sion nearly all the way.
The poor fel-low was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we stood on
it when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much up-set.
She was rest-less and un-easy all the time, and I can-not but think that
her dream-ing at night is telling on her. She is quite odd in one thing:
she will not ad-mit to me that there is any cause for rest-less-ness; or if
there be, she does not un-der-stand it her-self. There is an ad-di-tional
cause in that poor old Mr. Swales was found dead this morn-ing on our
seat, his neck be-ing broken. He had evid-ently, as the doc-tor said,
fallen back in the seat in some sort of fright, for there was a look of
fear and hor-ror on his face that the men said made them shud-der. Poor
dear old man! Per-haps he had seen Death with his dy-ing eyes! Lucy is so
sweet and sens-it-ive that she feels in-flu-ences more acutely than other
people do. Just now she was quite up-set by a little thing which I did
not much heed, though I am my-self very fond of an-im-als. One of the men
who came up here of-ten to look for the boats was fol-lowed by his dog.
The dog is al-ways with him. They are both quiet per-sons, and I never saw
the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. Dur-ing the ser-vice the dog would
not come to its mas-ter, who was on the seat with us, but kept a few
yards off, bark-ing and howl-ing. Its mas-ter spoke to it gently, and then
harshly, and then an-grily; but it would neither come nor cease to make a
noise. It was in a sort of fury, with its eyes sav-age, and all its hairs
brist-ling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the war-path. Fin-ally
the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then
took it by the scruff of the neck and half dragged and half threw it on
the tomb-stone on which the seat is fixed. The mo-ment it touched the
stone the poor thing be-came quiet and fell all into a tremble. It did
not try to get away, but crouched down, quiv-er-ing and cower-ing, and was
in such a pi-ti-able state of ter-ror that I tried, though without ef-fect,
to com-fort it. Lucy was full of pity, too, but she did not at-tempt to
touch the dog, but looked at it in an ag-on-ised sort of way. I greatly
fear that she is of too su-per-sens-it-ive a nature to go through the world
without trouble. She will be dream-ing of this to-night, I am sure. The
whole ag-glom-er-a-tion of things--the ship steered into port by a dead
man; his at-ti-tude, tied to the wheel with a cru-ci-fix and beads; the
touch-ing fu-neral; the dog, now furi-ous and now in ter-ror--will all
af-ford ma-ter-ial for her dreams.

I think it will be best for her to go to bed tired out phys-ic-ally, so I
shall take her for a long walk by the cliffs to Robin Hood's Bay and
back. She ought not to have much in-clin-a-tion for sleep-walk-ing then.




CHAPTER VIII

MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL


_Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am tired! If it were not that I
had made my di-ary a duty I should not open it to-night. We had a lovely
walk. Lucy, after a while, was in gay spir-its, ow-ing, I think, to some
dear cows who came nos-ing to-wards us in a field close to the light-house,
and frightened the wits out of us. I be-lieve we for-got everything
ex-cept, of course, per-sonal fear, and it seemed to wipe the slate clean
and give us a fresh start. We had a cap-ital "severe tea" at Robin Hood's
Bay in a sweet little old-fash-ioned inn, with a bow-win-dow right over
the sea-weed-covered rocks of the strand. I be-lieve we should have
shocked the "New Wo-man" with our ap-pet-ites. Men are more tol-er-ant, bless
them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stop-pages to rest,
and with our hearts full of a con-stant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was
really tired, and we in-ten-ded to creep off to bed as soon as we could.
The young cur-ate came in, how-ever, and Mrs. Westenra asked him to stay
for sup-per. Lucy and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I
know it was a hard fight on my part, and I am quite heroic. I think that
some day the bish-ops must get to-gether and see about breed-ing up a new
class of cur-ates, who don't take sup-per, no mat-ter how they may be
pressed to, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep and
breath-ing softly. She has more col-our in her cheeks than usual, and
looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holm-wood fell in love with her see-ing her
only in the draw-ing-room, I won-der what he would say if he saw her now.
Some of the "New Wo-men" writers will some day start an idea that men and
wo-men should be al-lowed to see each other asleep be-fore pro-pos-ing or
ac-cept-ing. But I sup-pose the New Wo-man won't con-des-cend in fu-ture to
ac-cept; she will do the pro-pos-ing her-self. And a nice job she will make
of it, too! There's some con-sol-a-tion in that. I am so happy to-night,
be-cause dear Lucy seems bet-ter. I really be-lieve she has turned the
corner, and that we are over her troubles with dream-ing. I should be
quite happy if I only knew if Jonathan.... God bless and keep him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 August, 3 a. m._--Di-ary again. No sleep now, so I may as well write.
I am too agit-ated to sleep. We have had such an ad-ven-ture, such an
ag-on-ising ex-per-i-ence. I fell asleep as soon as I had closed my di-ary....
Sud-denly I be-came broad awake, and sat up, with a hor-rible sense of fear
upon me, and of some feel-ing of empti-ness around me. The room was dark,
so I could not see Lucy's bed; I stole across and felt for her. The bed
was empty. I lit a match and found that she was not in the room. The
door was shut, but not locked, as I had left it. I feared to wake her
mother, who has been more than usu-ally ill lately, so threw on some
clothes and got ready to look for her. As I was leav-ing the room it
struck me that the clothes she wore might give me some clue to her
dream-ing in-ten-tion. Dress-ing-gown would mean house; dress, out-side.
Dress-ing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said
to my-self, "she can-not be far, as she is only in her night-dress." I ran
down-stairs and looked in the sit-ting-room. Not there! Then I looked in
all the other open rooms of the house, with an ever-grow-ing fear
chilling my heart. Fin-ally I came to the hall door and found it open. It
was not wide open, but the catch of the lock had not caught. The people
of the house are care-ful to lock the door every night, so I feared that
Lucy must have gone out as she was. There was no time to think of what
might hap-pen; a vague, over-mas-ter-ing fear ob-scured all de-tails. I took a
big, heavy shawl and ran out. The clock was strik-ing one as I was in the
Cres-cent, and there was not a soul in sight. I ran along the North
Ter-race, but could see no sign of the white fig-ure which I ex-pec-ted. At
the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the har-bour to
the East Cliff, in the hope or fear--I don't know which--of see-ing Lucy
in our fa-vour-ite seat. There was a bright full moon, with heavy black,
driv-ing clouds, which threw the whole scene into a fleet-ing di-orama of
light and shade as they sailed across. For a mo-ment or two I could see
noth-ing, as the shadow of a cloud ob-scured St. Mary's Church and all
around it. Then as the cloud passed I could see the ru-ins of the ab-bey
com-ing into view; and as the edge of a nar-row band of light as sharp as
a sword-cut moved along, the church and the church-yard be-came gradu-ally
vis-ible. Whatever my ex-pect-a-tion was, it was not dis-ap-poin-ted, for
there, on our fa-vour-ite seat, the sil-ver light of the moon struck a
half-re-clin-ing fig-ure, snowy white. The com-ing of the cloud was too
quick for me to see much, for shadow shut down on light al-most
im-me-di-ately; but it seemed to me as though some-thing dark stood be-hind
the seat where the white fig-ure shone, and bent over it. What it was,
whether man or beast, I could not tell; I did not wait to catch an-other
glance, but flew down the steep steps to the pier and along by the
fish-mar-ket to the bridge, which was the only way to reach the East
Cliff. The town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see; I re-joiced
that it was so, for I wanted no wit-ness of poor Lucy's con-di-tion. The
time and dis-tance seemed end-less, and my knees trembled and my breath
came la-boured as I toiled up the end-less steps to the ab-bey. I must have
gone fast, and yet it seemed to me as if my feet were weighted with
lead, and as though every joint in my body were rusty. When I got al-most
to the top I could see the seat and the white fig-ure, for I was now
close enough to dis-tin-guish it even through the spells of shadow. There
was un-doubtedly some-thing, long and black, bend-ing over the
half-re-clin-ing white fig-ure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and
some-thing raised a head, and from where I was I could see a white face
and red, gleam-ing eyes. Lucy did not an-swer, and I ran on to the
en-trance of the church-yard. As I entered, the church was between me and
the seat, and for a minute or so I lost sight of her. When I came in
view again the cloud had passed, and the moon-light struck so bril-liantly
that I could see Lucy half re-clin-ing with her head ly-ing over the back
of the seat. She was quite alone, and there was not a sign of any liv-ing
thing about.

When I bent over her I could see that she was still asleep. Her lips
were par-ted, and she was breath-ing--not softly as usual with her, but in
long, heavy gasps, as though striv-ing to get her lungs full at every
breath. As I came close, she put up her hand in her sleep and pulled the
col-lar of her night-dress close around her throat. Whilst she did so
there came a little shud-der through her, as though she felt the cold. I
flung the warm shawl over her, and drew the edges tight round her neck,
for I dreaded lest she should get some deadly chill from the night air,
un-clad as she was. I feared to wake her all at once, so, in or-der to
have my hands free that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her
throat with a big safety-pin; but I must have been clumsy in my anxi-ety
and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breath-ing
be-came quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I
had her care-fully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet and then began
very gently to wake her. At first she did not re-spond; but gradu-ally she
be-came more and more un-easy in her sleep, moan-ing and sigh-ing
oc-ca-sion-ally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other
reas-ons, I wished to get her home at once, I shook her more for-cibly,
till fi-nally she opened her eyes and awoke. She did not seem sur-prised
to see me, as, of course, she did not real-ise all at once where she was.
Lucy al-ways wakes pret-tily, and even at such a time, when her body must
have been chilled with cold, and her mind some-what ap-palled at wak-ing
un-clad in a church-yard at night, she did not lose her grace. She
trembled a little, and clung to me; when I told her to come at once with
me home she rose without a word, with the obed-i-ence of a child. As we
passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy no-ticed me wince. She
stopped and wanted to in-sist upon my tak-ing my shoes; but I would not.
However, when we got to the path-way out-side the church-yard, where there
was a puddle of wa-ter, re-main-ing from the storm, I daubed my feet with
mud, us-ing each foot in turn on the other, so that as we went home, no
one, in case we should meet any one, should no-tice my bare feet.

For-tune fa-voured us, and we got home without meet-ing a soul. Once we saw
a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of
us; but we hid in a door till he had dis-ap-peared up an open-ing such as
there are here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as they call them in
Scot-land. My heart beat so loud all the time that some-times I thought I
should faint. I was filled with anxi-ety about Lucy, not only for her
health, lest she should suf-fer from the ex-pos-ure, but for her repu-ta-tion
in case the story should get wind. When we got in, and had washed our
feet, and had said a prayer of thank-ful-ness to-gether, I tucked her into
bed. Be-fore fall-ing asleep she asked--even im-plored--me not to say a
word to any one, even her mother, about her sleep-walk-ing ad-ven-ture. I
hes-it-ated at first to prom-ise; but on think-ing of the state of her
mother's health, and how the know-ledge of such a thing would fret her,
and think-ing, too, of how such a story might be-come dis-tor-ted--nay,
in-fal-libly would--in case it should leak out, I thought it wiser to do
so. I hope I did right. I have locked the door, and the key is tied to
my wrist, so per-haps I shall not be again dis-turbed. Lucy is sleep-ing
soundly; the re-flex of the dawn is high and far over the sea....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed
not to have even changed her side. The ad-ven-ture of the night does not
seem to have harmed her; on the con-trary, it has be-nefited her, for she
looks bet-ter this morn-ing than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to
no-tice that my clum-si-ness with the safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might
have been ser-i-ous, for the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have
pinched up a piece of loose skin and have trans-fixed it, for there are
two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the band of her night-dress
was a drop of blood. When I apo-lo-gised and was con-cerned about it, she
laughed and pet-ted me, and said she did not even feel it. For-tunately it
can-not leave a scar, as it is so tiny.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Same day, night._--We passed a happy day. The air was clear, and the
sun bright, and there was a cool breeze. We took our lunch to Mul-grave
Woods, Mrs. Westenra driv-ing by the road and Lucy and I walk-ing by the
cliff-path and join-ing her at the gate. I felt a little sad my-self, for
I could not but feel how _ab-so-lutely_ happy it would have been had
Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only be pa-tient. In the even-ing
we strolled in the Casino Ter-race, and heard some good mu-sic by Spohr
and Mack-en-zie, and went to bed early. Lucy seems more rest-ful than she
has been for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the door
and se-cure the key the same as be-fore, though I do not ex-pect any
trouble to-night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_12 August._--My ex-pect-a-tions were wrong, for twice dur-ing the night I
was wakened by Lucy try-ing to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep, to
be a little im-pa-tient at find-ing the door shut, and went back to bed
un-der a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the birds
chirp-ing out-side of the win-dow. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad to see,
was even bet-ter than on the pre-vi-ous morn-ing. All her old gaiety of
man-ner seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in be-side me
and told me all about Ar-thur. I told her how anxious I was about
Jonathan, and then she tried to com-fort me. Well, she suc-ceeded
some-what, for, though sym-pathy can't al-ter facts, it can help to make
them more bear-able.

       *       *       *       *       *

_13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as
be-fore. Again I awoke in the night, and found Lucy sit-ting up in bed,
still asleep, point-ing to the win-dow. I got up quietly, and pulling
aside the blind, looked out. It was bril-liant moon-light, and the soft
ef-fect of the light over the sea and sky--merged to-gether in one great,
si-lent mys-tery--was beau-ti-ful bey-ond words. Between me and the moon-light
flit-ted a great bat, com-ing and go-ing in great whirl-ing circles. Once or
twice it came quite close, but was, I sup-pose, frightened at see-ing me,
and flit-ted away across the har-bour to-wards the ab-bey. When I came back
from the win-dow Lucy had lain down again, and was sleep-ing peace-fully.
She did not stir again all night.

       *       *       *       *       *

_14 August._--On the East Cliff, read-ing and writ-ing all day. Lucy seems
to have be-come as much in love with the spot as I am, and it is hard to
get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or
din-ner. This af-ter-noon she made a funny re-mark. We were com-ing home for
din-ner, and had come to the top of the steps up from the West Pier and
stopped to look at the view, as we gen-er-ally do. The set-ting sun, low
down in the sky, was just drop-ping be-hind Ket-tle-ness; the red light was
thrown over on the East Cliff and the old ab-bey, and seemed to bathe
everything in a beau-ti-ful rosy glow. We were si-lent for a while, and
sud-denly Lucy mur-mured as if to her-self:--

"His red eyes again! They are just the same." It was such an odd
ex-pres-sion, com-ing _apro-pos_ of noth-ing, that it quite startled me. I
slewed round a little, so as to see Lucy well without seem-ing to stare
at her, and saw that she was in a half-dreamy state, with an odd look on
her face that I could not quite make out; so I said noth-ing, but
fol-lowed her eyes. She ap-peared to be look-ing over at our own seat,
whereon was a dark fig-ure seated alone. I was a little startled my-self,
for it seemed for an in-stant as if the stranger had great eyes like
burn-ing flames; but a second look dis-pelled the il-lu-sion. The red
sun-light was shin-ing on the win-dows of St. Mary's Church be-hind our
seat, and as the sun dipped there was just suf-fi-cient change in the
re-frac-tion and re-flec-tion to make it ap-pear as if the light moved. I
called Lucy's at-ten-tion to the pe-cu-liar ef-fect, and she be-came her-self
with a start, but she looked sad all the same; it may have been that she
was think-ing of that ter-rible night up there. We never refer to it; so I
said noth-ing, and we went home to din-ner. Lucy had a head-ache and went
early to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out for a little stroll my-self;
I walked along the cliffs to the west-ward, and was full of sweet
sad-ness, for I was think-ing of Jonathan. When com-ing home--it was then
bright moon-light, so bright that, though the front of our part of the
Cres-cent was in shadow, everything could be well seen--I threw a glance
up at our win-dow, and saw Lucy's head lean-ing out. I thought that
per-haps she was look-ing out for me, so I opened my handker-chief and
waved it. She did not no-tice or make any move-ment whatever. Just then,
the moon-light crept round an angle of the build-ing, and the light fell
on the win-dow. There dis-tinctly was Lucy with her head ly-ing up against
the side of the win-dow-sill and her eyes shut. She was fast asleep, and
by her, seated on the win-dow-sill, was some-thing that looked like a
good-sized bird. I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran up-stairs,
but as I came into the room she was mov-ing back to her bed, fast
asleep, and breath-ing heav-ily; she was hold-ing her hand to her throat,
as though to pro-tect it from cold.

I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; I have taken care that the
door is locked and the win-dow se-curely fastened.

She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont, and
there is a drawn, hag-gard look un-der her eyes which I do not like. I
fear she is fret-ting about some-thing. I wish I could find out what it
is.

       *       *       *       *       *

_15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was lan-guid and tired, and
slept on after we had been called. We had a happy sur-prise at break-fast.
Ar-thur's father is bet-ter, and wants the mar-riage to come off soon. Lucy
is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later on
in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her
very own, but she is re-joiced that she is soon to have some one to
pro-tect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She con-fided to me that she has got
her death-war-rant. She has not told Lucy, and made me prom-ise secrecy;
her doc-tor told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for
her heart is weak-en-ing. At any time, even now, a sud-den shock would be
al-most sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the af-fair of
the dread-ful night of Lucy's sleep-walk-ing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 August._--No di-ary for two whole days. I have not had the heart to
write. Some sort of shad-owy pall seems to be com-ing over our hap-pi-ness.
No news from Jonathan, and Lucy seems to be grow-ing weaker, whilst her
mother's hours are num-ber-ing to a close. I do not un-der-stand Lucy's
fad-ing away as she is do-ing. She eats well and sleeps well, and en-joys
the fresh air; but all the time the roses in her cheeks are fad-ing, and
she gets weaker and more lan-guid day by day; at night I hear her gasp-ing
as if for air. I keep the key of our door al-ways fastened to my wrist at
night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and sits at the open
win-dow. Last night I found her lean-ing out when I woke up, and when I
tried to wake her I could not; she was in a faint. When I man-aged to
re-store her she was as weak as wa-ter, and cried si-lently between long,
pain-ful struggles for breath. When I asked her how she came to be at the
win-dow she shook her head and turned away. I trust her feel-ing ill may
not be from that un-lucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her throat
just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds seem not to have healed.
They are still open, and, if any-thing, lar-ger than be-fore, and the
edges of them are faintly white. They are like little white dots with
red centres. Un-less they heal within a day or two, I shall in-sist on the
doc-tor see-ing about them.


_Let-ter, Samuel F. Bil-ling-ton & Son, Soli-cit-ors, Whitby, to Messrs.
Carter, Pater-son & Co., Lon-don._

"_17 August._

"Dear Sirs,--

"Here-with please re-ceive in-voice of goods sent by Great North-ern
Rail-way. Same are to be de-livered at Car-fax, near Purfleet, im-me-di-ately
on re-ceipt at goods sta-tion King's Cross. The house is at present empty,
but en-closed please find keys, all of which are la-belled.

"You will please de-posit the boxes, fifty in num-ber, which form the
con-sign-ment, in the par-tially ruined build-ing form-ing part of the house
and marked 'A' on rough dia-gram en-closed. Your agent will eas-ily
re-cog-nise the loc-al-ity, as it is the an-cient chapel of the man-sion. The
goods leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be due at King's
Cross at 4:30 to-mor-row af-ter-noon. As our cli-ent wishes the de-liv-ery
made as soon as pos-sible, we shall be ob-liged by your hav-ing teams ready
at King's Cross at the time named and forth-with con-vey-ing the goods to
des-tin-a-tion. In or-der to ob-vi-ate any delays pos-sible through any routine
re-quire-ments as to pay-ment in your de-part-ments, we en-close cheque
here-with for ten pounds (£10), re-ceipt of which please ac-know-ledge.
Should the charge be less than this amount, you can re-turn bal-ance; if
greater, we shall at once send cheque for dif-fer-ence on hear-ing from
you. You are to leave the keys on com-ing away in the main hall of the
house, where the pro-pri-etor may get them on his en-ter-ing the house by
means of his du-plic-ate key.

"Pray do not take us as ex-ceed-ing the bounds of busi-ness cour-tesy in
press-ing you in all ways to use the ut-most ex-ped-i-tion.

_"We are, dear Sirs,

"Faith-fully yours,

"SAMUEL F. BILLINGTON & SON."_


_Let-ter, Messrs. Carter, Pater-son & Co., Lon-don, to Messrs. Bil-ling-ton &
Son, Whitby._

"_21 August._

"Dear Sirs,--

"We beg to ac-know-ledge £10 re-ceived and to re-turn cheque £1 17s. 9d,
amount of over-plus, as shown in re-ceipted ac-count here-with. Goods are
de-livered in ex-act ac-cord-ance with in-struc-tions, and keys left in par-cel
in main hall, as dir-ec-ted.

"We are, dear Sirs,

"Yours re-spect-fully.

"_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO."


_Mina Mur-ray's Journal._

_18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sit-ting on the seat in the
church-yard. Lucy is ever so much bet-ter. Last night she slept well all
night, and did not dis-turb me once. The roses seem com-ing back already
to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-look-ing. If she
were in any way an-æmic I could un-der-stand it, but she is not. She is in
gay spir-its and full of life and cheer-ful-ness. All the mor-bid reti-cence
seems to have passed from her, and she has just re-minded me, as if I
needed any re-mind-ing, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this
very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me she tapped play-fully with
the heel of her boot on the stone slab and said:--

"My poor little feet didn't make much noise then! I daresay poor old Mr.
Swales would have told me that it was be-cause I didn't want to wake up
Ge-ordie." As she was in such a com-mu-nic-at-ive hu-mour, I asked her if she
had dreamed at all that night. Be-fore she answered, that sweet, puckered
look came into her fore-head, which Ar-thur--I call him Ar-thur from her
habit--says he loves; and, in-deed, I don't won-der that he does. Then she
went on in a half-dream-ing kind of way, as if try-ing to re-call it to
her-self:--

"I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be real. I only wanted to be
here in this spot--I don't know why, for I was afraid of some-thing--I
don't know what. I re-mem-ber, though I sup-pose I was asleep, passing
through the streets and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I went by, and
I leaned over to look at it, and I heard a lot of dogs howl-ing--the
whole town seemed as if it must be full of dogs all howl-ing at once--as
I went up the steps. Then I had a vague memory of some-thing long and
dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the sun-set, and some-thing very
sweet and very bit-ter all around me at once; and then I seemed sink-ing
into deep green wa-ter, and there was a singing in my ears, as I have
heard there is to drown-ing men; and then everything seemed passing away
from me; my soul seemed to go out from my body and float about the air.
I seem to re-mem-ber that once the West Light-house was right un-der me,
and then there was a sort of ag-on-ising feel-ing, as if I were in an
earth-quake, and I came back and found you shak-ing my body. I saw you do
it be-fore I felt you."

Then she began to laugh. It seemed a little un-canny to me, and I
listened to her breath-lessly. I did not quite like it, and thought it
bet-ter not to keep her mind on the sub-ject, so we drif-ted on to other
sub-jects, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got home the
fresh breeze had braced her up, and her pale cheeks were really more
rosy. Her mother re-joiced when she saw her, and we all spent a very
happy even-ing to-gether.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 August._--Joy, joy, joy! al-though not all joy. At last, news of
Jonathan. The dear fel-low has been ill; that is why he did not write. I
am not afraid to think it or say it, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent
me on the let-ter, and wrote him-self, oh, so kindly. I am to leave in the
morn-ing and go over to Jonathan, and to help to nurse him if ne-ces-sary,
and to bring him home. Mr. Hawkins says it would not be a bad thing if
we were to be mar-ried out there. I have cried over the good Sister's
let-ter till I can feel it wet against my bosom, where it lies. It is of
Jonathan, and must be next my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. My jour-ney
is all mapped out, and my lug-gage ready. I am only tak-ing one change of
dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to Lon-don and keep it till I send for
it, for it may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it to say
to Jonathan, my hus-band. The let-ter that he has seen and touched must
com-fort me till we meet.


_Let-ter, Sister Agatha, Hos-pital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary,
Buda-Pesth, to Miss Wil-helmina Mur-ray._

"_12 August._

"Dear Madam,--

"I write by de-sire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is him-self not strong
enough to write, though pro-gress-ing well, thanks to God and St. Joseph
and Ste. Mary. He has been un-der our care for nearly six weeks,
suf-fer-ing from a vi-ol-ent brain fever. He wishes me to con-vey his love,
and to say that by this post I write for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins,
Exeter, to say, with his du-ti-ful re-spects, that he is sorry for his
delay, and that all of his work is com-pleted. He will re-quire some few
weeks' rest in our san-at-orium in the hills, but will then re-turn. He
wishes me to say that he has not suf-fi-cient money with him, and that he
would like to pay for his stay-ing here, so that oth-ers who need shall
not be want-ing for help.

"Be-lieve me,

"Yours, with sym-pathy and all bless-ings,

"SISTER AGATHA.

"P. S.--My pa-tient be-ing asleep, I open this to let you know some-thing
more. He has told me all about you, and that you are shortly to be his
wife. All bless-ings to you both! He has had some fear-ful shock--so says
our doc-tor--and in his de-li-rium his rav-ings have been dread-ful; of
wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear to say of
what. Be care-ful with him al-ways that there may be noth-ing to ex-cite him
of this kind for a long time to come; the traces of such an ill-ness as
his do not lightly die away. We should have writ-ten long ago, but we
knew noth-ing of his friends, and there was on him noth-ing that any one
could un-der-stand. He came in the train from Klausen-burg, and the guard
was told by the sta-tion-mas-ter there that he rushed into the sta-tion
shout-ing for a ticket for home. See-ing from his vi-ol-ent de-mean-our that
he was Eng-lish, they gave him a ticket for the fur-thest sta-tion on the
way thither that the train reached.

"Be as-sured that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his
sweet-ness and gen-tle-ness. He is truly get-ting on well, and I have no
doubt will in a few weeks be all him-self. But be care-ful of him for
safety's sake. There are, I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many,
many, happy years for you both."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_19 August._--Strange and sud-den change in Ren-field last night. About
eight o'clock he began to get ex-cited and sniff about as a dog does when
set-ting. The at-tend-ant was struck by his man-ner, and know-ing my in-terest
in him, en-cour-aged him to talk. He is usu-ally re-spect-ful to the
at-tend-ant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was
quite haughty. Would not con-des-cend to talk with him at all. All he
would say was:--

     "I don't want to talk to you: you don't count now; the Master is at
     hand."

The at-tend-ant thinks it is some sud-den form of re-li-gious mania which has
seized him. If so, we must look out for squalls, for a strong man with
hom-icidal and re-li-gious mania at once might be dan-ger-ous. The
com-bin-a-tion is a dread-ful one. At nine o'clock I vis-ited him my-self. His
at-ti-tude to me was the same as that to the at-tend-ant; in his sub-lime
self-feel-ing the dif-fer-ence between my-self and at-tend-ant seemed to him
as noth-ing. It looks like re-li-gious mania, and he will soon think that
he him-self is God. These in-fin-ites-imal dis-tinc-tions between man and man
are too paltry for an Om-ni-po-tent Be-ing. How these mad-men give them-selves
away! The real God taketh heed lest a spar-row fall; but the God cre-ated
from hu-man van-ity sees no dif-fer-ence between an eagle and a spar-row. Oh,
if men only knew!

For half an hour or more Ren-field kept get-ting ex-cited in greater and
greater de-gree. I did not pre-tend to be watch-ing him, but I kept strict
ob-ser-va-tion all the same. All at once that shifty look came into his
eyes which we al-ways see when a mad-man has seized an idea, and with it
the shifty move-ment of the head and back which asylum at-tend-ants come to
know so well. He be-came quite quiet, and went and sat on the edge of his
bed resign-edly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought I
would find out if his apathy were real or only as-sumed, and tried to
lead him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to ex-cite
his at-ten-tion. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:--

"Bother them all! I don't care a pin about them."

"What?" I said. "You don't mean to tell me you don't care about
spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling
up with columns of small fig-ures.) To this he answered en-ig-mat-ic-ally:--

"The bride-maid-ens re-joice the eyes that wait the com-ing of the bride;
but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maid-ens shine not to the eyes
that are filled."

He would not ex-plain him-self, but re-mained ob-stin-ately seated on his bed
all the time I re-mained with him.

I am weary to-night and low in spir-its. I can-not but think of Lucy, and
how dif-fer-ent things might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral,
the mod-ern Morph-eus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O. H_{2}O! I must be care-ful not to let
it grow into a habit. No, I shall take none to-night! I have thought of
Lucy, and I shall not dis-hon-our her by mix-ing the two. If need be,
to-night shall be sleep-less....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Glad I made the res-ol-u-tion; glad-der that I kept to it. I had
lain toss-ing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the
night-watch-man came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that Ren-field
had es-caped. I threw on my clothes and ran down at once; my pa-tient is
too dan-ger-ous a per-son to be roam-ing about. Those ideas of his might
work out dan-ger-ously with strangers. The at-tend-ant was wait-ing for me.
He said he had seen him not ten minutes be-fore, seem-ingly asleep in his
bed, when he had looked through the ob-ser-va-tion-trap in the door. His
at-ten-tion was called by the sound of the win-dow be-ing wrenched out. He
ran back and saw his feet dis-ap-pear through the win-dow, and had at once
sent up for me. He was only in his night-gear, and can-not be far off.
The at-tend-ant thought it would be more use-ful to watch where he should
go than to fol-low him, as he might lose sight of him whilst get-ting out
of the build-ing by the door. He is a bulky man, and couldn't get through
the win-dow. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet fore-most,
and, as we were only a few feet above ground, landed un-hurt. The
at-tend-ant told me the pa-tient had gone to the left, and had taken a
straight line, so I ran as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt
of trees I saw a white fig-ure scale the high wall which sep-ar-ates our
grounds from those of the deser-ted house.

I ran back at once, told the watch-man to get three or four men
im-me-di-ately and fol-low me into the grounds of Car-fax, in case our friend
might be dan-ger-ous. I got a lad-der my-self, and cross-ing the wall,
dropped down on the other side. I could see Ren-field's fig-ure just
dis-ap-pear-ing be-hind the angle of the house, so I ran after him. On the
far side of the house I found him pressed close against the old
iron-bound oak door of the chapel. He was talk-ing, ap-par-ently to some
one, but I was afraid to go near enough to hear what he was say-ing, lest
I might frighten him, and he should run off. Chas-ing an er-rant swarm of
bees is noth-ing to fol-low-ing a na-ked lun-atic, when the fit of es-cap-ing
is upon him! After a few minutes, how-ever, I could see that he did not
take note of any-thing around him, and so ven-tured to draw nearer to
him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were clos-ing him
in. I heard him say:--

"I am here to do Your bid-ding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will
re-ward me, for I shall be faith-ful. I have wor-shipped You long and afar
off. Now that You are near, I await Your com-mands, and You will not pass
me by, will You, dear Master, in Your dis-tri-bu-tion of good things?"

He _is_ a selfish old beg-gar any-how. He thinks of the loaves and fishes
even when he be-lieves he is in a Real Pres-ence. His manias make a
start-ling com-bin-a-tion. When we closed in on him he fought like a ti-ger.
He is im-mensely strong, for he was more like a wild beast than a man. I
never saw a lun-atic in such a par-oxysm of rage be-fore; and I hope I
shall not again. It is a mercy that we have found out his strength and
his danger in good time. With strength and de-term-in-a-tion like his, he
might have done wild work be-fore he was caged. He is safe now at any
rate. Jack Shep-pard him-self couldn't get free from the strait-waist-coat
that keeps him re-strained, and he's chained to the wall in the pad-ded
room. His cries are at times aw-ful, but the si-lences that fol-low are
more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and move-ment.

Just now he spoke co-her-ent words for the first time:--

"I shall be pa-tient, Master. It is com-ing--com-ing--com-ing!"

So I took the hint, and came too. I was too ex-cited to sleep, but this
di-ary has quieted me, and I feel I shall get some sleep to-night.




CHAPTER IX


_Let-ter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

"_Buda-Pesth, 24 August._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"I know you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we
par-ted at the rail-way sta-tion at Whitby. Well, my dear, I got to Hull
all right, and caught the boat to Ham-burg, and then the train on here. I
feel that I can hardly re-call any-thing of the jour-ney, ex-cept that I
knew I was com-ing to Jonathan, and, that as I should have to do some
nurs-ing, I had bet-ter get all the sleep I could.... I found my dear one,
oh, so thin and pale and weak-look-ing. All the res-ol-u-tion has gone out
of his dear eyes, and that quiet dig-nity which I told you was in his
face has van-ished. He is only a wreck of him-self, and he does not
re-mem-ber any-thing that has happened to him for a long time past. At
least, he wants me to be-lieve so, and I shall never ask. He has had some
ter-rible shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were to try
to re-call it. Sister Agatha, who is a good creature and a born nurse,
tells me that he raved of dread-ful things whilst he was off his head. I
wanted her to tell me what they were; but she would only cross her-self,
and say she would never tell; that the rav-ings of the sick were the
secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vo-ca-tion should hear
them, she should re-spect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the
next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the sub-ject again,
and after say-ing that she could never men-tion what my poor dear raved
about, ad-ded: 'I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was not about
any-thing which he has done wrong him-self; and you, as his wife to be,
have no cause to be con-cerned. He has not for-got-ten you or what he owes
to you. His fear was of great and ter-rible things, which no mor-tal can
treat of.' I do be-lieve the dear soul thought I might be jeal-ous lest my
poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of
_my_ be-ing jeal-ous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whis-per, I
felt a thrill of joy through me when I _knew_ that no other wo-man was a
cause of trouble. I am now sit-ting by his bed-side, where I can see his
face while he sleeps. He is wak-ing!...

"When he woke he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to get some-thing
from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things.
I saw that amongst them was his note-book, and was go-ing to ask him to
let me look at it--for I knew then that I might find some clue to his
trouble--but I sup-pose he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent
me over to the win-dow, say-ing he wanted to be quite alone for a mo-ment.
Then he called me back, and when I came he had his hand over the
note-book, and he said to me very sol-emnly:--

"'Wil-helmina'--I knew then that he was in deadly earn-est, for he has
never called me by that name since he asked me to marry him--'you know,
dear, my ideas of the trust between hus-band and wife: there should be no
secret, no con-ceal-ment. I have had a great shock, and when I try to
think of what it is I feel my head spin round, and I do not know if it
was all real or the dream-ing of a mad-man. You know I have had brain
fever, and that is to be mad. The secret is here, and I do not want to
know it. I want to take up my life here, with our mar-riage.' For, my
dear, we had de-cided to be mar-ried as soon as the form-al-it-ies are
com-plete. 'Are you will-ing, Wil-helmina, to share my ig-nor-ance? Here is
the book. Take it and keep it, read it if you will, but never let me
know; un-less, in-deed, some sol-emn duty should come upon me to go back to
the bit-ter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, re-cor-ded here.' He fell
back ex-hausted, and I put the book un-der his pil-low, and kissed him. I
have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Su-per-ior to let our wed-ding be this
af-ter-noon, and am wait-ing her reply....

       *       *       *       *       *

"She has come and told me that the chap-lain of the Eng-lish mis-sion
church has been sent for. We are to be mar-ried in an hour, or as soon
after as Jonathan awakes....

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lucy, the time has come and gone. I feel very sol-emn, but very, very
happy. Jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was ready, and he
sat up in bed, propped up with pil-lows. He answered his 'I will' firmly
and strongly. I could hardly speak; my heart was so full that even those
words seemed to choke me. The dear sis-ters were so kind. Please God, I
shall never, never for-get them, nor the grave and sweet re-spons-ib-il-it-ies
I have taken upon me. I must tell you of my wed-ding present. When the
chap-lain and the sis-ters had left me alone with my hus-band--oh, Lucy, it
is the first time I have writ-ten the words 'my hus-band'--left me alone
with my hus-band, I took the book from un-der his pil-low, and wrapped it
up in white pa-per, and tied it with a little bit of pale blue rib-bon
which was round my neck, and sealed it over the knot with seal-ing-wax,
and for my seal I used my wed-ding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it
to my hus-band, and told him that I would keep it so, and then it would
be an out-ward and vis-ible sign for us all our lives that we trus-ted each
other; that I would never open it un-less it were for his own dear sake
or for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took my hand in his, and oh,
Lucy, it was the first time he took _his wife's_ hand, and said that it
was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that he would go
through all the past again to win it, if need be. The poor dear meant to
have said a part of the past, but he can-not think of time yet, and I
shall not won-der if at first he mixes up not only the month, but the
year.

"Well, my dear, what could I say? I could only tell him that I was the
hap-pi-est wo-man in all the wide world, and that I had noth-ing to give him
ex-cept my-self, my life, and my trust, and that with these went my love
and duty for all the days of my life. And, my dear, when he kissed me,
and drew me to him with his poor weak hands, it was like a very sol-emn
pledge between us....

"Lucy dear, do you know why I tell you all this? It is not only be-cause
it is all sweet to me, but be-cause you have been, and are, very dear to
me. It was my priv-ilege to be your friend and guide when you came from
the school-room to pre-pare for the world of life. I want you to see now,
and with the eyes of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that
in your own mar-ried life you too may be all happy as I am. My dear,
please Almighty God, your life may be all it prom-ises: a long day of
sun-shine, with no harsh wind, no for-get-ting duty, no dis-trust. I must
not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be
_al-ways_ as happy as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at
once, and, per-haps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan
is wak-ing--I must at-tend to my hus-band!

"Your ever-lov-ing

"MINA HARKER."


_Let-ter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._

"_Whitby, 30 August._

"My dearest Mina,--

"Oceans of love and mil-lions of kisses, and may you soon be in your own
home with your hus-band. I wish you could be com-ing home soon enough to
stay with us here. The strong air would soon re-store Jonathan; it has
quite re-stored me. I have an ap-pet-ite like a cor-mor-ant, am full of
life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that I have quite given
up walk-ing in my sleep. I think I have not stirred out of my bed for a
week, that is when I once got into it at night. Ar-thur says I am get-ting
fat. By the way, I for-got to tell you that Ar-thur is here. We have such
walks and drives, and rides, and row-ing, and ten-nis, and fish-ing
to-gether; and I love him more than ever. He _tells_ me that he loves me
more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me
more than he did then. But this is non-sense. There he is, call-ing to me.
So no more just at present from your lov-ing

"LUCY.

"P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems bet-ter, poor dear. "P. P.
S.--We are to be mar-ried on 28 Septem-ber."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_20 August._--The case of Ren-field grows even more in-ter-est-ing. He has
now so far quieted that there are spells of ces-sa-tion from his pas-sion.
For the first week after his at-tack he was per-petu-ally vi-ol-ent. Then one
night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept mur-mur-ing to
him-self: "Now I can wait; now I can wait." The at-tend-ant came to tell
me, so I ran down at once to have a look at him. He was still in the
strait-waist-coat and in the pad-ded room, but the suf-fused look had gone
from his face, and his eyes had some-thing of their old plead-ing--I might
al-most say, "cringing"--soft-ness. I was sat-is-fied with his present
con-di-tion, and dir-ec-ted him to be re-lieved. The at-tend-ants hes-it-ated,
but fi-nally car-ried out my wishes without protest. It was a strange
thing that the pa-tient had hu-mour enough to see their dis-trust, for,
com-ing close to me, he said in a whis-per, all the while look-ing
furt-ively at them:--

"They think I could hurt you! Fancy _me_ hurt-ing _y-ou_! The fools!"

It was sooth-ing, some-how, to the feel-ings to find my-self dis-so-ci-ated
even in the mind of this poor mad-man from the oth-ers; but all the same I
do not fol-low his thought. Am I to take it that I have any-thing in
com-mon with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand to-gether; or has
he to gain from me some good so stu-pendous that my well-be-ing is need-ful
to him? I must find out later on. To-night he will not speak. Even the
of-fer of a kit-ten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt him. He will
only say: "I don't take any stock in cats. I have more to think of now,
and I can wait; I can wait."

After a while I left him. The at-tend-ant tells me that he was quiet
un-til just be-fore dawn, and that then he began to get un-easy, and at
length vi-ol-ent, un-til at last he fell into a par-oxysm which ex-hausted
him so that he swooned into a sort of coma.

       *       *       *       *       *

... Three nights has the same thing happened--vi-ol-ent all day then quiet
from moon-rise to sun-rise. I wish I could get some clue to the cause. It
would al-most seem as if there was some in-flu-ence which came and went.
Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad ones. He
es-caped be-fore without our help; to-night he shall es-cape with it. We
shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to fol-low in case they
are re-quired....

       *       *       *       *       *

_23 August._--"The un-ex-pec-ted al-ways hap-pens." How well Dis-raeli knew
life. Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our
subtle ar-range-ments were for nought. At any rate, we have proved one
thing; that the spells of quiet-ness last a reas-on-able time. We shall in
fu-ture be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day. I have given
or-ders to the night at-tend-ant merely to shut him in the pad-ded room,
when once he is quiet, un-til an hour be-fore sun-rise. The poor soul's
body will en-joy the re-lief even if his mind can-not ap-pre-ci-ate it. Hark!
The un-ex-pec-ted again! I am called; the pa-tient has once more es-caped.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Another night ad-ven-ture. Ren-field art-fully waited un-til the
at-tend-ant was en-ter-ing the room to in-spect. Then he dashed out past him
and flew down the pas-sage. I sent word for the at-tend-ants to fol-low.
Again he went into the grounds of the deser-ted house, and we found him
in the same place, pressed against the old chapel door. When he saw me
he be-came furi-ous, and had not the at-tend-ants seized him in time, he
would have tried to kill me. As we were hold-ing him a strange thing
happened. He sud-denly re-doubled his ef-forts, and then as sud-denly grew
calm. I looked round in-stinct-ively, but could see noth-ing. Then I caught
the pa-tient's eye and fol-lowed it, but could trace noth-ing as it looked
into the moon-lit sky ex-cept a big bat, which was flap-ping its si-lent and
ghostly way to the west. Bats usu-ally wheel and flit about, but this one
seemed to go straight on, as if it knew where it was bound for or had
some in-ten-tion of its own. The pa-tient grew calmer every in-stant, and
presently said:--

"You needn't tie me; I shall go quietly!" Without trouble we came back
to the house. I feel there is some-thing omin-ous in his calm, and shall
not for-get this night....


_Lucy Westenra's Di-ary_

_Hilling-ham, 24 August._--I must im-it-ate Mina, and keep writ-ing things
down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I won-der when it will
be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel so un-happy. Last night I
seemed to be dream-ing again just as I was at Whitby. Per-haps it is the
change of air, or get-ting home again. It is all dark and hor-rid to me,
for I can re-mem-ber noth-ing; but I am full of vague fear, and I feel so
weak and worn out. When Ar-thur came to lunch he looked quite grieved
when he saw me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to be cheer-ful. I won-der
if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make an ex-cuse and
try.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 August._--Another bad night. Mother did not seem to take to my
pro-posal. She seems not too well her-self, and doubt-less she fears to
worry me. I tried to keep awake, and suc-ceeded for a while; but when the
clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so I must have been fall-ing
asleep. There was a sort of scratch-ing or flap-ping at the win-dow, but I
did not mind it, and as I re-mem-ber no more, I sup-pose I must then have
fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could re-mem-ber them. This
morn-ing I am hor-ribly weak. My face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains
me. It must be some-thing wrong with my lungs, for I don't seem ever to
get air enough. I shall try to cheer up when Ar-thur comes, or else I
know he will be miser-able to see me so.


_Let-ter, Ar-thur Holm-wood to Dr. Se-ward._

"_Al-bemarle Hotel, 31 August._

"My dear Jack,--

"I want you to do me a fa-vour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no spe-cial
dis-ease, but she looks aw-ful, and is get-ting worse every day. I have
asked her if there is any cause; I do not dare to ask her mother, for to
dis-turb the poor lady's mind about her daugh-ter in her present state of
health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has con-fided to me that her doom is
spoken--dis-ease of the heart--though poor Lucy does not know it yet. I
am sure that there is some-thing prey-ing on my dear girl's mind. I am
al-most dis-trac-ted when I think of her; to look at her gives me a pang. I
told her I should ask you to see her, and though she de-murred at
first--I know why, old fel-low--she fi-nally con-sen-ted. It will be a
pain-ful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is for _her_ sake, and
I must not hes-it-ate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to lunch at
Hilling-ham to-mor-row, two o'clock, so as not to arouse any sus-pi-cion in
Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an op-por-tun-ity of be-ing
alone with you. I shall come in for tea, and we can go away to-gether; I
am filled with anxi-ety, and want to con-sult with you alone as soon as I
can after you have seen her. Do not fail!

"ARTHUR."


_Tele-gram, Ar-thur Holm-wood to Se-ward._

"_1 Septem-ber._

"Am summoned to see my father, who is worse. Am writ-ing. Write me fully
by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if ne-ces-sary."


_Let-ter from Dr. Se-ward to Ar-thur Holm-wood._

"_2 Septem-ber._

"My dear old fel-low,--

"With re-gard to Miss Westenra's health I hasten to let you know at once
that in my opin-ion there is not any func-tional dis-turb-ance or any mal-ady
that I know of. At the same time, I am not by any means sat-is-fied with
her ap-pear-ance; she is woe-fully dif-fer-ent from what she was when I saw
her last. Of course you must bear in mind that I did not have full
op-por-tun-ity of ex-am-in-a-tion such as I should wish; our very friend-ship
makes a little dif-fi-culty which not even med-ical sci-ence or cus-tom can
bridge over. I had bet-ter tell you ex-actly what happened, leav-ing you to
draw, in a meas-ure, your own con-clu-sions. I shall then say what I have
done and pro-pose do-ing.

"I found Miss Westenra in seem-ingly gay spir-its. Her mother was present,
and in a few seconds I made up my mind that she was try-ing all she knew
to mis-lead her mother and pre-vent her from be-ing anxious. I have no
doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of cau-tion there is.
We lunched alone, and as we all ex-er-ted ourselves to be cheer-ful, we
got, as some kind of re-ward for our la-bours, some real cheer-ful-ness
amongst us. Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down, and Lucy was left with
me. We went into her bou-doir, and till we got there her gaiety re-mained,
for the ser-vants were com-ing and go-ing. As soon as the door was closed,
how-ever, the mask fell from her face, and she sank down into a chair
with a great sigh, and hid her eyes with her hand. When I saw that her
high spir-its had failed, I at once took ad-vant-age of her re-ac-tion to
make a dia-gnosis. She said to me very sweetly:--

"'I can-not tell you how I loathe talk-ing about my-self.' I re-minded her
that a doc-tor's con-fid-ence was sac-red, but that you were griev-ously
anxious about her. She caught on to my mean-ing at once, and settled that
mat-ter in a word. 'Tell Ar-thur everything you choose. I do not care for
my-self, but all for him!' So I am quite free.

"I could eas-ily see that she is some-what blood-less, but I could not see
the usual an-æmic signs, and by a chance I was ac-tu-ally able to test the
qual-ity of her blood, for in open-ing a win-dow which was stiff a cord
gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a
slight mat-ter in it-self, but it gave me an evid-ent chance, and I se-cured
a few drops of the blood and have ana-lysed them. The qual-it-at-ive
ana-lysis gives a quite nor-mal con-di-tion, and shows, I should in-fer, in
it-self a vig-or-ous state of health. In other phys-ical mat-ters I was quite
sat-is-fied that there is no need for anxi-ety; but as there must be a
cause some-where, I have come to the con-clu-sion that it must be some-thing
men-tal. She com-plains of dif-fi-culty in breath-ing sat-is-fact-or-ily at
times, and of heavy, leth-ar-gic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but
re-gard-ing which she can re-mem-ber noth-ing. She says that as a child she
used to walk in her sleep, and that when in Whitby the habit came back,
and that once she walked out in the night and went to East Cliff, where
Miss Mur-ray found her; but she as-sures me that of late the habit has not
re-turned. I am in doubt, and so have done the best thing I know of; I
have writ-ten to my old friend and mas-ter, Pro-fessor Van Helsing, of
Am-s-ter-dam, who knows as much about ob-scure dis-eases as any one in the
world. I have asked him to come over, and as you told me that all things
were to be at your charge, I have men-tioned to him who you are and your
re-la-tions to Miss Westenra. This, my dear fel-low, is in obed-i-ence to
your wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to do any-thing I can for
her. Van Helsing would, I know, do any-thing for me for a per-sonal
reason, so, no mat-ter on what ground he comes, we must ac-cept his
wishes. He is a seem-ingly ar-bit-rary man, but this is be-cause he knows
what he is talk-ing about bet-ter than any one else. He is a philo-sopher
and a meta-phys-i-cian, and one of the most ad-vanced sci-ent-ists of his day;
and he has, I be-lieve, an ab-so-lutely open mind. This, with an iron
nerve, a tem-per of the ice-brook, an in-dom-it-able res-ol-u-tion,
self-com-mand, and tol-er-a-tion ex-al-ted from vir-tues to bless-ings, and the
kind-li-est and truest heart that beats--these form his equip-ment for the
noble work that he is do-ing for man-kind--work both in the-ory and
prac-tice, for his views are as wide as his all-em-bra-cing sym-pathy. I
tell you these facts that you may know why I have such con-fid-ence in
him. I have asked him to come at once. I shall see Miss Westenra
to-mor-row again. She is to meet me at the Stores, so that I may not
alarm her mother by too early a re-pe-ti-tion of my call.

"Yours al-ways,

"JOHN SEWARD."


_Let-ter, Abra-ham Van Helsing, M. D., D. Ph., D. Lit., etc., etc., to Dr.
Se-ward._

"_2 Septem-ber._

"My good Friend,--

"When I have re-ceived your let-ter I am already com-ing to you. By good
for-tune I can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have
trus-ted me. Were for-tune other, then it were bad for those who have
trus-ted, for I come to my friend when he call me to aid those he holds
dear. Tell your friend that when that time you suck from my wound so
swiftly the poison of the gan-grene from that knife that our other
friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he wants my
aids and you call for them than all his great for-tune could do. But it
is pleas-ure ad-ded to do for him, your friend; it is to you that I come.
Have then rooms for me at the Great Eastern Hotel, so that I may be near
to hand, and please it so ar-range that we may see the young lady not too
late on to-mor-row, for it is likely that I may have to re-turn here that
night. But if need be I shall come again in three days, and stay longer
if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John.

 "VAN HELSING."


_Let-ter, Dr. Se-ward to Hon. Ar-thur Holm-wood._

"_3 Septem-ber._

"My dear Art,--

"Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to Hilling-ham, and
found that, by Lucy's dis-cre-tion, her mother was lunch-ing out, so that
we were alone with her. Van Helsing made a very care-ful ex-am-in-a-tion of
the pa-tient. He is to re-port to me, and I shall ad-vise you, for of
course I was not present all the time. He is, I fear, much con-cerned,
but says he must think. When I told him of our friend-ship and how you
trust to me in the mat-ter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think.
Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not
jest-ing. This is no jest, but life and death, per-haps more.' I asked
what he meant by that, for he was very ser-i-ous. This was when we had
come back to town, and he was hav-ing a cup of tea be-fore start-ing on his
re-turn to Am-s-ter-dam. He would not give me any fur-ther clue. You must not
be angry with me, Art, be-cause his very reti-cence means that all his
brains are work-ing for her good. He will speak plainly enough when the
time comes, be sure. So I told him I would simply write an ac-count of
our visit, just as if I were do-ing a de-script-ive spe-cial art-icle for
_The Daily Tele-graph_. He seemed not to no-tice, but re-marked that the
smuts in Lon-don were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was a
stu-dent here. I am to get his re-port to-mor-row if he can pos-sibly make
it. In any case I am to have a let-ter.

"Well, as to the visit. Lucy was more cheer-ful than on the day I first
saw her, and cer-tainly looked bet-ter. She had lost some-thing of the
ghastly look that so up-set you, and her breath-ing was nor-mal. She was
very sweet to the pro-fessor (as she al-ways is), and tried to make him
feel at ease; though I could see that the poor girl was mak-ing a hard
struggle for it. I be-lieve Van Helsing saw it, too, for I saw the quick
look un-der his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began to chat of
all things ex-cept ourselves and dis-eases and with such an in-fin-ite
gen-i-al-ity that I could see poor Lucy's pre-tense of an-im-a-tion merge into
real-ity. Then, without any seem-ing change, he brought the con-ver-sa-tion
gently round to his visit, and suavely said:--

"'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleas-ure be-cause you are so
much be-loved. That is much, my dear, ever were there that which I do not
see. They told me you were down in the spirit, and that you were of a
ghastly pale. To them I say: "Pouf!"' And he snapped his fin-gers at me
and went on: 'But you and I shall show them how wrong they are. How can
he'--and he poin-ted at me with the same look and ges-ture as that with
which once he poin-ted me out to his class, on, or rather after, a
par-tic-u-lar oc-ca-sion which he never fails to re-mind me of--'know any-thing
of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and to bring them
back to hap-pi-ness, and to those that love them. It is much to do, and,
oh, but there are re-wards, in that we can be-stow such hap-pi-ness. But the
young ladies! He has no wife nor daugh-ter, and the young do not tell
them-selves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so many
sor-rows and the causes of them. So, my dear, we will send him away to
smoke the ci-gar-ette in the garden, whiles you and I have little talk all
to ourselves.' I took the hint, and strolled about, and presently the
pro-fessor came to the win-dow and called me in. He looked grave, but
said: 'I have made care-ful ex-am-in-a-tion, but there is no func-tional
cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has
been, but is not. But the con-di-tions of her are in no way an-æmic. I have
asked her to send me her maid, that I may ask just one or two ques-tion,
that so I may not chance to miss noth-ing. I know well what she will say.
And yet there is cause; there is al-ways cause for everything. I must go
back home and think. You must send to me the tele-gram every day; and if
there be cause I shall come again. The dis-ease--for not to be all well
is a dis-ease--in-terest me, and the sweet young dear, she in-terest me
too. She charm me, and for her, if not for you or dis-ease, I come.'

"As I tell you, he would not say a word more, even when we were alone.
And so now, Art, you know all I know. I shall keep stern watch. I trust
your poor father is ral-ly-ing. It must be a ter-rible thing to you, my
dear old fel-low, to be placed in such a po-s-i-tion between two people who
are both so dear to you. I know your idea of duty to your father, and
you are right to stick to it; but, if need be, I shall send you word to
come at once to Lucy; so do not be over-anxious un-less you hear from
me."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_4 Septem-ber._--Zoöphag-ous pa-tient still keeps up our in-terest in him.
He had only one out-burst and that was yes-ter-day at an un-usual time. Just
be-fore the stroke of noon he began to grow rest-less. The at-tend-ant knew
the symp-toms, and at once summoned aid. For-tunately the men came at a
run, and were just in time, for at the stroke of noon he be-came so
vi-ol-ent that it took all their strength to hold him. In about five
minutes, how-ever, he began to get more and more quiet, and fi-nally sank
into a sort of mel-an-choly, in which state he has re-mained up to now. The
at-tend-ant tells me that his screams whilst in the par-oxysm were really
ap-palling; I found my hands full when I got in, at-tend-ing to some of the
other pa-tients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite
un-der-stand the ef-fect, for the sounds dis-turbed even me, though I was
some dis-tance away. It is now after the din-ner-hour of the asylum, and
as yet my pa-tient sits in a corner brood-ing, with a dull, sul-len,
woe-be-gone look in his face, which seems rather to in-dic-ate than to show
some-thing dir-ectly. I can-not quite un-der-stand it.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Another change in my pa-tient. At five o'clock I looked in on
him, and found him seem-ingly as happy and con-ten-ted as he used to be. He
was catch-ing flies and eat-ing them, and was keep-ing note of his cap-ture
by mak-ing nail-marks on the edge of the door between the ridges of
pad-ding. When he saw me, he came over and apo-lo-gised for his bad
con-duct, and asked me in a very humble, cringing way to be led back to
his own room and to have his note-book again. I thought it well to
hu-mour him: so he is back in his room with the win-dow open. He has the
sugar of his tea spread out on the win-dow-sill, and is reap-ing quite a
har-vest of flies. He is not now eat-ing them, but put-ting them into a
box, as of old, and is already ex-amin-ing the corners of his room to find
a spider. I tried to get him to talk about the past few days, for any
clue to his thoughts would be of im-mense help to me; but he would not
rise. For a mo-ment or two he looked very sad, and said in a sort of
far-away voice, as though say-ing it rather to him-self than to me:--

"All over! all over! He has deser-ted me. No hope for me now un-less I do
it for my-self!" Then sud-denly turn-ing to me in a res-ol-ute way, he said:
"Doc-tor, won't you be very good to me and let me have a little more
sugar? I think it would be good for me."

"And the flies?" I said.

"Yes! The flies like it, too, and I like the flies; there-fore I like
it." And there are people who know so little as to think that mad-men do
not ar-gue. I pro-cured him a double sup-ply, and left him as happy a man
as, I sup-pose, any in the world. I wish I could fathom his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Mid-night._--Another change in him. I had been to see Miss Westenra,
whom I found much bet-ter, and had just re-turned, and was stand-ing at our
own gate look-ing at the sun-set, when once more I heard him yelling. As
his room is on this side of the house, I could hear it bet-ter than in
the morn-ing. It was a shock to me to turn from the won-der-ful smoky
beauty of a sun-set over Lon-don, with its lurid lights and inky shad-ows
and all the mar-vel-lous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul
wa-ter, and to real-ise all the grim stern-ness of my own cold stone
build-ing, with its wealth of breath-ing misery, and my own des-ol-ate heart
to en-dure it all. I reached him just as the sun was go-ing down, and from
his win-dow saw the red disc sink. As it sank he be-came less and less
fren-zied; and just as it dipped he slid from the hands that held him, an
in-ert mass, on the floor. It is won-der-ful, how-ever, what in-tel-lec-tual
re-cu-per-at-ive power lun-at-ics have, for within a few minutes he stood up
quite calmly and looked around him. I sig-nalled to the at-tend-ants not to
hold him, for I was anxious to see what he would do. He went straight
over to the win-dow and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his
fly-box, and emp-tied it out-side, and threw away the box; then he shut
the win-dow, and cross-ing over, sat down on his bed. All this sur-prised
me, so I asked him: "Are you not go-ing to keep flies any more?"

"No," said he; "I am sick of all that rub-bish!" He cer-tainly is a
won-der-fully in-ter-est-ing study. I wish I could get some glimpse of his
mind or of the cause of his sud-den pas-sion. Stop; there may be a clue
after all, if we can find why to-day his par-oxysms came on at high noon
and at sun-set. Can it be that there is a ma-lign in-flu-ence of the sun at
peri-ods which af-fects cer-tain natures--as at times the moon does oth-ers?
We shall see.


_Tele-gram, Se-ward, Lon-don, to Van Helsing, Am-s-ter-dam._

"_4 Septem-ber._--Pa-tient still bet-ter to-day."


_Tele-gram, Se-ward, Lon-don, to Van Helsing, Am-s-ter-dam._

"_5 Septem-ber._--Pa-tient greatly im-proved. Good ap-pet-ite; sleeps
nat-ur-ally; good spir-its; col-our com-ing back."


_Tele-gram, Se-ward, Lon-don, to Van Helsing, Am-s-ter-dam._

"_6 Septem-ber._--Ter-rible change for the worse. Come at once; do not
lose an hour. I hold over tele-gram to Holm-wood till have seen you."




CHAPTER X


_Let-ter, Dr. Se-ward to Hon. Ar-thur Holm-wood._

"_6 Septem-ber._

"My dear Art,--

"My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morn-ing had gone back a bit.
There is, how-ever, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs.
Westenra was nat-ur-ally anxious con-cern-ing Lucy, and has con-sul-ted me
pro-fes-sion-ally about her. I took ad-vant-age of the op-por-tun-ity, and told
her that my old mas-ter, Van Helsing, the great spe-cial-ist, was com-ing to
stay with me, and that I would put her in his charge con-jointly with
my-self; so now we can come and go without alarm-ing her un-duly, for a
shock to her would mean sud-den death, and this, in Lucy's weak
con-di-tion, might be dis-astrous to her. We are hedged in with
dif-fi-culties, all of us, my poor old fel-low; but, please God, we shall
come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you
do not hear from me, take it for gran-ted that I am simply wait-ing for
news. In haste

Yours ever,

"JOHN SEWARD."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_7 Septem-ber._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me when we met at
Liver-pool Street was:--

"Have you said any-thing to our young friend the lover of her?"

"No," I said. "I waited till I had seen you, as I said in my tele-gram. I
wrote him a let-ter simply telling him that you were com-ing, as Miss
Westenra was not so well, and that I should let him know if need be."

"Right, my friend," he said, "quite right! Bet-ter he not know as yet;
per-haps he shall never know. I pray so; but if it be needed, then he
shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me cau-tion you. You deal
with the mad-men. All men are mad in some way or the other; and inas-much
as you deal dis-creetly with your mad-men, so deal with God's mad-men,
too--the rest of the world. You tell not your mad-men what you do nor why
you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep know-ledge
in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it
and breed. You and I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He
touched me on the heart and on the fore-head, and then touched him-self
the same way. "I have for my-self thoughts at the present. Later I shall
un-fold to you."

"Why not now?" I asked. "It may do some good; we may ar-rive at some
de-cision." He stopped and looked at me, and said:--

"My friend John, when the corn is grown, even be-fore it has
ripened--while the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the sun-shine
has not yet be-gun to paint him with his gold, the hus-band-man he pull the
ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff,
and say to you: 'Look! he's good corn; he will make good crop when the
time comes.'" I did not see the ap-plic-a-tion, and told him so. For reply
he reached over and took my ear in his hand and pulled it play-fully, as
he used long ago to do at lec-tures, and said: "The good hus-band-man tell
you so then be-cause he knows, but not till then. But you do not find the
good hus-band-man dig up his planted corn to see if he grow; that is for
the chil-dren who play at hus-bandry, and not for those who take it as of
the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I have sown my corn,
and Nature has her work to do in mak-ing it sprout; if he sprout at all,
there's some prom-ise; and I wait till the ear be-gins to swell." He broke
off, for he evid-ently saw that I un-der-stood. Then he went on, and very
gravely:--

"You were al-ways a care-ful stu-dent, and your case-book was ever more
full than the rest. You were only stu-dent then; now you are mas-ter, and
I trust that good habit have not fail. Re-mem-ber, my friend, that
know-ledge is stronger than memory, and we should not trust the weaker.
Even if you have not kept the good prac-tise, let me tell you that this
case of our dear miss is one that may be--mind, I say _may be_--of such
in-terest to us and oth-ers that all the rest may not make him kick the
beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Noth-ing is too
small. I coun-sel you, put down in re-cord even your doubts and sur-mises.
Here-after it may be of in-terest to you to see how true you guess. We
learn from fail-ure, not from suc-cess!"

When I de-scribed Lucy's symp-toms--the same as be-fore, but in-fin-itely
more marked--he looked very grave, but said noth-ing. He took with him a
bag in which were many in-stru-ments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia
of our be-ne-fi-cial trade," as he once called, in one of his lec-tures, the
equip-ment of a pro-fessor of the heal-ing craft. When we were shown in,
Mrs. Westenra met us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much as I
ex-pec-ted to find her. Nature in one of her be-ne-fi-cent moods has or-dained
that even death has some an-ti-dote to its own ter-rors. Here, in a case
where any shock may prove fatal, mat-ters are so ordered that, from some
cause or other, the things not per-sonal--even the ter-rible change in her
daugh-ter to whom she is so at-tached--do not seem to reach her. It is
some-thing like the way Dame Nature gath-ers round a for-eign body an
en-vel-ope of some in-sens-it-ive tis-sue which can pro-tect from evil that
which it would oth-er-wise harm by con-tact. If this be an ordered
selfish-ness, then we should pause be-fore we con-demn any one for the vice
of ego-ism, for there may be deeper root for its causes than we have
know-ledge of.

I used my know-ledge of this phase of spir-itual patho-logy, and laid down
a rule that she should not be present with Lucy or think of her ill-ness
more than was ab-so-lutely re-quired. She as-sen-ted read-ily, so read-ily that
I saw again the hand of Nature fight-ing for life. Van Helsing and I were
shown up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw her yes-ter-day, I
was hor-ri-fied when I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale; the
red seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones of
her face stood out prom-in-ently; her breath-ing was pain-ful to see or
hear. Van Helsing's face grew set as marble, and his eye-brows con-verged
till they al-most touched over his nose. Lucy lay mo-tion-less, and did not
seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all si-lent. Then
Van Helsing beckoned to me, and we went gently out of the room. The
in-stant we had closed the door he stepped quickly along the pas-sage to
the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and
closed the door. "My God!" he said; "this is dread-ful. There is no time
to be lost. She will die for sheer want of blood to keep the heart's
ac-tion as it should be. There must be trans-fu-sion of blood at once. Is
it you or me?"

"I am younger and stronger, Pro-fessor. It must be me."

"Then get ready at once. I will bring up my bag. I am pre-pared."

I went down-stairs with him, and as we were go-ing there was a knock at
the hall-door. When we reached the hall the maid had just opened the
door, and Ar-thur was step-ping quickly in. He rushed up to me, say-ing in
an eager whis-per:--

"Jack, I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your let-ter, and
have been in an agony. The dad was bet-ter, so I ran down here to see for
my-self. Is not that gen-tle-man Dr. Van Helsing? I am so thank-ful to you,
sir, for com-ing." When first the Pro-fessor's eye had lit upon him he had
been angry at his in-ter-rup-tion at such a time; but now, as he took in
his stal-wart pro-por-tions and re-cog-nised the strong young man-hood which
seemed to em-an-ate from him, his eyes gleamed. Without a pause he said to
him gravely as he held out his hand:--

"Sir, you have come in time. You are the lover of our dear miss. She is
bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that." For he
sud-denly grew pale and sat down in a chair al-most faint-ing. "You are to
help her. You can do more than any that live, and your cour-age is your
best help."

"What can I do?" asked Ar-thur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I shall do it. My
life is hers, and I would give the last drop of blood in my body for
her." The Pro-fessor has a strongly hu-mor-ous side, and I could from old
know-ledge de-tect a trace of its ori-gin in his an-swer:--

"My young sir, I do not ask so much as that--not the last!"

"What shall I do?" There was fire in his eyes, and his open nos-tril
quivered with in-tent. Van Helsing slapped him on the shoulder. "Come!"
he said. "You are a man, and it is a man we want. You are bet-ter than
me, bet-ter than my friend John." Ar-thur looked be-wildered, and the
Pro-fessor went on by ex-plain-ing in a kindly way:--

"Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she must have
or die. My friend John and I have con-sul-ted; and we are about to per-form
what we call trans-fu-sion of blood--to trans-fer from full veins of one to
the empty veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he is
the more young and strong than me"--here Ar-thur took my hand and wrung
it hard in si-lence--"but, now you are here, you are more good than us,
old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not
so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" Ar-thur turned to him
and said:--

"If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you would
un-der-stand----"

He stopped, with a sort of choke in his voice.

"Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be happy
that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be si-lent. You
shall kiss her once be-fore it is done, but then you must go; and you
must leave at my sign. Say no word to Ma-dame; you know how it is with
her! There must be no shock; any know-ledge of this would be one. Come!"

We all went up to Lucy's room. Ar-thur by dir-ec-tion re-mained out-side.
Lucy turned her head and looked at us, but said noth-ing. She was not
asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the ef-fort. Her eyes spoke
to us; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag and laid
them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a nar-cotic, and
com-ing over to the bed, said cheer-ily:--

"Now, little miss, here is your medi-cine. Drink it off, like a good
child. See, I lift you so that to swal-low is easy. Yes." She had made
the ef-fort with suc-cess.

It as-ton-ished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked
the ex-tent of her weak-ness. The time seemed end-less un-til sleep began to
flicker in her eye-lids. At last, how-ever, the nar-cotic began to mani-fest
its po-tency; and she fell into a deep sleep. When the Pro-fessor was
sat-is-fied he called Ar-thur into the room, and bade him strip off his
coat. Then he ad-ded: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring
over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us looked whilst
he bent over her.

Van Helsing turn-ing to me, said:

"He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not
de-fib-rin-ate it."

Then with swift-ness, but with ab-so-lute method, Van Helsing per-formed the
op-er-a-tion. As the trans-fu-sion went on some-thing like life seemed to come
back to poor Lucy's cheeks, and through Ar-thur's grow-ing pal-lor the joy
of his face seemed ab-so-lutely to shine. After a bit I began to grow
anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Ar-thur, strong man as he
was. It gave me an idea of what a ter-rible strain Lucy's sys-tem must
have un-der-gone that what weakened Ar-thur only par-tially re-stored her.
But the Pro-fessor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with
his eyes fixed now on the pa-tient and now on Ar-thur. I could hear my own
heart beat. Presently he said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an in-stant.
It is enough. You at-tend him; I will look to her." When all was over I
could see how much Ar-thur was weakened. I dressed the wound and took his
arm to bring him away, when Van Helsing spoke without turn-ing round--the
man seems to have eyes in the back of his head:--

"The brave lover, I think, de-serve an-other kiss, which he shall have
presently." And as he had now fin-ished his op-er-a-tion, he ad-jus-ted the
pil-low to the pa-tient's head. As he did so the nar-row black vel-vet band
which she seems al-ways to wear round her throat, buckled with an old
dia-mond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up,
and showed a red mark on her throat. Ar-thur did not no-tice it, but I
could hear the deep hiss of in-drawn breath which is one of Van Helsing's
ways of be-tray-ing emo-tion. He said noth-ing at the mo-ment, but turned to
me, say-ing: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port
wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep
much and eat much, that he may be re-cruited of what he has so given to
his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a mo-ment. I may take it, sir,
that you are anxious of res-ult. Then bring it with you that in all ways
the op-er-a-tion is suc-cess-ful. You have saved her life this time, and you
can go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be is. I shall tell
her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you
have done. Good-bye."

When Ar-thur had gone I went back to the room. Lucy was sleep-ing gently,
but her breath-ing was stronger; I could see the coun-ter-pane move as her
breast heaved. By the bed-side sat Van Helsing, look-ing at her in-tently.
The vel-vet band again covered the red mark. I asked the Pro-fessor in a
whis-per:--

"What do you make of that mark on her throat?"

"What do you make of it?"

"I have not ex-amined it yet," I answered, and then and there pro-ceeded
to loose the band. Just over the ex-ternal jug-u-lar vein there were two
punc-tures, not large, but not whole-some-look-ing. There was no sign of
dis-ease, but the edges were white and worn-look-ing, as if by some
trit-ur-a-tion. It at once oc-curred to me that this wound, or whatever it
was, might be the means of that mani-fest loss of blood; but I aban-doned
the idea as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. The whole bed
would have been drenched to a scar-let with the blood which the girl must
have lost to leave such a pal-lor as she had be-fore the trans-fu-sion.

"Well?" said Van Helsing.

"Well," said I, "I can make noth-ing of it." The Pro-fessor stood up. "I
must go back to Am-s-ter-dam to-night," he said. "There are books and
things there which I want. You must re-main here all the night, and you
must not let your sight pass from her."

"Shall I have a nurse?" I asked.

"We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that
she is well fed, and that noth-ing dis-turbs her. You must not sleep all
the night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. I shall be back as soon as
pos-sible. And then we may be-gin."

"May be-gin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?"

"We shall see!" he answered, as he hur-ried out. He came back a mo-ment
later and put his head in-side the door and said with warn-ing fin-ger held
up:--

"Re-mem-ber, she is your charge. If you leave her, and harm be-fall, you
shall not sleep easy here-after!"


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary--con-tin-ued._

_8 Septem-ber._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opi-ate worked it-self
off to-wards dusk, and she waked nat-ur-ally; she looked a dif-fer-ent be-ing
from what she had been be-fore the op-er-a-tion. Her spir-its even were good,
and she was full of a happy vi-va-city, but I could see evid-ences of the
ab-so-lute pros-tra-tion which she had un-der-gone. When I told Mrs. Westenra
that Dr. Van Helsing had dir-ec-ted that I should sit up with her she
al-most pooh-poo-hed the idea, point-ing out her daugh-ter's re-newed
strength and ex-cel-lent spir-its. I was firm, how-ever, and made
pre-par-a-tions for my long vi-gil. When her maid had pre-pared her for the
night I came in, hav-ing in the mean-time had sup-per, and took a seat by
the bed-side. She did not in any way make ob-jec-tion, but looked at me
grate-fully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell she seemed
sink-ing off to sleep, but with an ef-fort seemed to pull her-self to-gether
and shook it off. This was re-peated sev-eral times, with greater ef-fort
and with shorter pauses as the time moved on. It was ap-par-ent that she
did not want to sleep, so I tackled the sub-ject at once:--

"You do not want to go to sleep?"

"No; I am afraid."

"Afraid to go to sleep! Why so? It is the boon we all crave for."

"Ah, not if you were like me--if sleep was to you a pres-age of hor-ror!"

"A pres-age of hor-ror! What on earth do you mean?"

"I don't know; oh, I don't know. And that is what is so ter-rible. All
this weak-ness comes to me in sleep; un-til I dread the very thought."

"But, my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watch-ing you, and
I can prom-ise that noth-ing will hap-pen."

"Ah, I can trust you!" I seized the op-por-tun-ity, and said: "I prom-ise
you that if I see any evid-ence of bad dreams I will wake you at once."

"You will? Oh, will you really? How good you are to me. Then I will
sleep!" And al-most at the word she gave a deep sigh of re-lief, and sank
back, asleep.

All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on and on
in a deep, tran-quil, life-giv-ing, health-giv-ing sleep. Her lips were
slightly par-ted, and her breast rose and fell with the reg-u-lar-ity of a
pen-du-lum. There was a smile on her face, and it was evid-ent that no bad
dreams had come to dis-turb her peace of mind.

In the early morn-ing her maid came, and I left her in her care and took
my-self back home, for I was anxious about many things. I sent a short
wire to Van Helsing and to Ar-thur, telling them of the ex-cel-lent res-ult
of the op-er-a-tion. My own work, with its man-i-fold ar-rears, took me all
day to clear off; it was dark when I was able to in-quire about my
zoöphag-ous pa-tient. The re-port was good; he had been quite quiet for the
past day and night. A tele-gram came from Van Helsing at Am-s-ter-dam whilst
I was at din-ner, sug-gest-ing that I should be at Hilling-ham to-night, as
it might be well to be at hand, and stat-ing that he was leav-ing by the
night mail and would join me early in the morn-ing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_9 Septem-ber_.--I was pretty tired and worn out when I got to
Hilling-ham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my
brain was be-gin-ning to feel that numb-ness which marks cereb-ral
ex-haus-tion. Lucy was up and in cheer-ful spir-its. When she shook hands
with me she looked sharply in my face and said:--

"No sit-ting up to-night for you. You are worn out. I am quite well
again; in-deed, I am; and if there is to be any sit-ting up, it is I who
will sit up with you." I would not ar-gue the point, but went and had my
sup-per. Lucy came with me, and, en-livened by her charm-ing pres-ence, I
made an ex-cel-lent meal, and had a couple of glasses of the more than
ex-cel-lent port. Then Lucy took me up-stairs, and showed me a room next
her own, where a cozy fire was burn-ing. "Now," she said, "you must stay
here. I shall leave this door open and my door too. You can lie on the
sofa for I know that noth-ing would in-duce any of you doc-tors to go to
bed whilst there is a pa-tient above the ho-ri-zon. If I want any-thing I
shall call out, and you can come to me at once." I could not but
ac-qui-esce, for I was "dog-tired," and could not have sat up had I tried.
So, on her re-new-ing her prom-ise to call me if she should want any-thing,
I lay on the sofa, and for-got all about everything.


_Lucy Westenra's Di-ary._

_9 Septem-ber._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been so miser-ably weak,
that to be able to think and move about is like feel-ing sun-shine after
a long spell of east wind out of a steel sky. Some-how Ar-thur feels very,
very close to me. I seem to feel his pres-ence warm about me. I sup-pose
it is that sick-ness and weak-ness are selfish things and turn our in-ner
eyes and sym-pathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love
rein, and in thought and feel-ing he can wander where he wills. I know
where my thoughts are. If Ar-thur only knew! My dear, my dear, your ears
must tingle as you sleep, as mine do wak-ing. Oh, the bliss-ful rest of
last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Dr. Se-ward watch-ing me.
And to-night I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand and
within call. Thank every-body for be-ing so good to me! Thank God!
Good-night, Ar-thur.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_10 Septem-ber._--I was con-scious of the Pro-fessor's hand on my head, and
star-ted awake all in a second. That is one of the things that we learn
in an asylum, at any rate.

"And how is our pa-tient?"

"Well, when I left her, or rather when she left me," I answered.

"Come, let us see," he said. And to-gether we went into the room.

The blind was down, and I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van
Helsing stepped, with his soft, cat-like tread, over to the bed.

As I raised the blind, and the morn-ing sun-light flooded the room, I
heard the Pro-fessor's low hiss of in-spir-a-tion, and know-ing its rar-ity, a
deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and
his ex-clam-a-tion of hor-ror, "Gott in Him-mel!" needed no en-force-ment from
his ag-on-ised face. He raised his hand and poin-ted to the bed, and his
iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my knees be-gin to tremble.

There on the bed, seem-ingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more hor-ribly
white and wan-look-ing than ever. Even the lips were white, and the gums
seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, as we some-times see in a
corpse after a pro-longed ill-ness. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp
in an-ger, but the in-stinct of his life and all the long years of habit
stood to him, and he put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring
the brandy." I flew to the din-ing-room, and re-turned with the de-canter.
He wet-ted the poor white lips with it, and to-gether we rubbed palm and
wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few mo-ments of ag-on-ising
sus-pense said:--

"It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is
un-done; we must be-gin again. There is no young Ar-thur here now; I have
to call on you your-self this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was
dip-ping into his bag and pro-du-cing the in-stru-ments for trans-fu-sion; I
had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no
pos-sib-il-ity of an opi-ate just at present, and no need of one; and so,
without a mo-ment's delay, we began the op-er-a-tion. After a time--it did
not seem a short time either, for the drain-ing away of one's blood, no
mat-ter how will-ingly it be given, is a ter-rible feel-ing--Van Helsing
held up a warn-ing fin-ger. "Do not stir," he said, "but I fear that with
grow-ing strength she may wake; and that would make danger, oh, so much
danger. But I shall pre-cau-tion take. I shall give hy-po-dermic in-jec-tion
of morphia." He pro-ceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out his
in-tent. The ef-fect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge
subtly into the nar-cotic sleep. It was with a feel-ing of per-sonal pride
that I could see a faint tinge of col-our steal back into the pal-lid
cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he ex-per-i-ences it, what it is to
feel his own life-blood drawn away into the veins of the wo-man he loves.

The Pro-fessor watched me crit-ic-ally. "That will do," he said. "Already?"
I re-mon-strated. "You took a great deal more from Art." To which he
smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:--

"He is her lover, her _fi-ancé_. You have work, much work, to do for her
and for oth-ers; and the present will suf-fice."

When we stopped the op-er-a-tion, he at-ten-ded to Lucy, whilst I ap-plied
di-gital pres-sure to my own in-cision. I laid down, whilst I waited his
leis-ure to at-tend to me, for I felt faint and a little sick. By-and-by
he bound up my wound, and sent me down-stairs to get a glass of wine for
my-self. As I was leav-ing the room, he came after me, and half
whispered:--

"Mind, noth-ing must be said of this. If our young lover should turn up
un-ex-pec-ted, as be-fore, no word to him. It would at once frighten him and
en-jeal-ous him, too. There must be none. So!"

When I came back he looked at me care-fully, and then said:--

"You are not much the worse. Go into the room, and lie on your sofa, and
rest awhile; then have much break-fast, and come here to me."

I fol-lowed out his or-ders, for I knew how right and wise they were. I
had done my part, and now my next duty was to keep up my strength. I
felt very weak, and in the weak-ness lost some-thing of the amazement at
what had oc-curred. I fell asleep on the sofa, how-ever, won-der-ing over
and over again how Lucy had made such a ret-ro-grade move-ment, and how
she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign any-where to
show for it. I think I must have con-tin-ued my won-der in my dreams, for,
sleep-ing and wak-ing, my thoughts al-ways came back to the little
punc-tures in her throat and the ragged, ex-hausted ap-pear-ance of their
edges--tiny though they were.

Lucy slept well into the day, and when she woke she was fairly well and
strong, though not nearly so much so as the day be-fore. When Van Helsing
had seen her, he went out for a walk, leav-ing me in charge, with strict
in-junc-tions that I was not to leave her for a mo-ment. I could hear his
voice in the hall, ask-ing the way to the nearest tele-graph of-fice.

Lucy chat-ted with me freely, and seemed quite un-con-scious that any-thing
had happened. I tried to keep her amused and in-ter-ested. When her mother
came up to see her, she did not seem to no-tice any change whatever, but
said to me grate-fully:--

"We owe you so much, Dr. Se-ward, for all you have done, but you really
must now take care not to over-work your-self. You are look-ing pale
your-self. You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you
do!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crim-son, though it was only mo-ment-ar-ily,
for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an un-wonted
drain to the head. The re-ac-tion came in ex-cess-ive pal-lor as she turned
im-plor-ing eyes on me. I smiled and nod-ded, and laid my fin-ger on my
lips; with a sigh, she sank back amid her pil-lows.

Van Helsing re-turned in a couple of hours, and presently said to me:
"Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. Make your-self strong. I
stay here to-night, and I shall sit up with little miss my-self. You and
I must watch the case, and we must have none other to know. I have grave
reas-ons. No, do not ask them; think what you will. Do not fear to think
even the most not-prob-able. Good-night."

In the hall two of the maids came to me, and asked if they or either of
them might not sit up with Miss Lucy. They im-plored me to let them; and
when I said it was Dr. Van Helsing's wish that either he or I should sit
up, they asked me quite piteously to in-ter-cede with the "for-eign
gen-tle-man." I was much touched by their kind-ness. Per-haps it is be-cause
I am weak at present, and per-haps be-cause it was on Lucy's ac-count, that
their de-vo-tion was mani-fes-ted; for over and over again have I seen
sim-ilar in-stances of wo-man's kind-ness. I got back here in time for a
late din-ner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst wait-ing
for sleep. It is com-ing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_11 Septem-ber._--This af-ter-noon I went over to Hilling-ham. Found Van
Helsing in ex-cel-lent spir-its, and Lucy much bet-ter. Shortly after I had
ar-rived, a big par-cel from abroad came for the Pro-fessor. He opened it
with much im-press-ment--as-sumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of
white flowers.

"These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said.

"For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!"

"Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. These are medi-cines." Here
Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not to take in a de-coc-tion or
in naus-eous form, so you need not snub that so charm-ing nose, or I shall
point out to my friend Ar-thur what woes he may have to en-dure in see-ing
so much beauty that he so loves so much dis-tort. Aha, my pretty miss,
that bring the so nice nose all straight again. This is medi-cinal, but
you do not know how. I put him in your win-dow, I make pretty wreath, and
hang him round your neck, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the
lo-tus flower, make your trouble for-got-ten. It smell so like the wa-ters
of Lethe, and of that foun-tain of youth that the Con-quista-dores sought
for in the Flor-i-das, and find him all too late."

Whilst he was speak-ing, Lucy had been ex-amin-ing the flowers and smelling
them. Now she threw them down, say-ing, with half-laughter, and
half-dis-gust:--

"Oh, Pro-fessor, I be-lieve you are only put-ting up a joke on me. Why,
these flowers are only com-mon gar-lic."

To my sur-prise, Van Helsing rose up and said with all his stern-ness, his
iron jaw set and his bushy eye-brows meet-ing:--

"No tri-fling with me! I never jest! There is grim pur-pose in all I do;
and I warn you that you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of
oth-ers if not for your own." Then see-ing poor Lucy scared, as she might
well be, he went on more gently: "Oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear
me. I only do for your good; but there is much vir-tue to you in those so
com-mon flowers. See, I place them my-self in your room. I make my-self the
wreath that you are to wear. But hush! no telling to oth-ers that make so
in-quis-it-ive ques-tions. We must obey, and si-lence is a part of obed-i-ence;
and obed-i-ence is to bring you strong and well into lov-ing arms that wait
for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, and you shall
help me deck the room with my gar-lic, which is all the way from Haar-lem,
where my friend Vander-pool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year.
I had to tele-graph yes-ter-day, or they would not have been here."

We went into the room, tak-ing the flowers with us. The Pro-fessor's
ac-tions were cer-tainly odd and not to be found in any phar-ma-co-poeia
that I ever heard of. First he fastened up the win-dows and latched them
se-curely; next, tak-ing a hand-ful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over
the sashes, as though to en-sure that every whiff of air that might get
in would be laden with the gar-lic smell. Then with the wisp he rubbed
all over the jamb of the door, above, be-low, and at each side, and round
the fire-place in the same way. It all seemed grot-esque to me, and
presently I said:--

"Well, Pro-fessor, I know you al-ways have a reason for what you do, but
this cer-tainly puzzles me. It is well we have no scep-tic here, or he
would say that you were work-ing some spell to keep out an evil spirit."

"Per-haps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to make the wreath which
Lucy was to wear round her neck.

We then waited whilst Lucy made her toi-let for the night, and when she
was in bed he came and him-self fixed the wreath of gar-lic round her
neck. The last words he said to her were:--

"Take care you do not dis-turb it; and even if the room feel close, do
not to-night open the win-dow or the door."

"I prom-ise," said Lucy, "and thank you both a thou-sand times for all
your kind-ness to me! Oh, what have I done to be blessed with such
friends?"

As we left the house in my fly, which was wait-ing, Van Helsing said:--

"To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel,
much read-ing in the day between, and much anxi-ety on the day to fol-low,
and a night to sit up, without to wink. To-mor-row in the morn-ing early
you call for me, and we come to-gether to see our pretty miss, so much
more strong for my 'spell' which I have work. Ho! ho!"

He seemed so con-fid-ent that I, re-mem-ber-ing my own con-fid-ence two nights
be-fore and with the bane-ful res-ult, felt awe and vague ter-ror. It must
have been my weak-ness that made me hes-it-ate to tell it to my friend, but
I felt it all the more, like un-shed tears.




CHAPTER XI

_Lucy Westenra's Di-ary._


_12 Septem-ber._--How good they all are to me. I quite love that dear Dr.
Van Helsing. I won-der why he was so anxious about these flowers. He
pos-it-ively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have been
right, for I feel com-fort from them already. Some-how, I do not dread
be-ing alone to-night, and I can go to sleep without fear. I shall not
mind any flap-ping out-side the win-dow. Oh, the ter-rible struggle that I
have had against sleep so of-ten of late; the pain of the sleep-less-ness,
or the pain of the fear of sleep, with such un-known hor-rors as it has
for me! How blessed are some people, whose lives have no fears, no
dreads; to whom sleep is a bless-ing that comes nightly, and brings
noth-ing but sweet dreams. Well, here I am to-night, hop-ing for sleep,
and ly-ing like Ophelia in the play, with "vir-gin crants and maiden
strew-ments." I never liked gar-lic be-fore, but to-night it is de-light-ful!
There is peace in its smell; I feel sleep com-ing already. Good-night,
every-body.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_13 Septem-ber._--Called at the Berke-ley and found Van Helsing, as usual,
up to time. The car-riage ordered from the hotel was wait-ing. The
Pro-fessor took his bag, which he al-ways brings with him now.

Let all be put down ex-actly. Van Helsing and I ar-rived at Hilling-ham at
eight o'clock. It was a lovely morn-ing; the bright sun-shine and all the
fresh feel-ing of early au-tumn seemed like the com-ple-tion of nature's
an-nual work. The leaves were turn-ing to all kinds of beau-ti-ful col-ours,
but had not yet be-gun to drop from the trees. When we entered we met
Mrs. Westenra com-ing out of the morn-ing room. She is al-ways an early
riser. She greeted us warmly and said:--

"You will be glad to know that Lucy is bet-ter. The dear child is still
asleep. I looked into her room and saw her, but did not go in, lest I
should dis-turb her." The Pro-fessor smiled, and looked quite ju-bil-ant. He
rubbed his hands to-gether, and said:--

"Aha! I thought I had dia-gnosed the case. My treat-ment is work-ing," to
which she answered:--

"You must not take all the credit to your-self, doc-tor. Lucy's state this
morn-ing is due in part to me."

"How you do mean, ma'am?" asked the Pro-fessor.

"Well, I was anxious about the dear child in the night, and went into
her room. She was sleep-ing soundly--so soundly that even my com-ing did
not wake her. But the room was aw-fully stuffy. There were a lot of those
hor-rible, strong-smelling flowers about every-where, and she had ac-tu-ally
a bunch of them round her neck. I feared that the heavy odour would be
too much for the dear child in her weak state, so I took them all away
and opened a bit of the win-dow to let in a little fresh air. You will be
pleased with her, I am sure."

She moved off into her bou-doir, where she usu-ally break-fas-ted early. As
she had spoken, I watched the Pro-fessor's face, and saw it turn ashen
grey. He had been able to re-tain his self-com-mand whilst the poor lady
was present, for he knew her state and how mis-chiev-ous a shock would be;
he ac-tu-ally smiled on her as he held open the door for her to pass into
her room. But the in-stant she had dis-ap-peared he pulled me, sud-denly and
for-cibly, into the din-ing-room and closed the door.

Then, for the first time in my life, I saw Van Helsing break down. He
raised his hands over his head in a sort of mute des-pair, and then beat
his palms to-gether in a help-less way; fi-nally he sat down on a chair,
and put-ting his hands be-fore his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs
that seemed to come from the very rack-ing of his heart. Then he raised
his arms again, as though ap-peal-ing to the whole uni-verse. "God! God!
God!" he said. "What have we done, what has this poor thing done, that
we are so sore be-set? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the
pa-gan world of old, that such things must be, and in such way? This poor
mother, all un-know-ing, and all for the best as she think, does such
thing as lose her daugh-ter body and soul; and we must not tell her, we
must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are
be-set! How are all the powers of the dev-ils against us!" Sud-denly he
jumped to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils
or no dev-ils, or all the dev-ils at once, it mat-ters not; we fight him
all the same." He went to the hall-door for his bag; and to-gether we
went up to Lucy's room.

Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went to-wards the bed.
This time he did not start as he looked on the poor face with the same
aw-ful, waxen pal-lor as be-fore. He wore a look of stern sad-ness and
in-fin-ite pity.

"As I ex-pec-ted," he mur-mured, with that hiss-ing in-spir-a-tion of his which
meant so much. Without a word he went and locked the door, and then
began to set out on the little table the in-stru-ments for yet an-other
op-er-a-tion of trans-fu-sion of blood. I had long ago re-cog-nised the
ne-ces-sity, and be-gun to take off my coat, but he stopped me with a
warn-ing hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must op-er-ate. I shall provide.
You are weakened already." As he spoke he took off his coat and rolled
up his shirt-sleeve.

Again the op-er-a-tion; again the nar-cotic; again some re-turn of col-our to
the ashy cheeks, and the reg-u-lar breath-ing of healthy sleep. This time I
watched whilst Van Helsing re-cruited him-self and res-ted.

Presently he took an op-por-tun-ity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must
not re-move any-thing from Lucy's room without con-sult-ing him; that the
flowers were of medi-cinal value, and that the breath-ing of their odour
was a part of the sys-tem of cure. Then he took over the care of the case
him-self, say-ing that he would watch this night and the next and would
send me word when to come.

After an-other hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and
seem-ingly not much the worse for her ter-rible or-deal.

What does it all mean? I am be-gin-ning to won-der if my long habit of life
amongst the in-sane is be-gin-ning to tell upon my own brain.


_Lucy Westenra's Di-ary._

_17 Septem-ber._--Four days and nights of peace. I am get-ting so strong
again that I hardly know my-self. It is as if I had passed through some
long night-mare, and had just awakened to see the beau-ti-ful sun-shine and
feel the fresh air of the morn-ing around me. I have a dim
half-re-mem-brance of long, anxious times of wait-ing and fear-ing; dark-ness
in which there was not even the pain of hope to make present dis-tress
more poignant: and then long spells of ob-li-vion, and the rising back to
life as a diver com-ing up through a great press of wa-ter. Since,
how-ever, Dr. Van Helsing has been with me, all this bad dream-ing seems
to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my
wits--the flap-ping against the win-dows, the dis-tant voices which seemed
so close to me, the harsh sounds that came from I know not where and
com-manded me to do I know not what--have all ceased. I go to bed now
without any fear of sleep. I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown
quite fond of the gar-lic, and a box-ful ar-rives for me every day from
Haar-lem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing is go-ing away, as he has to be for a
day in Am-s-ter-dam. But I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left
alone. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Ar-thur's, and for all our
friends who have been so kind! I shall not even feel the change, for
last night Dr. Van Helsing slept in his chair a lot of the time. I found
him asleep twice when I awoke; but I did not fear to go to sleep again,
al-though the boughs or bats or some-thing napped al-most an-grily against
the win-dow-panes.


_"The Pall Mall Gaz-ette," 18 Septem-ber._

                           THE ESCAPED WOLF.

         PERILOUS ADVENTURE OF OUR INTERVIEWER.

         _In-ter-view with the Keeper in the Zoö-lo-gical Gar-dens._

After many in-quir-ies and al-most as many re-fus-als, and per-petu-ally us-ing
the words "Pall Mall Gaz-ette" as a sort of talis-man, I man-aged to find
the keeper of the sec-tion of the Zoö-lo-gical Gar-dens in which the wolf
de-part-ment is in-cluded. Tho-mas Bilder lives in one of the cot-tages in
the en-clos-ure be-hind the ele-phant-house, and was just sit-ting down to
his tea when I found him. Tho-mas and his wife are hos-pit-able folk,
eld-erly, and without chil-dren, and if the spe-ci-men I en-joyed of their
hos-pit-al-ity be of the av-er-age kind, their lives must be pretty
com-fort-able. The keeper would not enter on what he called "busi-ness"
un-til the sup-per was over, and we were all sat-is-fied. Then when the
table was cleared, and he had lit his pipe, he said:--

"Now, sir, you can go on and arsk me what you want. You'll ex-coose me
re-foosin' to talk of per-fe-shunal sub-jects afore meals. I gives the
wolves and the jack-als and the hy-enas in all our sec-tion their tea afore
I be-gins to arsk them ques-tions."

"How do you mean, ask them ques-tions?" I quer-ied, wish-ful to get him
into a talk-at-ive hu-mour.

"'It-tin' of them over the 'ead with a pole is one way; scratchin' of
their hears is an-other, when gents as is flush wants a bit of a show-orf
to their gals. I don't so much mind the fust--the 'it-tin' with a pole
afore I chucks in their din-ner; but I waits till they've 'ad their
sherry and kaw-f-fee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the
ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he ad-ded philo-soph-ic-ally, "there's a deal of
the same nature in us as in them theer an-imiles. Here's you a-comin' and
arskin' of me ques-tions about my busi-ness, and I that grumpy-like that
only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd
an-swer. Not even when you arsked me sar-castic-like if I'd like you to
arsk the Su-per-in-tend-ent if you might arsk me ques-tions. Without of-fence
did I tell yer to go to 'ell?"

"You did."

"An' when you said you'd re-port me for usin' of ob-scene lan-guage that
was 'it-tin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I
weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for the food, and did with my 'owl
as the wolves, and lions, and ti-gers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now
that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed
me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch
my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me.
Drive along with your ques-tions. I know what yer a-comin' at, that 'ere
es-caped wolf."

"Ex-actly. I want you to give me your view of it. Just tell me how it
happened; and when I know the facts I'll get you to say what you
con-sider was the cause of it, and how you think the whole af-fair will
end."

"All right, guv'nor. This 'ere is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf
what we called Ber-sicker was one of three grey ones that came from
Nor-way to Jam-rach's, which we bought off him four years ago. He was a
nice well-be-haved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I'm more
sur-prised at 'im for wantin' to get out nor any other an-imile in the
place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor wo-men."

"Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's
got mindin' the an-imiles so long that blest if he ain't like a old wolf
'is-self! But there ain't no 'arm in 'im."

"Well, sir, it was about two hours after feedin' yes-ter-day when I first
hear my dis-turb-ance. I was makin' up a lit-ter in the mon-key-house for a
young puma which is ill; but when I heard the yelpin' and 'owlin' I kem
away straight. There was Ber-sicker a-tearin' like a mad thing at the
bars as if he wanted to get out. There wasn't much people about that
day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook
nose and a poin-ted beard, with a few white hairs run-nin' through it. He
had a 'ard, cold look and red eyes, and I took a sort of mis-like to him,
for it seemed as if it was 'im as they was hirr-it-ated at. He 'ad white
kid gloves on 'is 'ands, and he poin-ted out the an-imiles to me and says:
'Keeper, these wolves seem up-set at some-thing.'

"'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not like the airs as he give
'is-self. He didn't git angry, as I 'oped he would, but he smiled a kind
of in-solent smile, with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth. 'Oh no, they
wouldn't like me,' 'e says.

"'Ow yes, they would,' says I, a-im-it-atin' of him. 'They al-ways likes a
bone or two to clean their teeth on about tea-time, which you 'as a
bag-ful.'

"Well, it was a odd thing, but when the an-imiles see us a-talkin' they
lay down, and when I went over to Ber-sicker he let me stroke his ears
same as ever. That there man kem over, and blessed but if he didn't put
in his hand and stroke the old wolf's ears too!

"'Tyke care,' says I. 'Ber-sicker is quick.'

"'Never mind,' he says. 'I'm used to 'em!'

"'Are you in the busi-ness your-self?' I says, tyk-ing off my 'at, for a
man what trades in wolves, an-ceterer, is a good friend to keep-ers.

"'No' says he, 'not ex-actly in the busi-ness, but I 'ave made pets of
sev-eral.' And with that he lifts his 'at as perl-ite as a lord, and walks
away. Old Ber-sicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight,
and then went and lay down in a corner and wouldn't come hout the 'ole
heven-ing. Well, larst night, so soon as the moon was hup, the wolves
here all began a-'owl-ing. There warn't noth-ing for them to 'owl at.
There warn't no one near, ex-cept some one that was evid-ently a-cal-lin' a
dog some-wheres out back of the gard-ings in the Park road. Once or twice
I went out to see that all was right, and it was, and then the 'owl-ing
stopped. Just be-fore twelve o'clock I just took a look round afore
turnin' in, an', bust me, but when I kem op-pos-ite to old Ber-sicker's
cage I see the rails broken and twis-ted about and the cage empty. And
that's all I know for cert-ing."

"Did any one else see any-thing?"

"One of our gard'ners was a-comin' 'ome about that time from a 'ar-mony,
when he sees a big grey dog comin' out through the gard-ing 'edges. At
least, so he says, but I don't give much for it my-self, for if he did 'e
never said a word about it to his mis-sis when 'e got 'ome, and it was
only after the es-cape of the wolf was made known, and we had been up all
night-a-huntin' of the Park for Ber-sicker, that he re-membered seein'
any-thing. My own be-lief was that the 'ar-mony 'ad got into his 'ead."

"Now, Mr. Bilder, can you ac-count in any way for the es-cape of the
wolf?"

"Well, sir," he said, with a sus-pi-cious sort of mod-esty, "I think I can;
but I don't know as 'ow you'd be sat-is-fied with the the-ory."

"Cer-tainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the an-im-als from
ex-per-i-ence, can't haz-ard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?"

"Well then, sir, I ac-counts for it this way; it seems to me that 'ere
wolf es-caped--simply be-cause he wanted to get out."

From the hearty way that both Tho-mas and his wife laughed at the joke I
could see that it had done ser-vice be-fore, and that the whole
ex-plan-a-tion was simply an elab-or-ate sell. I couldn't cope in bad-in-age
with the worthy Tho-mas, but I thought I knew a surer way to his heart,
so I said:--

"Now, Mr. Bilder, we'll con-sider that first half-sov-er-eign worked off,
and this brother of his is wait-ing to be claimed when you've told me
what you think will hap-pen."

"Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll ex-coose me, I know, for
a-chaffin' of ye, but the old wo-man here winked at me, which was as much
as telling me to go on."

"Well, I never!" said the old lady.

"My opin-ion is this: that 'ere wolf is a-'idin' of, some-wheres. The
gard'ner wot didn't re-mem-ber said he was a-gal-lopin' north-ward faster
than a horse could go; but I don't be-lieve him, for, yer see, sir,
wolves don't gal-lop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that
way. Wolves is fine things in a story-book, and I des-say when they gets
in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is
they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But,
Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so
clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in
'im. This one ain't been used to fightin' or even to providin' for
his-self, and more like he's some-where round the Park a-'idin' an'
a-shiv-erin' of, and, if he thinks at all, won-derin' where he is to get
his break-fast from; or maybe he's got down some area and is in a
coal-cel-lar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his
green eyes a-shin-ing at her out of the dark! If he can't get food he's
bound to look for it, and may-hap he may chance to light on a butcher's
shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nurse-maid goes a-walkin' orf with
a sol-dier, leavin' of the hin-fant in the per-am-bu-lator--well, then I
shouldn't be sur-prised if the census is one babby the less. That's
all."

I was hand-ing him the half-sov-er-eign, when some-thing came bob-bing up
against the win-dow, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its nat-ural length
with sur-prise.

"God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Ber-sicker come back by
'is-self!"

He went to the door and opened it; a most un-ne-ces-sary pro-ceed-ing it
seemed to me. I have al-ways thought that a wild an-imal never looks so
well as when some obstacle of pro-nounced dur-ab-il-ity is between us; a
per-sonal ex-per-i-ence has in-tens-i-fied rather than di-min-ished that idea.

After all, how-ever, there is noth-ing like cus-tom, for neither Bilder nor
his wife thought any more of the wolf than I should of a dog. The an-imal
it-self was as peace-ful and well-be-haved as that father of all
pic-ture-wolves--Red Rid-ing Hood's quon-dam friend, whilst mov-ing her
con-fid-ence in mas-quer-ade.

The whole scene was an un-ut-ter-able mix-ture of com-edy and pathos. The
wicked wolf that for half a day had para-lysed Lon-don and set all the
chil-dren in the town shiv-er-ing in their shoes, was there in a sort of
pen-it-ent mood, and was re-ceived and pet-ted like a sort of vulpine
prod-igal son. Old Bilder ex-amined him all over with most tender
so-li-citude, and when he had fin-ished with his pen-it-ent said:--

"There, I knew the poor old chap would get into some kind of trouble;
didn't I say it all along? Here's his head all cut and full of broken
glass. 'E's been a-get-tin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a
shyme that people are al-lowed to top their walls with broken bottles.
This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Ber-sicker."

He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of meat that
sat-is-fied, in quant-ity at any rate, the ele-ment-ary con-di-tions of the
fat-ted calf, and went off to re-port.

I came off, too, to re-port the only ex-clus-ive in-form-a-tion that is given
to-day re-gard-ing the strange es-capade at the Zoo.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_17 Septem-ber._--I was en-gaged after din-ner in my study post-ing up my
books, which, through press of other work and the many vis-its to Lucy,
had fallen sadly into ar-rear. Sud-denly the door was burst open, and in
rushed my pa-tient, with his face dis-tor-ted with pas-sion. I was
thun-der-struck, for such a thing as a pa-tient get-ting of his own ac-cord
into the Su-per-in-tend-ent's study is al-most un-known. Without an in-stant's
pause he made straight at me. He had a din-ner-knife in his hand, and,
as I saw he was dan-ger-ous, I tried to keep the table between us. He was
too quick and too strong for me, how-ever; for be-fore I could get my
bal-ance he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely.
Be-fore he could strike again, how-ever, I got in my right and he was
sprawl-ing on his back on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a
little pool trickled on to the car-pet. I saw that my friend was not
in-tent on fur-ther ef-fort, and oc-cu-pied my-self bind-ing up my wrist,
keep-ing a wary eye on the pros-trate fig-ure all the time. When the
at-tend-ants rushed in, and we turned our at-ten-tion to him, his em-ploy-ment
pos-it-ively sickened me. He was ly-ing on his belly on the floor lick-ing
up, like a dog, the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was
eas-ily se-cured, and, to my sur-prise, went with the at-tend-ants quite
pla-cidly, simply re-peat-ing over and over again: "The blood is the life!
The blood is the life!"

I can-not af-ford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of
late for my phys-ical good, and then the pro-longed strain of Lucy's
ill-ness and its hor-rible phases is telling on me. I am over-ex-cited and
weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Hap-pily Van Helsing has not summoned
me, so I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not well do without
it.


_Tele-gram, Van Helsing, Ant-werp, to Se-ward, Car-fax._

(Sent to Car-fax, Sus-sex, as no county given; de-livered late by
twenty-two hours.)

"_17 Septem-ber._--Do not fail to be at Hilling-ham to-night. If not
watch-ing all the time fre-quently, visit and see that flowers are as
placed; very im-port-ant; do not fail. Shall be with you as soon as
pos-sible after ar-rival."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_18 Septem-ber._--Just off for train to Lon-don. The ar-rival of Van
Helsing's tele-gram filled me with dis-may. A whole night lost, and I know
by bit-ter ex-per-i-ence what may hap-pen in a night. Of course it is
pos-sible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely
there is some hor-rible doom hanging over us that every pos-sible ac-ci-dent
should thwart us in all we try to do. I shall take this cyl-in-der with
me, and then I can com-plete my entry on Lucy's phono-graph.


_Memor-andum left by Lucy Westenra._

_17 Septem-ber. Night._--I write this and leave it to be seen, so that no
one may by any chance get into trouble through me. This is an ex-act
re-cord of what took place to-night. I feel I am dy-ing of weak-ness, and
have barely strength to write, but it must be done if I die in the
do-ing.

I went to bed as usual, tak-ing care that the flowers were placed as Dr.
Van Helsing dir-ec-ted, and soon fell asleep.

I was waked by the flap-ping at the win-dow, which had be-gun after that
sleep-walk-ing on the cliff at Whitby when Mina saved me, and which now I
know so well. I was not afraid, but I did wish that Dr. Se-ward was in
the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing said he would be--so that I might have
called him. I tried to go to sleep, but could not. Then there came to me
the old fear of sleep, and I de-term-ined to keep awake. Per-versely sleep
would try to come then when I did not want it; so, as I feared to be
alone, I opened my door and called out: "Is there any-body there?" There
was no an-swer. I was afraid to wake mother, and so closed my door again.
Then out-side in the shrub-bery I heard a sort of howl like a dog's, but
more fierce and deeper. I went to the win-dow and looked out, but could
see noth-ing, ex-cept a big bat, which had evid-ently been buf-feting its
wings against the win-dow. So I went back to bed again, but de-term-ined
not to go to sleep. Presently the door opened, and mother looked in;
see-ing by my mov-ing that I was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She
said to me even more sweetly and softly than her wont:--

"I was un-easy about you, darling, and came in to see that you were all
right."

I feared she might catch cold sit-ting there, and asked her to come in
and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down be-side me; she did
not take off her dress-ing gown, for she said she would only stay a while
and then go back to her own bed. As she lay there in my arms, and I in
hers, the flap-ping and buf-feting came to the win-dow again. She was
startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried
to pa-cify her, and at last suc-ceeded, and she lay quiet; but I could
hear her poor dear heart still beat-ing ter-ribly. After a while there was
the low howl again out in the shrub-bery, and shortly after there was a
crash at the win-dow, and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor.
The win-dow blind blew back with the wind that rushed in, and in the
aper-ture of the broken panes there was the head of a great, gaunt grey
wolf. Mother cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a sit-ting
pos-ture, and clutched wildly at any-thing that would help her. Amongst
other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that Dr. Van Helsing
in-sisted on my wear-ing round my neck, and tore it away from me. For a
second or two she sat up, point-ing at the wolf, and there was a strange
and hor-rible gurg-ling in her throat; then she fell over--as if struck
with light-ning, and her head hit my fore-head and made me dizzy for a
mo-ment or two. The room and all round seemed to spin round. I kept my
eyes fixed on the win-dow, but the wolf drew his head back, and a whole
myriad of little specks seemed to come blow-ing in through the broken
win-dow, and wheel-ing and circ-ling round like the pil-lar of dust that
trav-el-lers de-scribe when there is a sim-oon in the desert. I tried to
stir, but there was some spell upon me, and dear mother's poor body,
which seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to
beat--weighed me down; and I re-membered no more for a while.

The time did not seem long, but very, very aw-ful, till I re-covered
con-scious-ness again. Some-where near, a passing bell was tolling; the
dogs all round the neigh-bour-hood were howl-ing; and in our shrub-bery,
seem-ingly just out-side, a night-in-gale was singing. I was dazed and
stu-pid with pain and ter-ror and weak-ness, but the sound of the
night-in-gale seemed like the voice of my dead mother come back to com-fort
me. The sounds seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could hear
their bare feet pat-ter-ing out-side my door. I called to them, and they
came in, and when they saw what had happened, and what it was that lay
over me on the bed, they screamed out. The wind rushed in through the
broken win-dow, and the door slammed to. They lif-ted off the body of my
dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after I
had got up. They were all so frightened and nervous that I dir-ec-ted them
to go to the din-ing-room and have each a glass of wine. The door flew
open for an in-stant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went
in a body to the din-ing-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear
mother's breast. When they were there I re-membered what Dr. Van Helsing
had told me, but I didn't like to re-move them, and, be-sides, I would
have some of the ser-vants to sit up with me now. I was sur-prised that
the maids did not come back. I called them, but got no an-swer, so I went
to the din-ing-room to look for them.

My heart sank when I saw what had happened. They all four lay help-less
on the floor, breath-ing heav-ily. The de-canter of sherry was on the table
half full, but there was a queer, ac-rid smell about. I was sus-pi-cious,
and ex-amined the de-canter. It smelt of laudanum, and look-ing on the
side-board, I found that the bottle which mother's doc-tor uses for
her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? what am I to do? I am back
in the room with mother. I can-not leave her, and I am alone, save for
the sleep-ing ser-vants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I
dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl of the wolf through the
broken win-dow.

The air seems full of specks, float-ing and circ-ling in the draught from
the win-dow, and the lights burn blue and dim. What am I to do? God
shield me from harm this night! I shall hide this pa-per in my breast,
where they shall find it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother
gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Ar-thur, if I should not
sur-vive this night. God keep you, dear, and God help me!




CHAPTER XII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_18 Septem-ber._--I drove at once to Hilling-ham and ar-rived early.
Keep-ing my cab at the gate, I went up the av-enue alone. I knocked gently
and rang as quietly as pos-sible, for I feared to dis-turb Lucy or her
mother, and hoped to only bring a ser-vant to the door. After a while,
find-ing no re-sponse, I knocked and rang again; still no an-swer. I cursed
the lazi-ness of the ser-vants that they should lie abed at such an
hour--for it was now ten o'clock--and so rang and knocked again, but
more im-pa-tiently, but still without re-sponse. Hitherto I had blamed only
the ser-vants, but now a ter-rible fear began to as-sail me. Was this
des-ol-a-tion but an-other link in the chain of doom which seemed draw-ing
tight around us? Was it in-deed a house of death to which I had come, too
late? I knew that minutes, even seconds of delay, might mean hours of
danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of those fright-ful re-lapses;
and I went round the house to try if I could find by chance an entry
any-where.

I could find no means of in-gress. Every win-dow and door was fastened and
locked, and I re-turned baffled to the porch. As I did so, I heard the
rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. They stopped at the
gate, and a few seconds later I met Van Helsing run-ning up the av-enue.
When he saw me, he gasped out:--

"Then it was you, and just ar-rived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you
not get my tele-gram?"

I answered as quickly and co-her-ently as I could that I had only got his
tele-gram early in the morn-ing, and had not lost a minute in com-ing here,
and that I could not make any one in the house hear me. He paused and
raised his hat as he said sol-emnly:--

"Then I fear we are too late. God's will be done!" With his usual
re-cu-per-at-ive en-ergy, he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get
in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now."

We went round to the back of the house, where there was a kit-chen
win-dow. The Pro-fessor took a small sur-gical saw from his case, and
hand-ing it to me, poin-ted to the iron bars which guarded the win-dow. I
at-tacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then
with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fasten-ing of the sashes and
opened the win-dow. I helped the Pro-fessor in, and fol-lowed him. There
was no one in the kit-chen or in the ser-vants' rooms, which were close at
hand. We tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the din-ing-room,
dimly lit by rays of light through the shut-ters, found four
ser-vant-wo-men ly-ing on the floor. There was no need to think them dead,
for their ster-tor-ous breath-ing and the ac-rid smell of laudanum in the
room left no doubt as to their con-di-tion. Van Helsing and I looked at
each other, and as we moved away he said: "We can at-tend to them later."
Then we as-cen-ded to Lucy's room. For an in-stant or two we paused at the
door to listen, but there was no sound that we could hear. With white
faces and trem-bling hands, we opened the door gently, and entered the
room.

How shall I de-scribe what we saw? On the bed lay two wo-men, Lucy and her
mother. The lat-ter lay farthest in, and she was covered with a white
sheet, the edge of which had been blown back by the draught through the
broken win-dow, show-ing the drawn, white face, with a look of ter-ror
fixed upon it. By her side lay Lucy, with face white and still more
drawn. The flowers which had been round her neck we found upon her
mother's bosom, and her throat was bare, show-ing the two little wounds
which we had no-ticed be-fore, but look-ing hor-ribly white and mangled.
Without a word the Pro-fessor bent over the bed, his head al-most touch-ing
poor Lucy's breast; then he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who
listens, and leap-ing to his feet, he cried out to me:--

"It is not yet too late! Quick! quick! Bring the brandy!"

I flew down-stairs and re-turned with it, tak-ing care to smell and taste
it, lest it, too, were drugged like the de-canter of sherry which I found
on the table. The maids were still breath-ing, but more rest-lessly, and I
fan-cied that the nar-cotic was wear-ing off. I did not stay to make sure,
but re-turned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on an-other
oc-ca-sion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her
hands. He said to me:--

"I can do this, all that can be at the present. You go wake those maids.
Flick them in the face with a wet towel, and flick them hard. Make them
get heat and fire and a warm bath. This poor soul is nearly as cold as
that be-side her. She will need be heated be-fore we can do any-thing
more."

I went at once, and found little dif-fi-culty in wak-ing three of the
wo-men. The fourth was only a young girl, and the drug had evid-ently
af-fected her more strongly, so I lif-ted her on the sofa and let her
sleep. The oth-ers were dazed at first, but as re-mem-brance came back to
them they cried and sobbed in a hys-ter-ical man-ner. I was stern with
them, how-ever, and would not let them talk. I told them that one life
was bad enough to lose, and that if they delayed they would sac-ri-fice
Miss Lucy. So, sob-bing and cry-ing, they went about their way, half clad
as they were, and pre-pared fire and wa-ter. For-tunately, the kit-chen and
boiler fires were still alive, and there was no lack of hot wa-ter. We
got a bath and car-ried Lucy out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst
we were busy chaf-ing her limbs there was a knock at the hall door. One
of the maids ran off, hur-ried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then
she re-turned and whispered to us that there was a gen-tle-man who had come
with a mes-sage from Mr. Holm-wood. I bade her simply tell him that he
must wait, for we could see no one now. She went away with the mes-sage,
and, en-grossed with our work, I clean for-got all about him.

I never saw in all my ex-per-i-ence the Pro-fessor work in such deadly
earn-est. I knew--as he knew--that it was a stand-up fight with death,
and in a pause told him so. He answered me in a way that I did not
un-der-stand, but with the stern-est look that his face could wear:--

"If that were all, I would stop here where we are now, and let her fade
away into peace, for I see no light in life over her ho-ri-zon." He went
on with his work with, if pos-sible, re-newed and more fren-zied vigour.

Presently we both began to be con-scious that the heat was be-gin-ning to
be of some ef-fect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more aud-ibly to the
steth-o-scope, and her lungs had a per-cept-ible move-ment. Van Helsing's
face al-most beamed, and as we lif-ted her from the bath and rolled her in
a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:--

"The first gain is ours! Check to the King!"

We took Lucy into an-other room, which had by now been pre-pared, and laid
her in bed and forced a few drops of brandy down her throat. I no-ticed
that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handker-chief round her throat. She was
still un-con-scious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had
ever seen her.

Van Helsing called in one of the wo-men, and told her to stay with her
and not to take her eyes off her till we re-turned, and then beckoned me
out of the room.

"We must con-sult as to what is to be done," he said as we des-cen-ded the
stairs. In the hall he opened the din-ing-room door, and we passed in, he
clos-ing the door care-fully be-hind him. The shut-ters had been opened, but
the blinds were already down, with that obed-i-ence to the etiquette of
death which the Brit-ish wo-man of the lower classes al-ways ri-gidly
ob-serves. The room was, there-fore, dimly dark. It was, how-ever, light
enough for our pur-poses. Van Helsing's stern-ness was some-what re-lieved
by a look of per-plex-ity. He was evid-ently tor-tur-ing his mind about
some-thing, so I waited for an in-stant, and he spoke:--

"What are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help? We must have
an-other trans-fu-sion of blood, and that soon, or that poor girl's life
won't be worth an hour's pur-chase. You are ex-hausted already; I am
ex-hausted too. I fear to trust those wo-men, even if they would have
cour-age to sub-mit. What are we to do for some one who will open his
veins for her?"

"What's the mat-ter with me, any-how?"

The voice came from the sofa across the room, and its tones brought
re-lief and joy to my heart, for they were those of Quin-cey Mor-ris. Van
Helsing star-ted an-grily at the first sound, but his face softened and a
glad look came into his eyes as I cried out: "Quin-cey Mor-ris!" and
rushed to-wards him with out-stretched hands.

"What brought you here?" I cried as our hands met.

"I guess Art is the cause."

He handed me a tele-gram:--

"Have not heard from Se-ward for three days, and am ter-ribly anxious.
Can-not leave. Father still in same con-di-tion. Send me word how Lucy is.
Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD."

"I think I came just in the nick of time. You know you have only to tell
me what to do."

Van Helsing strode for-ward, and took his hand, look-ing him straight in
the eyes as he said:--

"A brave man's blood is the best thing on this earth when a wo-man is in
trouble. You're a man and no mis-take. Well, the devil may work against
us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want them."

Once again we went through that ghastly op-er-a-tion. I have not the heart
to go through with the de-tails. Lucy had got a ter-rible shock and it
told on her more than be-fore, for though plenty of blood went into her
veins, her body did not re-spond to the treat-ment as well as on the other
oc-ca-sions. Her struggle back into life was some-thing fright-ful to see
and hear. However, the ac-tion of both heart and lungs im-proved, and Van
Helsing made a sub-cu-taneous in-jec-tion of morphia, as be-fore, and with
good ef-fect. Her faint be-came a pro-found slum-ber. The Pro-fessor watched
whilst I went down-stairs with Quin-cey Mor-ris, and sent one of the maids
to pay off one of the cab-men who were wait-ing. I left Quin-cey ly-ing down
after hav-ing a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good
break-fast. Then a thought struck me, and I went back to the room where
Lucy now was. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing with a sheet or
two of note-pa-per in his hand. He had evid-ently read it, and was
think-ing it over as he sat with his hand to his brow. There was a look
of grim sat-is-fac-tion in his face, as of one who has had a doubt solved.
He handed me the pa-per say-ing only: "It dropped from Lucy's breast when
we car-ried her to the bath."

When I had read it, I stood look-ing at the Pro-fessor, and after a pause
asked him: "In God's name, what does it all mean? Was she, or is she,
mad; or what sort of hor-rible danger is it?" I was so be-wildered that I
did not know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his hand and took the
pa-per, say-ing:--

"Do not trouble about it now. For-get it for the present. You shall know
and un-der-stand it all in good time; but it will be later. And now what
is it that you came to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I
was all my-self again.

"I came to speak about the cer-ti-fic-ate of death. If we do not act
prop-erly and wisely, there may be an in-quest, and that pa-per would have
to be pro-duced. I am in hopes that we need have no in-quest, for if we
had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if noth-ing else did. I know, and you
know, and the other doc-tor who at-ten-ded her knows, that Mrs. Westenra
had dis-ease of the heart, and we can cer-tify that she died of it. Let us
fill up the cer-ti-fic-ate at once, and I shall take it my-self to the
re-gis-trar and go on to the un-der-taker."

"Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be
sad in the foes that be-set her, is at least happy in the friends that
love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, be-sides one old
man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not blind! I love you all the
more for it! Now go."

In the hall I met Quin-cey Mor-ris, with a tele-gram for Ar-thur telling him
that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now
go-ing on bet-ter; and that Van Helsing and I were with her. I told him
where I was go-ing, and he hur-ried me out, but as I was go-ing said:--

"When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to
ourselves?" I nod-ded in reply and went out. I found no dif-fi-culty about
the re-gis-tra-tion, and ar-ranged with the local un-der-taker to come up in
the even-ing to meas-ure for the coffin and to make ar-range-ments.

When I got back Quin-cey was wait-ing for me. I told him I would see him
as soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to her room. She was still
sleep-ing, and the Pro-fessor seem-ingly had not moved from his seat at her
side. From his put-ting his fin-ger to his lips, I gathered that he
ex-pec-ted her to wake be-fore long and was afraid of fore-stalling nature.
So I went down to Quin-cey and took him into the break-fast-room, where
the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheer-ful, or
rather less cheer-less, than the other rooms. When we were alone, he said
to me:--

"Jack Se-ward, I don't want to shove my-self in any-where where I've no
right to be; but this is no or-din-ary case. You know I loved that girl
and wanted to marry her; but, al-though that's all past and gone, I can't
help feel-ing anxious about her all the same. What is it that's wrong
with her? The Dutch-man--and a fine old fel-low he is; I can see
that--said, that time you two came into the room, that you must have
_an-other_ trans-fu-sion of blood, and that both you and he were ex-hausted.
Now I know well that you med-ical men speak _in cam-era_, and that a man
must not ex-pect to know what they con-sult about in private. But this is
no com-mon mat-ter, and, whatever it is, I have done my part. Is not that
so?"

"That's so," I said, and he went on:--

"I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done already what I did
to-day. Is not that so?"

"That's so."

"And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four days ago down at his
own place he looked queer. I have not seen any-thing pulled down so quick
since I was on the Pam-pas and had a mare that I was fond of go to grass
all in a night. One of those big bats that they call vam-pires had got at
her in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there
wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I had to put a
bul-let through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without
be-tray-ing con-fid-ence, Ar-thur was the first, is not that so?" As he spoke
the poor fel-low looked ter-ribly anxious. He was in a tor-ture of sus-pense
re-gard-ing the wo-man he loved, and his ut-ter ig-nor-ance of the ter-rible
mys-tery which seemed to sur-round her in-tens-i-fied his pain. His very
heart was bleed-ing, and it took all the man-hood of him--and there was a
royal lot of it, too--to keep him from break-ing down. I paused be-fore
an-swer-ing, for I felt that I must not be-tray any-thing which the
Pro-fessor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed
so much, that there could be no reason for not an-swer-ing, so I answered
in the same phrase: "That's so."

"And how long has this been go-ing on?"

"About ten days."

"Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Se-ward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood
of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then,
com-ing close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whis-per: "What took it
out?"

I shook my head. "That," I said, "is the crux. Van Helsing is simply
frantic about it, and I am at my wits' end. I can't even haz-ard a guess.
There has been a series of little cir-cum-stances which have thrown out
all our cal-cu-la-tions as to Lucy be-ing prop-erly watched. But these shall
not oc-cur again. Here we stay un-til all be well--or ill." Quin-cey held
out his hand. "Count me in," he said. "You and the Dutch-man will tell me
what to do, and I'll do it."

When she woke late in the af-ter-noon, Lucy's first move-ment was to feel
in her breast, and, to my sur-prise, pro-duced the pa-per which Van Helsing
had given me to read. The care-ful Pro-fessor had re-placed it where it had
come from, lest on wak-ing she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van
Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked around the room,
and see-ing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her
poor thin hands be-fore her pale face. We both un-der-stood what that
meant--that she had real-ised to the full her mother's death; so we tried
what we could to com-fort her. Doubt-less sym-pathy eased her some-what, but
she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept si-lently and weakly for
a long time. We told her that either or both of us would now re-main with
her all the time, and that seemed to com-fort her. Towards dusk she fell
into a doze. Here a very odd thing oc-curred. Whilst still asleep she
took the pa-per from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped
over and took the pieces from her. All the same, how-ever, she went on
with the ac-tion of tear-ing, as though the ma-ter-ial were still in her
hands; fi-nally she lif-ted her hands and opened them as though scat-ter-ing
the frag-ments. Van Helsing seemed sur-prised, and his brows gathered as
if in thought, but he said noth-ing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_19 Septem-ber._--All last night she slept fit-fully, be-ing al-ways afraid
to sleep, and some-thing weaker when she woke from it. The Pro-fessor and
I took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a mo-ment
un-at-ten-ded. Quin-cey Mor-ris said noth-ing about his in-ten-tion, but I knew
that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.

When the day came, its search-ing light showed the rav-ages in poor Lucy's
strength. She was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nour-ish-ment which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she
slept, and both Van Helsing and I no-ticed the dif-fer-ence in her, between
sleep-ing and wak-ing. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, al-though more
hag-gard, and her breath-ing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale
gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked pos-it-ively longer and
sharper than usual; when she woke the soft-ness of her eyes evid-ently
changed the ex-pres-sion, for she looked her own self, al-though a dy-ing
one. In the af-ter-noon she asked for Ar-thur, and we tele-graphed for him.
Quin-cey went off to meet him at the sta-tion.

When he ar-rived it was nearly six o'clock, and the sun was set-ting full
and warm, and the red light streamed in through the win-dow and gave more
col-our to the pale cheeks. When he saw her, Ar-thur was simply chok-ing
with emo-tion, and none of us could speak. In the hours that had passed,
the fits of sleep, or the co-matose con-di-tion that passed for it, had
grown more fre-quent, so that the pauses when con-ver-sa-tion was pos-sible
were shortened. Ar-thur's pres-ence, how-ever, seemed to act as a
stim-u-lant; she ral-lied a little, and spoke to him more brightly than she
had done since we ar-rived. He too pulled him-self to-gether, and spoke as
cheer-ily as he could, so that the best was made of everything.

It was now nearly one o'clock, and he and Van Helsing are sit-ting with
her. I am to re-lieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am en-ter-ing
this on Lucy's phono-graph. Until six o'clock they are to try to rest. I
fear that to-mor-row will end our watch-ing, for the shock has been too
great; the poor child can-not rally. God help us all.


_Let-ter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._

(Unopened by her.)

"_17 Septem-ber._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or in-deed since I wrote. You
will par-don me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all my
budget of news. Well, I got my hus-band back all right; when we ar-rived
at Exeter there was a car-riage wait-ing for us, and in it, though he had
an at-tack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where there
were rooms for us all nice and com-fort-able, and we dined to-gether. After
din-ner Mr. Hawkins said:--

"'My dears, I want to drink your health and prosper-ity; and may every
bless-ing at-tend you both. I know you both from chil-dren, and have, with
love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to make your home here
with me. I have left to me neither chick nor child; all are gone, and in
my will I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and
the old man clasped hands. Our even-ing was a very, very happy one.

"So here we are, in-stalled in this beau-ti-ful old house, and from both my
bed-room and the draw-ing-room I can see the great elms of the cathed-ral
close, with their great black stems stand-ing out against the old yel-low
stone of the cathed-ral and I can hear the rooks over-head caw-ing and
caw-ing and chat-ter-ing and gos-sip-ing all day, after the man-ner of
rooks--and hu-mans. I am busy, I need not tell you, ar-ran-ging things and
house-keep-ing. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that
Jonathan is a part-ner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him all about the
cli-ents.

"How is your dear mother get-ting on? I wish I could run up to town for a
day or two to see you, dear, but I dare not go yet, with so much on my
shoulders; and Jonathan wants look-ing after still. He is be-gin-ning to
put some flesh on his bones again, but he was ter-ribly weakened by the
long ill-ness; even now he some-times starts out of his sleep in a sud-den
way and awakes all trem-bling un-til I can coax him back to his usual
pla-cid-ity. However, thank God, these oc-ca-sions grow less fre-quent as the
days go on, and they will in time pass away al-to-gether, I trust. And now
I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be mar-ried,
and where, and who is to per-form the ce-re-mony, and what are you to wear,
and is it to be a pub-lic or a private wed-ding? Tell me all about it,
dear; tell me all about everything, for there is noth-ing which in-terests
you which will not be dear to me. Jonathan asks me to send his
're-spect-ful duty,' but I do not think that is good enough from the
ju-nior part-ner of the im-port-ant firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you
love me, and he loves me, and I love you with all the moods and tenses
of the verb, I send you simply his 'love' in-stead. Good-bye, my dearest
Lucy, and all bless-ings on you.

"Yours,

"MINA HARKER."


_Re-port from Pat-rick Hen-nes-sey, M. D., M. R. C. S. L. K. Q. C. P. I.,
etc., etc., to John Se-ward, M. D._

"_20 Septem-ber._

"My dear Sir,--

"In ac-cord-ance with your wishes, I en-close re-port of the con-di-tions of
everything left in my charge.... With re-gard to pa-tient, Ren-field, there
is more to say. He has had an-other out-break, which might have had a
dread-ful end-ing, but which, as it for-tu-nately happened, was un-at-ten-ded
with any un-happy res-ults. This af-ter-noon a car-rier's cart with two men
made a call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to
which, you will re-mem-ber, the pa-tient twice ran away. The men stopped at
our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. I was
my-self look-ing out of the study win-dow, hav-ing a smoke after din-ner, and
saw one of them come up to the house. As he passed the win-dow of
Ren-field's room, the pa-tient began to rate him from within, and called
him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. The man, who seemed a
de-cent fel-low enough, con-ten-ted him-self by telling him to "shut up for a
foul-mouthed beg-gar," whereon our man ac-cused him of rob-bing him and
want-ing to murder him and said that he would hinder him if he were to
swing for it. I opened the win-dow and signed to the man not to no-tice,
so he con-ten-ted him-self after look-ing the place over and mak-ing up his
mind as to what kind of a place he had got to by say-ing: 'Lor' bless
yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a bloomin' mad-house. I
pity ye and the guv'nor for havin' to live in the house with a wild
beast like that.' Then he asked his way civilly enough, and I told him
where the gate of the empty house was; he went away, fol-lowed by threats
and curses and re-vil-ings from our man. I went down to see if I could
make out any cause for his an-ger, since he is usu-ally such a
well-be-haved man, and ex-cept his vi-ol-ent fits noth-ing of the kind had
ever oc-curred. I found him, to my as-ton-ish-ment, quite com-posed and most
gen-ial in his man-ner. I tried to get him to talk of the in-cid-ent, but he
blandly asked me ques-tions as to what I meant, and led me to be-lieve
that he was com-pletely ob-li-vi-ous of the af-fair. It was, I am sorry to
say, how-ever, only an-other in-stance of his cun-ning, for within half an
hour I heard of him again. This time he had broken out through the
win-dow of his room, and was run-ning down the av-enue. I called to the
at-tend-ants to fol-low me, and ran after him, for I feared he was in-tent
on some mis-chief. My fear was jus-ti-fied when I saw the same cart which
had passed be-fore com-ing down the road, hav-ing on it some great wooden
boxes. The men were wip-ing their fore-heads, and were flushed in the
face, as if with vi-ol-ent ex-er-cise. Be-fore I could get up to him the
pa-tient rushed at them, and pulling one of them off the cart, began to
knock his head against the ground. If I had not seized him just at the
mo-ment I be-lieve he would have killed the man there and then. The other
fel-low jumped down and struck him over the head with the butt-end of his
heavy whip. It was a ter-rible blow; but he did not seem to mind it, but
seized him also, and struggled with the three of us, pulling us to and
fro as if we were kit-tens. You know I am no light weight, and the oth-ers
were both burly men. At first he was si-lent in his fight-ing; but as we
began to mas-ter him, and the at-tend-ants were put-ting a strait-waist-coat
on him, he began to shout: 'I'll frus-trate them! They shan't rob me!
they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' and
all sorts of sim-ilar in-co-her-ent rav-ings. It was with very con-sid-er-able
dif-fi-culty that they got him back to the house and put him in the pad-ded
room. One of the at-tend-ants, Hardy, had a fin-ger broken. However, I set
it all right; and he is go-ing on well.

"The two car-ri-ers were at first loud in their threats of ac-tions for
dam-ages, and prom-ised to rain all the pen-al-ties of the law on us. Their
threats were, how-ever, mingled with some sort of in-dir-ect apo-logy for
the de-feat of the two of them by a feeble mad-man. They said that if it
had not been for the way their strength had been spent in car-ry-ing and
rais-ing the heavy boxes to the cart they would have made short work of
him. They gave as an-other reason for their de-feat the ex-traordin-ary
state of drouth to which they had been re-duced by the dusty nature of
their oc-cu-pa-tion and the rep-re-hens-ible dis-tance from the scene of their
la-bours of any place of pub-lic en-ter-tain-ment. I quite un-der-stood their
drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and
with each a sov-er-eign in hand, they made light of the at-tack, and swore
that they would en-counter a worse mad-man any day for the pleas-ure of
meet-ing so 'bloomin' good a bloke' as your cor-res-pond-ent. I took their
names and ad-dresses, in case they might be needed. They are as
fol-lows:--Jack Smol-let, of Dud-ding's Rents, King Ge-orge's Road, Great
Wal-worth, and Tho-mas Snelling, Peter Far-ley's Row, Guide Court, Beth-nal
Green. They are both in the em-ploy-ment of Har-ris & Sons, Mov-ing and
Ship-ment Com-pany, Orange Master's Yard, Soho.

"I shall re-port to you any mat-ter of in-terest oc-cur-ring here, and shall
wire you at once if there is any-thing of im-port-ance.

"Be-lieve me, dear Sir,

"Yours faith-fully,

"PATRICK HENNESSEY."


_Let-ter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westen-ra_.

(Unopened by her.)

"_18 Septem-ber._

"My dearest Lucy,--

"Such a sad blow has be-fallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very sud-denly.
Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him
that it really seems as though we had lost a father. I never knew either
father or mother, so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me.
Jonathan is greatly dis-tressed. It is not only that he feels sor-row,
deep sor-row, for the dear, good man who has be-friended him all his life,
and now at the end has treated him like his own son and left him a
for-tune which to people of our mod-est bring-ing up is wealth bey-ond the
dream of av-arice, but Jonathan feels it on an-other ac-count. He says the
amount of re-spons-ib-il-ity which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He
be-gins to doubt him-self. I try to cheer him up, and _my_ be-lief in _him_
helps him to have a be-lief in him-self. But it is here that the grave
shock that he ex-per-i-enced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too hard
that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which
en-abled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to mas-ter
in a few years--should be so in-jured that the very es-sence of its
strength is gone. For-give me, dear, if I worry you with my troubles in
the midst of your own hap-pi-ness; but, Lucy dear, I must tell some one,
for the strain of keep-ing up a brave and cheer-ful ap-pear-ance to Jonathan
tries me, and I have no one here that I can con-fide in. I dread com-ing
up to Lon-don, as we must do the day after to-mor-row; for poor Mr.
Hawkins left in his will that he was to be bur-ied in the grave with his
father. As there are no re-la-tions at all, Jonathan will have to be chief
mourner. I shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a few
minutes. For-give me for troub-ling you. With all bless-ings,

"Your lov-ing

"MINA HARKER."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_20 Septem-ber._--Only res-ol-u-tion and habit can let me make an entry
to-night. I am too miser-able, too low-spir-ited, too sick of the world
and all in it, in-clud-ing life it-self, that I would not care if I heard
this mo-ment the flap-ping of the wings of the an-gel of death. And he has
been flap-ping those grim wings to some pur-pose of late--Lucy's mother
and Ar-thur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work.

I duly re-lieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Ar-thur to
go to rest also, but he re-fused at first. It was only when I told him
that we should want him to help us dur-ing the day, and that we must not
all break down for want of rest, lest Lucy should suf-fer, that he agreed
to go. Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, my child," he said;
"come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sor-row and much
men-tal pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. You
must not be alone; for to be alone is to be full of fears and alarms.
Come to the draw-ing-room, where there is a big fire, and there are two
so-fas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sym-pathy will
be com-fort to each other, even though we do not speak, and even if we
sleep." Ar-thur went off with him, cast-ing back a long-ing look on Lucy's
face, which lay in her pil-low, al-most whiter than the lawn. She lay
quite still, and I looked round the room to see that all was as it
should be. I could see that the Pro-fessor had car-ried out in this room,
as in the other, his pur-pose of us-ing the gar-lic; the whole of the
win-dow-sashes reeked with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk
handker-chief which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chap-let of
the same odor-ous flowers. Lucy was breath-ing some-what ster-tor-ously, and
her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her
teeth, in the dim, un-cer-tain light, seemed longer and sharper than they
had been in the morn-ing. In par-tic-u-lar, by some trick of the light, the
can-ine teeth looked longer and sharper than the rest. I sat down by her,
and presently she moved un-eas-ily. At the same mo-ment there came a sort
of dull flap-ping or buf-feting at the win-dow. I went over to it softly,
and peeped out by the corner of the blind. There was a full moon-light,
and I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled
round--doubt-less at-trac-ted by the light, al-though so dim--and every now
and again struck the win-dow with its wings. When I came back to my seat,
I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the gar-lic
flowers from her throat. I re-placed them as well as I could, and sat
watch-ing her.

Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing had pre-scribed.
She took but a little, and that lan-guidly. There did not seem to be with
her now the un-con-scious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto
so marked her ill-ness. It struck me as curi-ous that the mo-ment she
be-came con-scious she pressed the gar-lic flowers close to her. It was
cer-tainly odd that whenever she got into that leth-ar-gic state, with the
ster-tor-ous breath-ing, she put the flowers from her; but that when she
waked she clutched them close. There was no pos-sib-il-ity of mak-ing any
mis-take about this, for in the long hours that fol-lowed, she had many
spells of sleep-ing and wak-ing and re-peated both ac-tions many times.

At six o'clock Van Helsing came to re-lieve me. Ar-thur had then fallen
into a doze, and he mer-ci-fully let him sleep on. When he saw Lucy's face
I could hear the sis-s-ing in-draw of his breath, and he said to me in a
sharp whis-per: "Draw up the blind; I want light!" Then he bent down,
and, with his face al-most touch-ing Lucy's, ex-amined her care-fully. He
re-moved the flowers and lif-ted the silk handker-chief from her throat. As
he did so he star-ted back, and I could hear his ejac-u-la-tion, "Mein
Gott!" as it was smothered in his throat. I bent over and looked, too,
and as I no-ticed some queer chill came over me.

The wounds on the throat had ab-so-lutely dis-ap-peared.

For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood look-ing at her, with his face
at its stern-est. Then he turned to me and said calmly:--

"She is dy-ing. It will not be long now. It will be much dif-fer-ence, mark
me, whether she dies con-scious or in her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and
let him come and see the last; he trusts us, and we have prom-ised him."

I went to the din-ing-room and waked him. He was dazed for a mo-ment, but
when he saw the sun-light stream-ing in through the edges of the shut-ters
he thought he was late, and ex-pressed his fear. I as-sured him that Lucy
was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could that both Van
Helsing and I feared that the end was near. He covered his face with his
hands, and slid down on his knees by the sofa, where he re-mained,
per-haps a minute, with his head bur-ied, pray-ing, whilst his shoulders
shook with grief. I took him by the hand and raised him up. "Come," I
said, "my dear old fel-low, sum-mon all your forti-tude: it will be best
and easi-est for her."

When we came into Lucy's room I could see that Van Helsing had, with
his usual fore-thought, been put-ting mat-ters straight and mak-ing
everything look as pleas-ing as pos-sible. He had even brushed Lucy's
hair, so that it lay on the pil-low in its usual sunny ripples. When we
came into the room she opened her eyes, and see-ing him, whispered
softly:--

"Ar-thur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come!" He was stoop-ing to
kiss her, when Van Helsing mo-tioned him back. "No," he whispered, "not
yet! Hold her hand; it will com-fort her more."

So Ar-thur took her hand and knelt be-side her, and she looked her best,
with all the soft lines match-ing the an-gelic beauty of her eyes. Then
gradu-ally her eyes closed, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit her
breast heaved softly, and her breath came and went like a tired child's.

And then in-sens-ibly there came the strange change which I had no-ticed in
the night. Her breath-ing grew ster-tor-ous, the mouth opened, and the pale
gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than ever. In a
sort of sleep-wak-ing, vague, un-con-scious way she opened her eyes, which
were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, vo-lup-tu-ous voice,
such as I had never heard from her lips:--

"Ar-thur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!" Ar-thur bent
eagerly over to kiss her; but at that in-stant Van Helsing, who, like me,
had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catch-ing him by
the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which
I never thought he could have pos-sessed, and ac-tu-ally hurled him al-most
across the room.

"Not for your life!" he said; "not for your liv-ing soul and hers!" And
he stood between them like a lion at bay.

Ar-thur was so taken aback that he did not for a mo-ment know what to do
or say; and be-fore any im-pulse of vi-ol-ence could seize him he real-ised
the place and the oc-ca-sion, and stood si-lent, wait-ing.

I kept my eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm as
of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed
to-gether. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heav-ily.

Very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their soft-ness, and
put-ting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown
one; draw-ing it to her, she kissed it. "My true friend," she said, in a
faint voice, but with un-tellable pathos, "My true friend, and his! Oh,
guard him, and give me peace!"

"I swear it!" he said sol-emnly, kneel-ing be-side her and hold-ing up his
hand, as one who re-gisters an oath. Then he turned to Ar-thur, and said
to him: "Come, my child, take her hand in yours, and kiss her on the
fore-head, and only once."

Their eyes met in-stead of their lips; and so they par-ted.

Lucy's eyes closed; and Van Helsing, who had been watch-ing closely, took
Ar-thur's arm, and drew him away.

And then Lucy's breath-ing be-came ster-tor-ous again, and all at once it
ceased.

"It is all over," said Van Helsing. "She is dead!"

I took Ar-thur by the arm, and led him away to the draw-ing-room, where he
sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sob-bing in a way that
nearly broke me down to see.

I went back to the room, and found Van Helsing look-ing at poor Lucy, and
his face was sterner than ever. Some change had come over her body.
Death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had
re-covered some of their flow-ing lines; even the lips had lost their
deadly pal-lor. It was as if the blood, no longer needed for the work-ing
of the heart, had gone to make the harsh-ness of death as little rude as
might be.

    "We thought her dy-ing whilst she slept,
        And sleep-ing when she died."

I stood be-side Van Helsing, and said:--

"Ah, well, poor girl, there is peace for her at last. It is the end!"

He turned to me, and said with grave solem-nity:--

"Not so; alas! not so. It is only the be-gin-ning!"

When I asked him what he meant, he only shook his head and answered:--

"We can do noth-ing as yet. Wait and see."




CHAPTER XIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_con-tin-ued_.


The fu-neral was ar-ranged for the next suc-ceed-ing day, so that Lucy and
her mother might be bur-ied to-gether. I at-ten-ded to all the ghastly
form-al-it-ies, and the urbane un-der-taker proved that his staff were
af-flic-ted--or blessed--with some-thing of his own ob-sequious suav-ity.
Even the wo-man who per-formed the last of-fices for the dead re-marked to
me, in a con-fid-en-tial, brother-pro-fes-sional way, when she had come out
from the death-cham-ber:--

"She makes a very beau-ti-ful corpse, sir. It's quite a priv-ilege to
at-tend on her. It's not too much to say that she will do credit to our
es-tab-lish-ment!"

I no-ticed that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was pos-sible from
the dis-ordered state of things in the house-hold. There were no re-l-at-ives
at hand; and as Ar-thur had to be back the next day to at-tend at his
father's fu-neral, we were un-able to no-tify any one who should have been
bid-den. Under the cir-cum-stances, Van Helsing and I took it upon
ourselves to ex-am-ine pa-pers, etc. He in-sisted upon look-ing over Lucy's
pa-pers him-self. I asked him why, for I feared that he, be-ing a
for-eigner, might not be quite aware of Eng-lish legal re-quire-ments, and
so might in ig-nor-ance make some un-ne-ces-sary trouble. He answered me:--

"I know; I know. You for-get that I am a law-yer as well as a doc-tor. But
this is not al-to-gether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the
cor-oner. I have more than him to avoid. There may be pa-pers more--such
as this."

As he spoke he took from his pocket-book the memor-andum which had been
in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep.

"When you find any-thing of the so-li-citor who is for the late Mrs.
Westenra, seal all her pa-pers, and write him to-night. For me, I watch
here in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I my-self
search for what may be. It is not well that her very thoughts go into
the hands of strangers."

I went on with my part of the work, and in an-other half hour had found
the name and ad-dress of Mrs. Westenra's so-li-citor and had writ-ten to
him. All the poor lady's pa-pers were in or-der; ex-pli-cit dir-ec-tions
re-gard-ing the place of burial were given. I had hardly sealed the
let-ter, when, to my sur-prise, Van Helsing walked into the room,
say-ing:--

"Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I may, my ser-vice is to
you."

"Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:--

"I did not look for any spe-cific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I
have, all that there was--only some let-ters and a few memor-anda, and a
di-ary new be-gun. But I have them here, and we shall for the present say
noth-ing of them. I shall see that poor lad to-mor-row even-ing, and, with
his sanc-tion, I shall use some."

When we had fin-ished the work in hand, he said to me:--

"And now, friend John, I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you
and I, and rest to re-cu-per-ate. To-mor-row we shall have much to do, but
for the to-night there is no need of us. Alas!"

Be-fore turn-ing in we went to look at poor Lucy. The un-der-taker had
cer-tainly done his work well, for the room was turned into a small
_chapelle ar-den-te_. There was a wil-der-ness of beau-ti-ful white flowers,
and death was made as little re-puls-ive as might be. The end of the
wind-ing-sheet was laid over the face; when the Pro-fessor bent over and
turned it gently back, we both star-ted at the beauty be-fore us, the tall
wax candles show-ing a suf-fi-cient light to note it well. All Lucy's
love-li-ness had come back to her in death, and the hours that had passed,
in-stead of leav-ing traces of "de-cay's ef-fa-cing fin-gers," had but
re-stored the beauty of life, till pos-it-ively I could not be-lieve my eyes
that I was look-ing at a corpse.

The Pro-fessor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and
there was no need for tears in his eyes. He said to me: "Re-main till I
re-turn," and left the room. He came back with a hand-ful of wild gar-lic
from the box wait-ing in the hall, but which had not been opened, and
placed the flowers amongst the oth-ers on and around the bed. Then he
took from his neck, in-side his col-lar, a little gold cru-ci-fix, and
placed it over the mouth. He re-stored the sheet to its place, and we
came away.

I was un-dress-ing in my own room, when, with a pre-mon-it-ory tap at the
door, he entered, and at once began to speak:--

"To-mor-row I want you to bring me, be-fore night, a set of post-mortem
knives."

"Must we make an autopsy?" I asked.

"Yes and no. I want to op-er-ate, but not as you think. Let me tell you
now, but not a word to an-other. I want to cut off her head and take out
her heart. Ah! you a sur-geon, and so shocked! You, whom I have seen with
no tremble of hand or heart, do op-er-a-tions of life and death that make
the rest shud-der. Oh, but I must not for-get, my dear friend John, that
you loved her; and I have not for-got-ten it, for it is I that shall
op-er-ate, and you must only help. I would like to do it to-night, but for
Ar-thur I must not; he will be free after his father's fu-neral to-mor-row,
and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined
ready for the next day, you and I shall come when all sleep. We shall
un-screw the coffin-lid, and shall do our op-er-a-tion: and then re-place
all, so that none know, save we alone."

"But why do it at all? The girl is dead. Why mu-til-ate her poor body
without need? And if there is no ne-ces-sity for a post-mortem and noth-ing
to gain by it--no good to her, to us, to sci-ence, to hu-man
know-ledge--why do it? Without such it is mon-strous."

For an-swer he put his hand on my shoulder, and said, with in-fin-ite
ten-der-ness:--

"Friend John, I pity your poor bleed-ing heart; and I love you the more
be-cause it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on my-self the bur-den
that you do bear. But there are things that you know not, but that you
shall know, and bless me for know-ing, though they are not pleas-ant
things. John, my child, you have been my friend now many years, and yet
did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but
man; but I be-lieve in all I do. Was it not for these causes that you
send for me when the great trouble came? Yes! Were you not amazed, nay
hor-ri-fied, when I would not let Ar-thur kiss his love--though she was
dy-ing--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw
how she thanked me, with her so beau-ti-ful dy-ing eyes, her voice, too, so
weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not
hear me swear prom-ise to her, that so she closed her eyes grate-ful? Yes!

"Well, I have good reason now for all I want to do. You have for many
years trust me; you have be-lieve me weeks past, when there be things so
strange that you might have well doubt. Be-lieve me yet a little, friend
John. If you trust me not, then I must tell what I think; and that is
not per-haps well. And if I work--as work I shall, no mat-ter trust or no
trust--without my friend trust in me, I work with heavy heart and feel,
oh! so lonely when I want all help and cour-age that may be!" He paused a
mo-ment and went on sol-emnly: "Friend John, there are strange and
ter-rible days be-fore us. Let us not be two, but one, that so we work to
a good end. Will you not have faith in me?"

I took his hand, and prom-ised him. I held my door open as he went away,
and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood without
mov-ing, I saw one of the maids pass si-lently along the pas-sage--she had
her back to-wards me, so did not see me--and go into the room where Lucy
lay. The sight touched me. De-vo-tion is so rare, and we are so grate-ful
to those who show it un-asked to those we love. Here was a poor girl
put-ting aside the ter-rors which she nat-ur-ally had of death to go watch
alone by the bier of the mis-tress whom she loved, so that the poor clay
might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest....

       *       *       *       *       *

I must have slept long and soundly, for it was broad day-light when Van
Helsing waked me by com-ing into my room. He came over to my bed-side and
said:--

"You need not trouble about the knives; we shall not do it."

"Why not?" I asked. For his solem-nity of the night be-fore had greatly
im-pressed me.

"Be-cause," he said sternly, "it is too late--or too early. See!" Here he
held up the little golden cru-ci-fix. "This was stolen in the night."

"How, stolen," I asked in won-der, "since you have it now?"

"Be-cause I get it back from the worth-less wretch who stole it, from the
wo-man who robbed the dead and the liv-ing. Her pun-ish-ment will surely
come, but not through me; she knew not al-to-gether what she did and thus
un-know-ing, she only stole. Now we must wait."

He went away on the word, leav-ing me with a new mys-tery to think of, a
new puzzle to grapple with.

The forenoon was a dreary time, but at noon the so-li-citor came: Mr.
Mar-quand, of Whole-man, Sons, Mar-quand & Lid-der-dale. He was very gen-ial
and very ap-pre-ci-at-ive of what we had done, and took off our hands all
cares as to de-tails. Dur-ing lunch he told us that Mrs. Westenra had for
some time ex-pec-ted sud-den death from her heart, and had put her af-fairs
in ab-so-lute or-der; he in-formed us that, with the ex-cep-tion of a cer-tain
en-tailed prop-erty of Lucy's father's which now, in de-fault of dir-ect
is-sue, went back to a dis-tant branch of the fam-ily, the whole es-tate,
real and per-sonal, was left ab-so-lutely to Ar-thur Holm-wood. When he had
told us so much he went on:--

"Frankly we did our best to pre-vent such a test-a-ment-ary dis-pos-i-tion, and
poin-ted out cer-tain con-tin-gen-cies that might leave her daugh-ter either
pen-ni-less or not so free as she should be to act re-gard-ing a mat-ri-mo-nial
al-li-ance. Indeed, we pressed the mat-ter so far that we al-most came into
col-li-sion, for she asked us if we were or were not pre-pared to carry out
her wishes. Of course, we had then no al-tern-at-ive but to ac-cept. We were
right in prin-ciple, and ninety-nine times out of a hun-dred we should
have proved, by the lo-gic of events, the ac-cur-acy of our judg-ment.
Frankly, how-ever, I must ad-mit that in this case any other form of
dis-pos-i-tion would have rendered im-possible the car-ry-ing out of her
wishes. For by her pre-de-ceas-ing her daugh-ter the lat-ter would have come
into pos-ses-sion of the prop-erty, and, even had she only sur-vived her
mother by five minutes, her prop-erty would, in case there were no
will--and a will was a prac-tical im-possib-il-ity in such a case--have been
treated at her de-cease as un-der in-test-acy. In which case Lord Godalm-ing,
though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the world; and the
in-her-it-ors, be-ing re-mote, would not be likely to aban-don their just
rights, for sen-ti-mental reas-ons re-gard-ing an en-tire stranger. I as-sure
you, my dear sirs, I am re-joiced at the res-ult, per-fectly re-joiced."

He was a good fel-low, but his re-joicing at the one little part--in which
he was of-fi-cially in-ter-ested--of so great a tragedy, was an
ob-ject-les-son in the lim-it-a-tions of sym-path-etic un-der-stand-ing.

He did not re-main long, but said he would look in later in the day and
see Lord Godalm-ing. His com-ing, how-ever, had been a cer-tain com-fort to
us, since it as-sured us that we should not have to dread hos-tile
cri-ti-cism as to any of our acts. Ar-thur was ex-pec-ted at five o'clock, so
a little be-fore that time we vis-ited the death-cham-ber. It was so in
very truth, for now both mother and daugh-ter lay in it. The un-der-taker,
true to his craft, had made the best dis-play he could of his goods, and
there was a mor-tu-ary air about the place that lowered our spir-its at
once. Van Helsing ordered the former ar-range-ment to be ad-hered to,
ex-plain-ing that, as Lord Godalm-ing was com-ing very soon, it would be
less har-row-ing to his feel-ings to see all that was left of his _fi-ancée_
quite alone. The un-der-taker seemed shocked at his own stu-pid-ity and
ex-er-ted him-self to re-store things to the con-di-tion in which we left them
the night be-fore, so that when Ar-thur came such shocks to his feel-ings
as we could avoid were saved.

Poor fel-low! He looked des-per-ately sad and broken; even his stal-wart
man-hood seemed to have shrunk some-what un-der the strain of his
much-tried emo-tions. He had, I knew, been very genu-inely and de-votedly
at-tached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a
bit-ter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing he
was sweetly cour-teous; but I could not help see-ing that there was some
con-straint with him. The Pro-fessor no-ticed it, too, and mo-tioned me to
bring him up-stairs. I did so, and left him at the door of the room, as I
felt he would like to be quite alone with her, but he took my arm and
led me in, say-ing husk-ily:--

"You loved her too, old fel-low; she told me all about it, and there was
no friend had a closer place in her heart than you. I don't know how to
thank you for all you have done for her. I can't think yet...."

Here he sud-denly broke down, and threw his arms round my shoulders and
laid his head on my breast, cry-ing:--

"Oh, Jack! Jack! What shall I do! The whole of life seems gone from me
all at once, and there is noth-ing in the wide world for me to live for."

I com-for-ted him as well as I could. In such cases men do not need much
ex-pres-sion. A grip of the hand, the tight-en-ing of an arm over the
shoulder, a sob in uni-son, are ex-pres-sions of sym-pathy dear to a man's
heart. I stood still and si-lent till his sobs died away, and then I said
softly to him:--

"Come and look at her."

To-gether we moved over to the bed, and I lif-ted the lawn from her face.
God! how beau-ti-ful she was. Every hour seemed to be en-han-cing her
love-li-ness. It frightened and amazed me some-what; and as for Ar-thur, he
fell a-trem-bling, and fi-nally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At
last, after a long pause, he said to me in a faint whis-per:--

"Jack, is she really dead?"

I as-sured him sadly that it was so, and went on to sug-gest--for I felt
that such a hor-rible doubt should not have life for a mo-ment longer than
I could help--that it of-ten happened that after death faces be-came
softened and even re-solved into their youth-ful beauty; that this was
es-pe-cially so when death had been pre-ceded by any acute or pro-longed
suf-fer-ing. It seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after
kneel-ing be-side the couch for a while and look-ing at her lov-ingly and
long, he turned aside. I told him that that must be good-bye, as the
coffin had to be pre-pared; so he went back and took her dead hand in his
and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her fore-head. He came away,
fondly look-ing back over his shoulder at her as he came.

I left him in the draw-ing-room, and told Van Helsing that he had said
good-bye; so the lat-ter went to the kit-chen to tell the un-der-taker's men
to pro-ceed with the pre-par-a-tions and to screw up the coffin. When he
came out of the room again I told him of Ar-thur's ques-tion, and he
replied:--

"I am not sur-prised. Just now I doubted for a mo-ment my-self!"

We all dined to-gether, and I could see that poor Art was try-ing to make
the best of things. Van Helsing had been si-lent all din-ner-time; but
when we had lit our ci-gars he said--

"Lord----"; but Ar-thur in-ter-rup-ted him:--

"No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. For-give me, sir:
I did not mean to speak of-fens-ively; it is only be-cause my loss is so
re-cent."

The Pro-fessor answered very sweetly:--

"I only used that name be-cause I was in doubt. I must not call you
'Mr.,' and I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as
Ar-thur."

Ar-thur held out his hand, and took the old man's warmly.

"Call me what you will," he said. "I hope I may al-ways have the title of
a friend. And let me say that I am at a loss for words to thank you for
your good-ness to my poor dear." He paused a mo-ment, and went on: "I know
that she un-der-stood your good-ness even bet-ter than I do; and if I was
rude or in any way want-ing at that time you ac-ted so--you re-mem-ber"--the
Pro-fessor nod-ded--"you must for-give me."

He answered with a grave kind-ness:--

"I know it was hard for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such
vi-ol-ence needs to un-der-stand; and I take it that you do not--that you
can-not--trust me now, for you do not yet un-der-stand. And there may be
more times when I shall want you to trust when you can-not--and may
not--and must not yet un-der-stand. But the time will come when your trust
shall be whole and com-plete in me, and when you shall un-der-stand as
though the sun-light him-self shone through. Then you shall bless me from
first to last for your own sake, and for the sake of oth-ers and for her
dear sake to whom I swore to pro-tect."

"And, in-deed, in-deed, sir," said Ar-thur warmly, "I shall in all ways
trust you. I know and be-lieve you have a very noble heart, and you are
Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what you like."

The Pro-fessor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to
speak, and fi-nally said:--

"May I ask you some-thing now?"

"Cer-tainly."

"You know that Mrs. Westenra left you all her prop-erty?"

"No, poor dear; I never thought of it."

"And as it is all yours, you have a right to deal with it as you will. I
want you to give me per-mis-sion to read all Miss Lucy's pa-pers and
let-ters. Be-lieve me, it is no idle curi-os-ity. I have a motive of which,
be sure, she would have ap-proved. I have them all here. I took them
be-fore we knew that all was yours, so that no strange hand might touch
them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep
them, if I may; even you may not see them yet, but I shall keep them
safe. No word shall be lost; and in the good time I shall give them back
to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will do it, will you not, for
Lucy's sake?"

Ar-thur spoke out heart-ily, like his old self:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you will. I feel that in say-ing this I
am do-ing what my dear one would have ap-proved. I shall not trouble you
with ques-tions till the time comes."

The old Pro-fessor stood up as he said sol-emnly:--

"And you are right. There will be pain for us all; but it will not be
all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of
all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bit-ter wa-ter be-fore we
reach the sweet. But we must be brave of heart and un-selfish, and do our
duty, and all will be well!"

I slept on a sofa in Ar-thur's room that night. Van Helsing did not go to
bed at all. He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was
never out of sight of the room where Lucy lay in her coffin, strewn with
the wild gar-lic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose,
a heavy, over-power-ing smell into the night.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_22 Septem-ber._--In the train to Exeter. Jonathan sleep-ing.

It seems only yes-ter-day that the last entry was made, and yet how much
between then, in Whitby and all the world be-fore me, Jonathan away and
no news of him; and now, mar-ried to Jonathan, Jonathan a so-li-citor, a
part-ner, rich, mas-ter of his busi-ness, Mr. Hawkins dead and bur-ied, and
Jonathan with an-other at-tack that may harm him. Some day he may ask me
about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my short-hand--see what
un-ex-pec-ted prosper-ity does for us--so it may be as well to freshen it up
again with an ex-er-cise any-how....

The ser-vice was very simple and very sol-emn. There were only ourselves
and the ser-vants there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his
Lon-don agent, and a gen-tle-man rep-res-ent-ing Sir John Pax-ton, the
Pres-id-ent of the In-cor-por-ated Law So-ci-ety. Jonathan and I stood hand in
hand, and we felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from us....

We came back to town quietly, tak-ing a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner.
Jonathan thought it would in-terest me to go into the Row for a while, so
we sat down; but there were very few people there, and it was
sad-look-ing and des-ol-ate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think
of the empty chair at home; so we got up and walked down Pic-ca-dilly.
Jonathan was hold-ing me by the arm, the way he used to in old days
be-fore I went to school. I felt it very im-proper, for you can't go on
for some years teach-ing etiquette and de-corum to other girls without the
ped-antry of it bit-ing into your-self a bit; but it was Jonathan, and he
was my hus-band, and we didn't know any-body who saw us--and we didn't
care if they did--so on we walked. I was look-ing at a very beau-ti-ful
girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sit-ting in a vic-toria out-side Guili-ano's,
when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and he said
un-der his breath: "My God!" I am al-ways anxious about Jonathan, for I
fear that some nervous fit may up-set him again; so I turned to him
quickly, and asked him what it was that dis-turbed him.

He was very pale, and his eyes seemed bul-ging out as, half in ter-ror and
half in amazement, he gazed at a tall, thin man, with a beaky nose and
black mous-tache and poin-ted beard, who was also ob-serving the pretty
girl. He was look-ing at her so hard that he did not see either of us,
and so I had a good view of him. His face was not a good face; it was
hard, and cruel, and sen-sual, and his big white teeth, that looked all
the whiter be-cause his lips were so red, were poin-ted like an an-imal's.
Jonathan kept star-ing at him, till I was afraid he would no-tice. I
feared he might take it ill, he looked so fierce and nasty. I asked
Jonathan why he was dis-turbed, and he answered, evid-ently think-ing that
I knew as much about it as he did: "Do you see who it is?"

"No, dear," I said; "I don't know him; who is it?" His an-swer seemed to
shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he did not know that it was
to me, Mina, to whom he was speak-ing:--

"It is the man him-self!"

The poor dear was evid-ently ter-ri-fied at some-thing--very greatly
ter-ri-fied; I do be-lieve that if he had not had me to lean on and to
sup-port him he would have sunk down. He kept star-ing; a man came out of
the shop with a small par-cel, and gave it to the lady, who then drove
off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed on her, and when the car-riage
moved up Pic-ca-dilly he fol-lowed in the same dir-ec-tion, and hailed a
hansom. Jonathan kept look-ing after him, and said, as if to him-self:--

"I be-lieve it is the Count, but he has grown young. My God, if this be
so! Oh, my God! my God! If I only knew! if I only knew!" He was
dis-tress-ing him-self so much that I feared to keep his mind on the
sub-ject by ask-ing him any ques-tions, so I re-mained si-lent. I drew him
away quietly, and he, hold-ing my arm, came eas-ily. We walked a little
fur-ther, and then went in and sat for a while in the Green Park. It was
a hot day for au-tumn, and there was a com-fort-able seat in a shady place.
After a few minutes' star-ing at noth-ing, Jonathan's eyes closed, and he
went quietly into a sleep, with his head on my shoulder. I thought it
was the best thing for him, so did not dis-turb him. In about twenty
minutes he woke up, and said to me quite cheer-fully:--

"Why, Mina, have I been asleep! Oh, do for-give me for be-ing so rude.
Come, and we'll have a cup of tea some-where." He had evid-ently for-got-ten
all about the dark stranger, as in his ill-ness he had for-got-ten all that
this epis-ode had re-minded him of. I don't like this lapsing into
for-get-ful-ness; it may make or con-tinue some in-jury to the brain. I must
not ask him, for fear I shall do more harm than good; but I must some-how
learn the facts of his jour-ney abroad. The time is come, I fear, when I
must open that par-cel, and know what is writ-ten. Oh, Jonathan, you will,
I know, for-give me if I do wrong, but it is for your own dear sake.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--A sad home-com-ing in every way--the house empty of the dear
soul who was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy un-der a slight
re-lapse of his mal-ady; and now a tele-gram from Van Helsing, who-ever he
may be:--

"You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and
that Lucy died the day be-fore yes-ter-day. They were both bur-ied to-day."

Oh, what a wealth of sor-row in a few words! Poor Mrs. Westenra! poor
Lucy! Gone, gone, never to re-turn to us! And poor, poor Ar-thur, to have
lost such sweet-ness out of his life! God help us all to bear our
troubles.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_22 Septem-ber._--It is all over. Ar-thur has gone back to Ring, and has
taken Quin-cey Mor-ris with him. What a fine fel-low is Quin-cey! I be-lieve
in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about Lucy's death as any
of us; but he bore him-self through it like a moral Vik-ing. If Amer-ica
can go on breed-ing men like that, she will be a power in the world
in-deed. Van Helsing is ly-ing down, hav-ing a rest pre-par-at-ory to his
jour-ney. He goes over to Am-s-ter-dam to-night, but says he re-turns
to-mor-row night; that he only wants to make some ar-range-ments which can
only be made per-son-ally. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says
he has work to do in Lon-don which may take him some time. Poor old
fel-low! I fear that the strain of the past week has broken down even his
iron strength. All the time of the burial he was, I could see, put-ting
some ter-rible re-straint on him-self. When it was all over, we were
stand-ing be-side Ar-thur, who, poor fel-low, was speak-ing of his part in
the op-er-a-tion where his blood had been trans-fused to his Lucy's veins; I
could see Van Helsing's face grow white and purple by turns. Ar-thur was
say-ing that he felt since then as if they two had been really mar-ried
and that she was his wife in the sight of God. None of us said a word of
the other op-er-a-tions, and none of us ever shall. Ar-thur and Quin-cey went
away to-gether to the sta-tion, and Van Helsing and I came on here. The
mo-ment we were alone in the car-riage he gave way to a reg-u-lar fit of
hys-ter-ics. He has denied to me since that it was hys-ter-ics, and in-sisted
that it was only his sense of hu-mour as-sert-ing it-self un-der very
ter-rible con-di-tions. He laughed till he cried, and I had to draw down
the blinds lest any one should see us and mis-judge; and then he cried,
till he laughed again; and laughed and cried to-gether, just as a wo-man
does. I tried to be stern with him, as one is to a wo-man un-der the
cir-cum-stances; but it had no ef-fect. Men and wo-men are so dif-fer-ent in
mani-fest-a-tions of nervous strength or weak-ness! Then when his face grew
grave and stern again I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time.
His reply was in a way char-ac-ter-istic of him, for it was lo-gical and
force-ful and mys-ter-i-ous. He said:--

"Ah, you don't com-pre-hend, friend John. Do not think that I am not sad,
though I laugh. See, I have cried even when the laugh did choke me. But
no more think that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come
just the same. Keep it al-ways with you that laughter who knock at your
door and say, 'May I come in?' is not the true laughter. No! he is a
king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no per-son; he choose no
time of suit-ab-il-ity. He say, 'I am here.' Be-hold, in ex-ample I grieve my
heart out for that so sweet young girl; I give my blood for her, though
I am old and worn; I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other
suf-fer-ers want that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very
grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sex-ton drop upon her
coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood
from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of
the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his
hair and eyes the same. There, you know now why I love him so. And yet
when he say things that touch my hus-band-heart to the quick, and make my
father-heart yearn to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend
John, for we are more level in ex-per-i-ences than father and son--yet even
at such mo-ment King Laugh he come to me and shout and bel-low in my ear,
'Here I am! here I am!' till the blood come dance back and bring some of
the sun-shine that he carry with him to my cheek. Oh, friend John, it is
a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miser-ies, and woes, and
troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the
tune he play. Bleed-ing hearts, and dry bones of the church-yard, and
tears that burn as they fall--all dance to-gether to the mu-sic that he
make with that smile-less mouth of him. And be-lieve me, friend John, that
he is good to come, and kind. Ah, we men and wo-men are like ropes drawn
tight with strain that pull us dif-fer-ent ways. Then tears come; and,
like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, un-til per-haps the strain
be-come too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come like the
sun-shine, and he ease off the strain again; and we bear to go on with
our la-bour, what it may be."

I did not like to wound him by pre-tend-ing not to see his idea; but, as I
did not yet un-der-stand the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he
answered me his face grew stern, and he said in quite a dif-fer-ent
tone:--

"Oh, it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady gar-landed with
flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered if she
were truly dead; she laid in that so fine marble house in that lonely
church-yard, where rest so many of her kin, laid there with the mother
who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sac-red bell go-ing 'Toll!
toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white
gar-ments of the an-gel, pre-tend-ing to read books, and yet all the time
their eyes never on the page; and all of us with the bowed head. And all
for what? She is dead; so! Is it not?"

"Well, for the life of me, Pro-fessor," I said, "I can't see any-thing to
laugh at in all that. Why, your ex-plan-a-tion makes it a harder puzzle
than be-fore. But even if the burial ser-vice was comic, what about poor
Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was simply break-ing."

"Just so. Said he not that the trans-fu-sion of his blood to her veins had
made her truly his bride?"

"Yes, and it was a sweet and com-fort-ing idea for him."

"Quite so. But there was a dif-fi-culty, friend John. If so that, then
what about the oth-ers? Ho, ho! Then this so sweet maid is a poly-andrist,
and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but alive by Church's law, though
no wits, all gone--even I, who am faith-ful hus-band to this now-no-wife,
am bi-gam-ist."

"I don't see where the joke comes in there either!" I said; and I did
not feel par-tic-u-larly pleased with him for say-ing such things. He laid
his hand on my arm, and said:--

"Friend John, for-give me if I pain. I showed not my feel-ing to oth-ers
when it would wound, but only to you, my old friend, whom I can trust.
If you could have looked into my very heart then when I want to laugh;
if you could have done so when the laugh ar-rived; if you could do so
now, when King Laugh have pack up his crown, and all that is to him--for
he go far, far away from me, and for a long, long time--maybe you would
per-haps pity me the most of all."

I was touched by the ten-der-ness of his tone, and asked why.

"Be-cause I know!"

And now we are all scattered; and for many a long day loneli-ness will
sit over our roofs with brood-ing wings. Lucy lies in the tomb of her
kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely church-yard, away from teem-ing
Lon-don; where the air is fresh, and the sun rises over Hamp-stead Hill,
and where wild flowers grow of their own ac-cord.

So I can fin-ish this di-ary; and God only knows if I shall ever be-gin
an-other. If I do, or if I even open this again, it will be to deal with
dif-fer-ent people and dif-fer-ent themes; for here at the end, where the
ro-mance of my life is told, ere I go back to take up the thread of my
life-work, I say sadly and without hope,

                        "FINIS."


_"The West-min-ster Gaz-ette," 25 Septem-ber._

                          A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY.


The neigh-bour-hood of Hamp-stead is just at present ex-er-cised with a
series of events which seem to run on lines par-al-lel to those of what
was known to the writers of head-lines as "The Kens-ing-ton Hor-ror," or
"The Stab-bing Wo-man," or "The Wo-man in Black." Dur-ing the past two or
three days sev-eral cases have oc-curred of young chil-dren stray-ing from
home or neg-lect-ing to re-turn from their play-ing on the Heath. In all
these cases the chil-dren were too young to give any prop-erly
in-tel-li-gible ac-count of them-selves, but the con-sensus of their ex-cuses
is that they had been with a "bloofer lady." It has al-ways been late in
the even-ing when they have been missed, and on two oc-ca-sions the
chil-dren have not been found un-til early in the fol-low-ing morn-ing. It is
gen-er-ally sup-posed in the neigh-bour-hood that, as the first child missed
gave as his reason for be-ing away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to
come for a walk, the oth-ers had picked up the phrase and used it as
oc-ca-sion served. This is the more nat-ural as the fa-vour-ite game of the
little ones at present is lur-ing each other away by wiles. A
cor-res-pond-ent writes us that to see some of the tiny tots pre-tend-ing to
be the "bloofer lady" is su-premely funny. Some of our ca-ri-ca-tur-ists
might, he says, take a les-son in the irony of grot-esque by com-par-ing the
real-ity and the pic-ture. It is only in ac-cord-ance with gen-eral
prin-ciples of hu-man nature that the "bloofer lady" should be the pop-u-lar
rôle at these _al fresco_ per-form-ances. Our cor-res-pond-ent naïvely says
that even El-len Terry could not be so win-ningly at-tract-ive as some of
these grubby-faced little chil-dren pre-tend--and even ima-gine
them-selves--to be.

There is, how-ever, pos-sibly a ser-i-ous side to the ques-tion, for some of
the chil-dren, in-deed all who have been missed at night, have been
slightly torn or wounded in the throat. The wounds seem such as might be
made by a rat or a small dog, and al-though of not much im-port-ance
in-di-vidu-ally, would tend to show that whatever an-imal in-flicts them has
a sys-tem or method of its own. The po-lice of the di-vi-sion have been
in-struc-ted to keep a sharp look-out for stray-ing chil-dren, es-pe-cially
when very young, in and around Hamp-stead Heath, and for any stray dog
which may be about.


               _"The West-min-ster Gaz-ette," 25 Septem-ber._

                            _Ex-tra Spe-cial._

                         THE HAMPSTEAD HORROR.

                         ANOTHER CHILD INJURED.

                         _The "Bloofer Lady."_

We have just re-ceived in-tel-li-gence that an-other child, missed last
night, was only dis-covered late in the morn-ing un-der a furze bush at the
Shooter's Hill side of Hamp-stead Heath, which is, per-haps, less
fre-quen-ted than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the
throat as has been no-ticed in other cases. It was ter-ribly weak, and
looked quite ema-ci-ated. It too, when par-tially re-stored, had the com-mon
story to tell of be-ing lured away by the "bloofer lady."




CHAPTER XIV

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


_23 Septem-ber_.--Jonathan is bet-ter after a bad night. I am so glad that
he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the ter-rible
things; and oh, I am re-joiced that he is not now weighed down with the
re-spons-ib-il-ity of his new po-s-i-tion. I knew he would be true to him-self,
and now how proud I am to see my Jonathan rising to the height of his
ad-vance-ment and keep-ing pace in all ways with the du-ties that come upon
him. He will be away all day till late, for he said he could not lunch
at home. My house-hold work is done, so I shall take his for-eign journal,
and lock my-self up in my room and read it....


_24 Septem-ber_.--I hadn't the heart to write last night; that ter-rible
re-cord of Jonathan's up-set me so. Poor dear! How he must have suffered,
whether it be true or only ima-gin-a-tion. I won-der if there is any truth
in it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those
ter-rible things, or had he some cause for it all? I sup-pose I shall
never know, for I dare not open the sub-ject to him.... And yet that man
we saw yes-ter-day! He seemed quite cer-tain of him.... Poor fel-low! I
sup-pose it was the fu-neral up-set him and sent his mind back on some
train of thought.... He be-lieves it all him-self. I re-mem-ber how on our
wed-ding-day he said: "Un-less some sol-emn duty come upon me to go back to
the bit-ter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane." There seems to be
through it all some thread of con-tinu-ity.... That fear-ful Count was
com-ing to Lon-don.... If it should be, and he came to Lon-don, with his
teem-ing mil-lions.... There may be a sol-emn duty; and if it come we must
not shrink from it.... I shall be pre-pared. I shall get my type-writer
this very hour and be-gin tran-scrib-ing. Then we shall be ready for other
eyes if re-quired. And if it be wanted; then, per-haps, if I am ready,
poor Jonathan may not be up-set, for I can speak for him and never let
him be troubled or wor-ried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets
over the nervous-ness he may want to tell me of it all, and I can ask him
ques-tions and find out things, and see how I may com-fort him.


_Let-ter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

"_24 Septem-ber._

(_Con-fid-ence_)

"Dear Madam,--

"I pray you to par-don my writ-ing, in that I am so far friend as that I
sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy Westenra's death. By the kind-ness of
Lord Godalm-ing, I am em-powered to read her let-ters and pa-pers, for I am
deeply con-cerned about cer-tain mat-ters vi-tally im-port-ant. In them I find
some let-ters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you
love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I im-plore you, help me. It is
for oth-ers' good that I ask--to re-dress great wrong, and to lift much
and ter-rible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. May it
be that I see you? You can trust me. I am friend of Dr. John Se-ward and
of Lord Godalm-ing (that was Ar-thur of Miss Lucy). I must keep it private
for the present from all. I should come to Exeter to see you at once if
you tell me I am priv-ilege to come, and where and when. I im-plore your
par-don, madam. I have read your let-ters to poor Lucy, and know how good
you are and how your hus-band suf-fer; so I pray you, if it may be,
en-lighten him not, lest it may harm. Again your par-don, and for-give me.

"VAN HELSING."


_Tele-gram, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

"_25 Septem-ber._--Come to-day by quarter-past ten train if you can catch
it. Can see you any time you call.

"WILHELMINA HARKER."

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL.

_25 Septem-ber._--I can-not help feel-ing ter-ribly ex-cited as the time
draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, for some-how I ex-pect that
it will throw some light upon Jonathan's sad ex-per-i-ence; and as he
at-ten-ded poor dear Lucy in her last ill-ness, he can tell me all about
her. That is the reason of his com-ing; it is con-cern-ing Lucy and her
sleep-walk-ing, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know the real
truth now! How silly I am. That aw-ful journal gets hold of my
ima-gin-a-tion and tinges everything with some-thing of its own col-our. Of
course it is about Lucy. That habit came back to the poor dear, and that
aw-ful night on the cliff must have made her ill. I had al-most for-got-ten
in my own af-fairs how ill she was af-ter-wards. She must have told him
of her sleep-walk-ing ad-ven-ture on the cliff, and that I knew all about
it; and now he wants me to tell him what she knows, so that he may
un-der-stand. I hope I did right in not say-ing any-thing of it to Mrs.
Westenra; I should never for-give my-self if any act of mine, were it even
a neg-at-ive one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van
Helsing will not blame me; I have had so much trouble and anxi-ety of
late that I feel I can-not bear more just at present.

I sup-pose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain
does. Per-haps it was read-ing the journal yes-ter-day that up-set me, and
then Jonathan went away this morn-ing to stay away from me a whole day
and night, the first time we have been par-ted since our mar-riage. I do
hope the dear fel-low will take care of him-self, and that noth-ing will
oc-cur to up-set him. It is two o'clock, and the doc-tor will be here soon
now. I shall say noth-ing of Jonathan's journal un-less he asks me. I am
so glad I have type-writ-ten out my own journal, so that, in case he asks
about Lucy, I can hand it to him; it will save much ques-tion-ing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--He has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meet-ing, and how it
all makes my head whirl round! I feel like one in a dream. Can it be all
pos-sible, or even a part of it? If I had not read Jonathan's journal
first, I should never have ac-cep-ted even a pos-sib-il-ity. Poor, poor, dear
Jonathan! How he must have suffered. Please the good God, all this may
not up-set him again. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be even
a con-sol-a-tion and a help to him--ter-rible though it be and aw-ful in its
con-sequences--to know for cer-tain that his eyes and ears and brain did
not de-ceive him, and that it is all true. It may be that it is the doubt
which haunts him; that when the doubt is re-moved, no mat-ter
which--wak-ing or dream-ing--may prove the truth, he will be more
sat-is-fied and bet-ter able to bear the shock. Dr. Van Helsing must be a
good man as well as a clever one if he is Ar-thur's friend and Dr.
Se-ward's, and if they brought him all the way from Hol-land to look after
Lucy. I feel from hav-ing seen him that he _is_ good and kind and of a
noble nature. When he comes to-mor-row I shall ask him about Jonathan;
and then, please God, all this sor-row and anxi-ety may lead to a good
end. I used to think I would like to prac-tise in-ter-view-ing; Jonathan's
friend on "The Exeter News" told him that memory was everything in such
work--that you must be able to put down ex-actly al-most every word
spoken, even if you had to re-fine some of it af-ter-wards. Here was a rare
in-ter-view; I shall try to re-cord it _ver-batim_.

It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my cour-age _à
deux mains_ and waited. In a few minutes Mary opened the door, and
an-nounced "Dr. Van Helsing."

I rose and bowed, and he came to-wards me; a man of me-dium weight,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and
a neck well bal-anced on the trunk as the head is on the neck. The poise
of the head strikes one at once as in-dic-at-ive of thought and power; the
head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large be-hind the ears. The face,
clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, res-ol-ute, mo-bile
mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sens-it-ive
nos-trils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy brows come down and the
mouth tight-ens. The fore-head is broad and fine, rising at first al-most
straight and then slop-ing back above two bumps or ridges wide apart;
such a fore-head that the red-dish hair can-not pos-sibly tumble over it,
but falls nat-ur-ally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes are set
widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. He
said to me:--

"Mrs. Harker, is it not?" I bowed as-sent.

"That was Miss Mina Mur-ray?" Again I as-sen-ted.

"It is Mina Mur-ray that I came to see that was friend of that poor dear
child Lucy Westenra. Madam Mina, it is on ac-count of the dead I come."

"Sir," I said, "you could have no bet-ter claim on me than that you were
a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra." And I held out my hand. He took
it and said ten-derly:--

"Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that the friend of that poor lily girl must be
good, but I had yet to learn----" He fin-ished his speech with a courtly
bow. I asked him what it was that he wanted to see me about, so he at
once began:--

"I have read your let-ters to Miss Lucy. For-give me, but I had to be-gin
to in-quire some-where, and there was none to ask. I know that you were
with her at Whitby. She some-times kept a di-ary--you need not look
sur-prised, Madam Mina; it was be-gun after you had left, and was in
im-it-a-tion of you--and in that di-ary she traces by in-fer-ence cer-tain
things to a sleep-walk-ing in which she puts down that you saved her. In
great per-plex-ity then I come to you, and ask you out of your so much
kind-ness to tell me all of it that you can re-mem-ber."

"I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about it."

"Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for de-tails? It is not al-ways
so with young ladies."

"No, doc-tor, but I wrote it all down at the time. I can show it to you
if you like."

"Oh, Madam Mina, I will be grate-ful; you will do me much fa-vour." I
could not res-ist the tempta-tion of mys-ti-fy-ing him a bit--I sup-pose it is
some of the taste of the ori-ginal apple that re-mains still in our
mouths--so I handed him the short-hand di-ary. He took it with a grate-ful
bow, and said:--

"May I read it?"

"If you wish," I answered as de-murely as I could. He opened it, and for
an in-stant his face fell. Then he stood up and bowed.

"Oh, you so clever wo-man!" he said. "I knew long that Mr. Jonathan was a
man of much thank-ful-ness; but see, his wife have all the good things.
And will you not so much hon-our me and so help me as to read it for me?
Alas! I know not the short-hand." By this time my little joke was over,
and I was al-most ashamed; so I took the type-writ-ten copy from my
work-bas-ket and handed it to him.

"For-give me," I said: "I could not help it; but I had been think-ing that
it was of dear Lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you might not
have time to wait--not on my ac-count, but be-cause I know your time must
be pre-cious--I have writ-ten it out on the type-writer for you."

He took it and his eyes glistened. "You are so good," he said. "And may
I read it now? I may want to ask you some things when I have read."

"By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I or-der lunch; and then you
can ask me ques-tions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled him-self in a
chair with his back to the light, and be-came ab-sorbed in the pa-pers,
whilst I went to see after lunch chiefly in or-der that he might not be
dis-turbed. When I came back, I found him walk-ing hur-riedly up and down
the room, his face all ablaze with ex-cite-ment. He rushed up to me and
took me by both hands.

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "how can I say what I owe to you? This pa-per
is as sun-shine. It opens the gate to me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so
much light, and yet clouds roll in be-hind the light every time. But that
you do not, can-not, com-pre-hend. Oh, but I am grate-ful to you, you so
clever wo-man. Madam"--he said this very sol-emnly--"if ever Abra-ham Van
Helsing can do any-thing for you or yours, I trust you will let me know.
It will be pleas-ure and de-light if I may serve you as a friend; as a
friend, but all I have ever learned, all I can ever do, shall be for you
and those you love. There are dark-nesses in life, and there are lights;
you are one of the lights. You will have happy life and good life, and
your hus-band will be blessed in you."

"But, doc-tor, you praise me too much, and--and you do not know me."

"Not know you--I, who am old, and who have stud-ied all my life men and
wo-men; I, who have made my spe-cialty the brain and all that be-longs to
him and all that fol-low from him! And I have read your di-ary that you
have so goodly writ-ten for me, and which breathes out truth in every
line. I, who have read your so sweet let-ter to poor Lucy of your
mar-riage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good wo-men tell
all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that
an-gels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us some-thing of
an-gels' eyes. Your hus-band is noble nature, and you are noble too, for
you trust, and trust can-not be where there is mean nature. And your
hus-band--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and
is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an open-ing to ask him about
Jonathan, so I said:--

"He was al-most re-covered, but he has been greatly up-set by Mr. Hawkins's
death." He in-ter-rup-ted:--

"Oh, yes, I know, I know. I have read your last two let-ters." I went
on:--

"I sup-pose this up-set him, for when we were in town on Thursday last he
had a sort of shock."

"A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of
a shock was it?"

"He thought he saw some one who re-called some-thing ter-rible, some-thing
which led to his brain fever." And here the whole thing seemed to
over-whelm me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the hor-ror which he
ex-per-i-enced, the whole fear-ful mys-tery of his di-ary, and the fear that
has been brood-ing over me ever since, all came in a tu-mult. I sup-pose I
was hys-ter-ical, for I threw my-self on my knees and held up my hands to
him, and im-plored him to make my hus-band well again. He took my hands
and raised me up, and made me sit on the sofa, and sat by me; he held my
hand in his, and said to me with, oh, such in-fin-ite sweet-ness:--

"My life is a bar-ren and lonely one, and so full of work that I have not
had much time for friend-ships; but since I have been summoned to here by
my friend John Se-ward I have known so many good people and seen such
no-bil-ity that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my ad-van-cing
years--the loneli-ness of my life. Be-lieve, me, then, that I come here
full of re-spect for you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I
am seek-ing of, but that there are good wo-men still left to make life
happy--good wo-men, whose lives and whose truths may make good les-son for
the chil-dren that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some
use to you; for if your hus-band suf-fer, he suf-fer within the range of my
study and ex-per-i-ence. I prom-ise you that I will gladly do _all_ for him
that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy
one. Now you must eat. You are over-wrought and per-haps over-anxious.
Hus-band Jonathan would not like to see you so pale; and what he like not
where he love, is not to his good. There-fore for his sake you must eat
and smile. You have told me all about Lucy, and so now we shall not
speak of it, lest it dis-tress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I
want to think much over what you have told me, and when I have thought I
will ask you ques-tions, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me of
hus-band Jonathan's trouble so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat
now; af-ter-wards you shall tell me all."

After lunch, when we went back to the draw-ing-room, he said to me:--

"And now tell me all about him." When it came to speak-ing to this great
learned man, I began to fear that he would think me a weak fool, and
Jonathan a mad-man--that journal is all so strange--and I hes-it-ated to go
on. But he was so sweet and kind, and he had prom-ised to help, and I
trus-ted him, so I said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, what I have to tell you is so queer that you must not
laugh at me or at my hus-band. I have been since yes-ter-day in a sort of
fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and not think me fool-ish that I
have even half be-lieved some very strange things." He re-as-sured me by
his man-ner as well as his words when he said:--

"Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is the mat-ter re-gard-ing which
I am here, it is you who would laugh. I have learned not to think little
of any one's be-lief, no mat-ter how strange it be. I have tried to keep
an open mind; and it is not the or-din-ary things of life that could close
it, but the strange things, the ex-traordin-ary things, the things that
make one doubt if they be mad or sane."

"Thank you, thank you, a thou-sand times! You have taken a weight off my
mind. If you will let me, I shall give you a pa-per to read. It is long,
but I have type-writ-ten it out. It will tell you my trouble and
Jonathan's. It is the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that
happened. I dare not say any-thing of it; you will read for your-self and
judge. And then when I see you, per-haps, you will be very kind and tell
me what you think."

"I prom-ise," he said as I gave him the pa-pers; "I shall in the morn-ing,
so soon as I can, come to see you and your hus-band, if I may."

"Jonathan will be here at half-past el-even, and you must come to lunch
with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which
will leave you at Pad-ding-ton be-fore eight." He was sur-prised at my
know-ledge of the trains off-hand, but he does not know that I have made
up all the trains to and from Exeter, so that I may help Jonathan in
case he is in a hurry.

So he took the pa-pers with him and went away, and I sit here
think-ing--think-ing I don't know what.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Let-ter (by hand), Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._

"_25 Septem-ber, 6 o'clock._

"Dear Madam Mina,--

"I have read your hus-band's so won-der-ful di-ary. You may sleep without
doubt. Strange and ter-rible as it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my
life on it. It may be worse for oth-ers; but for him and you there is no
dread. He is a noble fel-low; and let me tell you from ex-per-i-ence of men,
that one who would do as he did in go-ing down that wall and to that
room--ay, and go-ing a second time--is not one to be in-jured in
per-man-ence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right; this I
swear, be-fore I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall have much to
ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to see you, for
I have learn all at once so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more
than ever, and I must think.

"Yours the most faith-ful,

"ABRAHAM VAN HELSING."


_Let-ter, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._

"_25 Septem-ber, 6:30 p. m._

"My dear Dr. Van Helsing,--

"A thou-sand thanks for your kind let-ter, which has taken a great weight
off my mind. And yet, if it be true, what ter-rible things there are in
the world, and what an aw-ful thing if that man, that mon-ster, be really
in Lon-don! I fear to think. I have this mo-ment, whilst writ-ing, had a
wire from Jonathan, say-ing that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from
Launce-ston and will be here at 10:18, so that I shall have no fear
to-night. Will you, there-fore, in-stead of lunch-ing with us, please come
to break-fast at eight o'clock, if this be not too early for you? You can
get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will bring
you to Pad-ding-ton by 2:35. Do not an-swer this, as I shall take it that,
if I do not hear, you will come to break-fast.

"Be-lieve me,

"Your faith-ful and grate-ful friend,

"MINA HARKER."


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_26 Septem-ber._--I thought never to write in this di-ary again, but the
time has come. When I got home last night Mina had sup-per ready, and
when we had supped she told me of Van Helsing's visit, and of her hav-ing
given him the two di-ar-ies copied out, and of how anxious she has been
about me. She showed me in the doc-tor's let-ter that all I wrote down was
true. It seems to have made a new man of me. It was the doubt as to the
real-ity of the whole thing that knocked me over. I felt im-pot-ent, and in
the dark, and dis-trust-ful. But, now that I _know_, I am not afraid, even
of the Count. He has suc-ceeded after all, then, in his design in get-ting
to Lon-don, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing
is the man to un-mask him and hunt him out, if he is any-thing like what
Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dress-ing, and I
shall call at the hotel in a few minutes and bring him over....

He was, I think, sur-prised to see me. When I came into the room where he
was, and in-tro-duced my-self, he took me by the shoulder, and turned my
face round to the light, and said, after a sharp scru-tiny:--

"But Madam Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock." It was
so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly,
strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:--

"I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already."

"And how?"

"By your let-ter to Mina last night. I was in doubt, and then everything
took a hue of un-real-ity, and I did not know what to trust, even the
evid-ence of my own senses. Not know-ing what to trust, I did not know
what to do; and so had only to keep on work-ing in what had hitherto been
the groove of my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I mis-trus-ted
my-self. Doc-tor, you don't know what it is to doubt everything, even
your-self. No, you don't; you couldn't with eye-brows like yours." He
seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:--

"So! You are physiognom-ist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with
so much pleas-ure com-ing to you to break-fast; and, oh, sir, you will
par-don praise from an old man, but you are blessed in your wife." I
would listen to him go on prais-ing Mina for a day, so I simply nod-ded
and stood si-lent.

"She is one of God's wo-men, fash-ioned by His own hand to show us men and
other wo-men that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its
light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an
ego-ist--and that, let me tell you, is much in this age, so scep-tical and
selfish. And you, sir--I have read all the let-ters to poor Miss Lucy,
and some of them speak of you, so I know you since some days from the
know-ing of oth-ers; but I have seen your true self since last night. You
will give me your hand, will you not? And let us be friends for all our
lives."

We shook hands, and he was so earn-est and so kind that it made me quite
choky.

"And now," he said, "may I ask you for some more help? I have a great
task to do, and at the be-gin-ning it is to know. You can help me here.
Can you tell me what went be-fore your go-ing to Transylvania? Later on I
may ask more help, and of a dif-fer-ent kind; but at first this will do."

"Look here, sir," I said, "does what you have to do con-cern the Count?"

"It does," he said sol-emnly.

"Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10:30 train, you
will not have time to read them; but I shall get the bundle of pa-pers.
You can take them with you and read them in the train."

After break-fast I saw him to the sta-tion. When we were part-ing he
said:--

"Per-haps you will come to town if I send to you, and take Madam Mina
too."

"We shall both come when you will," I said.

I had got him the morn-ing pa-pers and the Lon-don pa-pers of the pre-vi-ous
night, and while we were talk-ing at the car-riage win-dow, wait-ing for the
train to start, he was turn-ing them over. His eyes sud-denly seemed to
catch some-thing in one of them, "The West-min-ster Gaz-ette"--I knew it by
the col-our--and he grew quite white. He read some-thing in-tently,
groan-ing to him-self: "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not
think he re-membered me at the mo-ment. Just then the whistle blew, and
the train moved off. This re-called him to him-self, and he leaned out of
the win-dow and waved his hand, call-ing out: "Love to Madam Mina; I shall
write so soon as ever I can."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_26 Septem-ber._--Truly there is no such thing as fi-nal-ity. Not a week
since I said "Finis," and yet here I am start-ing fresh again, or rather
go-ing on with the same re-cord. Until this af-ter-noon I had no cause to
think of what is done. Ren-field had be-come, to all in-tents, as sane as
he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly busi-ness; and he had
just star-ted in the spider line also; so he had not been of any trouble
to me. I had a let-ter from Ar-thur, writ-ten on Sunday, and from it I
gather that he is bear-ing up won-der-fully well. Quin-cey Mor-ris is with
him, and that is much of a help, for he him-self is a bub-bling well of
good spir-its. Quin-cey wrote me a line too, and from him I hear that
Ar-thur is be-gin-ning to re-cover some-thing of his old buoy-ancy; so as to
them all my mind is at rest. As for my-self, I was set-tling down to my
work with the en-thu-si-asm which I used to have for it, so that I might
fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was be-com-ing
ci-ca-trised. Everything is, how-ever, now re-opened; and what is to be the
end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows,
too, but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curi-os-ity. He
went to Exeter yes-ter-day, and stayed there all night. To-day he came
back, and al-most bounded into the room at about half-past five o'clock,
and thrust last night's "West-min-ster Gaz-ette" into my hand.

"What do you think of that?" he asked as he stood back and fol-ded his
arms.

I looked over the pa-per, for I really did not know what he meant; but he
took it from me and poin-ted out a para-graph about chil-dren be-ing de-coyed
away at Hamp-stead. It did not con-vey much to me, un-til I reached a
pas-sage where it de-scribed small punc-tured wounds on their throats. An
idea struck me, and I looked up. "Well?" he said.

"It is like poor Lucy's."

"And what do you make of it?"

"Sim-ply that there is some cause in com-mon. Whatever it was that in-jured
her has in-jured them." I did not quite un-der-stand his an-swer:--

"That is true in-dir-ectly, but not dir-ectly."

"How do you mean, Pro-fessor?" I asked. I was a little in-clined to take
his ser-i-ous-ness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and free-dom
from burn-ing, har-row-ing anxi-ety does help to re-store one's spir-its--but
when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the midst of our
des-pair about poor Lucy, had he looked more stern.

"Tell me!" I said. "I can haz-ard no opin-ion. I do not know what to
think, and I have no data on which to found a con-jec-ture."

"Do you mean to tell me, friend John, that you have no sus-pi-cion as to
what poor Lucy died of; not after all the hints given, not only by
events, but by me?"

"Of nervous pros-tra-tion fol-low-ing on great loss or waste of blood."

"And how the blood lost or waste?" I shook my head. He stepped over and
sat down be-side me, and went on:--

"You are clever man, friend John; you reason well, and your wit is bold;
but you are too pre-ju-diced. You do not let your eyes see nor your ears
hear, and that which is out-side your daily life is not of ac-count to
you. Do you not think that there are things which you can-not un-der-stand,
and yet which are; that some people see things that oth-ers can-not? But
there are things old and new which must not be con-tem-plate by men's
eyes, be-cause they know--or think they know--some things which other men
have told them. Ah, it is the fault of our sci-ence that it wants to
ex-plain all; and if it ex-plain not, then it says there is noth-ing to
ex-plain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of new be-liefs,
which think them-selves new; and which are yet but the old, which pre-tend
to be young--like the fine ladies at the op-era. I sup-pose now you do not
be-lieve in cor-por-eal trans-fer-ence. No? Nor in ma-ter-i-al-isa-tion. No? Nor
in as-tral bod-ies. No? Nor in the read-ing of thought. No? Nor in
hyp-not-ism----"

"Yes," I said. "Char-cot has proved that pretty well." He smiled as he
went on: "Then you are sat-is-fied as to it. Yes? And of course then you
un-der-stand how it act, and can fol-low the mind of the great
Char-cot--alas that he is no more!--into the very soul of the pa-tient
that he in-flu-ence. No? Then, friend John, am I to take it that you
simply ac-cept fact, and are sat-is-fied to let from premise to con-clu-sion
be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am stu-dent of the brain--how you
ac-cept the hyp-not-ism and re-ject the thought read-ing. Let me tell you, my
friend, that there are things done to-day in elec-trical sci-ence which
would have been deemed un-holy by the very men who dis-covered
elec-tri-city--who would them-selves not so long be-fore have been burned
as wiz-ards. There are al-ways mys-ter-ies in life. Why was it that
Meth-u-se-lah lived nine hun-dred years, and 'Old Parr' one hun-dred and
sixty-nine, and yet that poor Lucy, with four men's blood in her poor
veins, could not live even one day? For, had she live one more day, we
could have save her. Do you know all the mys-tery of life and death? Do
you know the al-to-gether of com-par-at-ive ana-tomy and can say where-fore the
qual-it-ies of brutes are in some men, and not in oth-ers? Can you tell me
why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived
for cen-tur-ies in the tower of the old Span-ish church and grew and grew,
till, on des-cend-ing, he could drink the oil of all the church lamps? Can
you tell me why in the Pam-pas, ay and else-where, there are bats that
come at night and open the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their
veins; how in some is-lands of the Western seas there are bats which hang
on the trees all day, and those who have seen de-scribe as like gi-ant
nuts or pods, and that when the sail-ors sleep on the deck, be-cause that
it is hot, flit down on them, and then--and then in the morn-ing are
found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?"

"Good God, Pro-fessor!" I said, start-ing up. "Do you mean to tell me that
Lucy was bit-ten by such a bat; and that such a thing is here in Lon-don
in the nine-teenth cen-tury?" He waved his hand for si-lence, and went
on:--

"Can you tell me why the tor-toise lives more long than gen-er-a-tions of
men; why the ele-phant goes on and on till he have seen dyn-asties; and
why the par-rot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other com-plaint?
Can you tell me why men be-lieve in all ages and places that there are
some few who live on al-ways if they be per-mit; that there are men and
wo-men who can-not die? We all know--be-cause sci-ence has vouched for the
fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thou-sands of
years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of
the world. Can you tell me how the In-dian fakir can make him-self to die
and have been bur-ied, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the
corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then men
come and take away the un-broken seal and that there lie the In-dian
fakir, not dead, but that rise up and walk amongst them as be-fore?" Here
I in-ter-rup-ted him. I was get-ting be-wildered; he so crowded on my mind
his list of nature's ec-cent-ri-cit-ies and pos-sible im-possib-il-it-ies that my
ima-gin-a-tion was get-ting fired. I had a dim idea that he was teach-ing me
some les-son, as long ago he used to do in his study at Am-s-ter-dam; but
he used then to tell me the thing, so that I could have the ob-ject of
thought in mind all the time. But now I was without this help, yet I
wanted to fol-low him, so I said:--

"Pro-fessor, let me be your pet stu-dent again. Tell me the thesis, so
that I may ap-ply your know-ledge as you go on. At present I am go-ing in
my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, fol-lows an
idea. I feel like a novice lum-ber-ing through a bog in a mist, jump-ing
from one tus-sock to an-other in the mere blind ef-fort to move on without
know-ing where I am go-ing."

"That is good im-age," he said. "Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is
this: I want you to be-lieve."

"To be-lieve what?"

"To be-lieve in things that you can-not. Let me il-lus-trate. I heard once
of an Amer-ican who so defined faith: 'that fac-ulty which en-ables us to
be-lieve things which we know to be un-true.' For one, I fol-low that man.
He meant that we shall have an open mind, and not let a little bit of
truth check the rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a rail-way
truck. We get the small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we value
him; but all the same we must not let him think him-self all the truth in
the uni-verse."

"Then you want me not to let some pre-vi-ous con-vic-tion in-jure the
re-ceptiv-ity of my mind with re-gard to some strange mat-ter. Do I read
your les-son aright?"

"Ah, you are my fa-vour-ite pu-pil still. It is worth to teach you. Now
that you are will-ing to un-der-stand, you have taken the first step to
un-der-stand. You think then that those so small holes in the chil-dren's
throats were made by the same that made the hole in Miss Lucy?"

"I sup-pose so." He stood up and said sol-emnly:--

"Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse,
far, far worse."

"In God's name, Pro-fessor Van Helsing, what do you mean?" I cried.

He threw him-self with a des-pair-ing ges-ture into a chair, and placed his
el-bows on the table, cov-er-ing his face with his hands as he spoke:--

"They were made by Miss Lucy!"




CHAPTER XV

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_con-tin-ued_.


For a while sheer an-ger mastered me; it was as if he had dur-ing her life
struck Lucy on the face. I smote the table hard and rose up as I said to
him:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?" He raised his head and looked at me, and
some-how the ten-der-ness of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he
said. "Mad-ness were easy to bear com-pared with truth like this. Oh, my
friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell
you so simple a thing? Was it be-cause I hate you and have hated you all
my life? Was it be-cause I wished to give you pain? Was it that I wanted,
now so late, re-venge for that time when you saved my life, and from a
fear-ful death? Ah no!"

"For-give me," said I. He went on:--

"My friend, it was be-cause I wished to be gentle in the break-ing to you,
for I know you have loved that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not
ex-pect you to be-lieve. It is so hard to ac-cept at once any ab-stract
truth, that we may doubt such to be pos-sible when we have al-ways
be-lieved the 'no' of it; it is more hard still to ac-cept so sad a
con-crete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy. To-night I go to prove
it. Dare you come with me?"

This staggered me. A man does not like to prove such a truth; Byron
ex-cep-ted from the cat-egory, jeal-ousy.

    "And prove the very truth he most ab-horred."

He saw my hes-it-a-tion, and spoke:--

"The lo-gic is simple, no mad-man's lo-gic this time, jump-ing from tus-sock
to tus-sock in a misty bog. If it be not true, then proof will be re-lief;
at worst it will not harm. If it be true! Ah, there is the dread; yet
very dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of be-lief. Come,
I tell you what I pro-pose: first, that we go off now and see that child
in the hos-pital. Dr. Vin-cent, of the North Hos-pital, where the pa-pers
say the child is, is friend of mine, and I think of yours since you were
in class at Am-s-ter-dam. He will let two sci-ent-ists see his case, if he
will not let two friends. We shall tell him noth-ing, but only that we
wish to learn. And then----"

"And then?" He took a key from his pocket and held it up. "And then we
spend the night, you and I, in the church-yard where Lucy lies. This is
the key that lock the tomb. I had it from the coffin-man to give to
Ar-thur." My heart sank within me, for I felt that there was some fear-ful
or-deal be-fore us. I could do noth-ing, how-ever, so I plucked up what
heart I could and said that we had bet-ter hasten, as the af-ter-noon was
passing....

We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food, and
al-to-gether was go-ing on well. Dr. Vin-cent took the band-age from its
throat, and showed us the punc-tures. There was no mis-tak-ing the
sim-il-ar-ity to those which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smal-ler,
and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vin-cent to what he
at-trib-uted them, and he replied that it must have been a bite of some
an-imal, per-haps a rat; but, for his own part, he was in-clined to think
that it was one of the bats which are so nu-mer-ous on the north-ern
heights of Lon-don. "Out of so many harm-less ones," he said, "there may
be some wild spe-ci-men from the South of a more ma-lig-nant spe-cies. Some
sailor may have brought one home, and it man-aged to es-cape; or even from
the Zoö-lo-gical Gar-dens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred
there from a vam-pire. These things do oc-cur, you know. Only ten days ago
a wolf got out, and was, I be-lieve, traced up in this dir-ec-tion. For a
week after, the chil-dren were play-ing noth-ing but Red Rid-ing Hood on the
Heath and in every al-ley in the place un-til this 'bloofer lady' scare
came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with them. Even
this poor little mite, when he woke up to-day, asked the nurse if he
might go away. When she asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted
to play with the 'bloofer lady.'"

"I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you are send-ing the child home
you will cau-tion its par-ents to keep strict watch over it. These fan-cies
to stray are most dan-ger-ous; and if the child were to re-main out an-other
night, it would prob-ably be fatal. But in any case I sup-pose you will
not let it away for some days?"

"Cer-tainly not, not for a week at least; longer if the wound is not
healed."

Our visit to the hos-pital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
the sun had dipped be-fore we came out. When Van Helsing saw how dark it
was, he said:--

"There is no hurry. It is more late than I thought. Come, let us seek
some-where that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way."

We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little crowd of
bi-cyc-lists and oth-ers who were gen-i-ally noisy. About ten o'clock we
star-ted from the inn. It was then very dark, and the scattered lamps
made the dark-ness greater when we were once out-side their in-di-vidual
ra-dius. The Pro-fessor had evid-ently noted the road we were to go, for he
went on un-hes-it-at-ingly; but, as for me, I was in quite a mixup as to
loc-al-ity. As we went fur-ther, we met fewer and fewer people, till at
last we were some-what sur-prised when we met even the patrol of horse
po-lice go-ing their usual sub-urban round. At last we reached the wall of
the church-yard, which we climbed over. With some little dif-fi-culty--for
it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so strange to us--we found
the Westenra tomb. The Pro-fessor took the key, opened the creaky door,
and stand-ing back, po-litely, but quite un-con-sciously, mo-tioned me to
pre-cede him. There was a de-li-cious irony in the of-fer, in the
court-li-ness of giv-ing pref-er-ence on such a ghastly oc-ca-sion. My
com-pan-ion fol-lowed me quickly, and cau-tiously drew the door to, after
care-fully as-cer-tain-ing that the lock was a fall-ing, and not a spring,
one. In the lat-ter case we should have been in a bad plight. Then he
fumbled in his bag, and tak-ing out a match-box and a piece of candle,
pro-ceeded to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed
with fresh flowers, had looked grim and grue-some enough; but now, some
days af-ter-wards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites
turn-ing to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the
beetle had re-sumed their ac-cus-tomed dom-in-ance; when time-dis-col-oured
stone, and dust-en-crus-ted mor-tar, and rusty, dank iron, and tar-nished
brass, and clouded sil-ver-plat-ing gave back the feeble glim-mer of a
candle, the ef-fect was more miser-able and sor-did than could have been
ima-gined. It con-veyed ir-res-ist-ibly the idea that life--an-imal life--was
not the only thing which could pass away.

Van Helsing went about his work sys-tem-at-ic-ally. Hold-ing his candle so
that he could read the coffin plates, and so hold-ing it that the sperm
dropped in white patches which con-gealed as they touched the metal, he
made as-sur-ance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, and he took
out a turn-screw.

"What are you go-ing to do?" I asked.

"To open the coffin. You shall yet be con-vinced." Straight-way he began
tak-ing out the screws, and fi-nally lif-ted off the lid, show-ing the
cas-ing of lead be-neath. The sight was al-most too much for me. It seemed
to be as much an af-front to the dead as it would have been to have
stripped off her cloth-ing in her sleep whilst liv-ing; I ac-tu-ally took
hold of his hand to stop him. He only said: "You shall see," and again
fum-bling in his bag, took out a tiny fret-saw. Strik-ing the turn-screw
through the lead with a swift down-ward stab, which made me wince, he
made a small hole, which was, how-ever, big enough to ad-mit the point of
the saw. I had ex-pec-ted a rush of gas from the week-old corpse. We
doc-tors, who have had to study our dangers, have to be-come ac-cus-tomed to
such things, and I drew back to-wards the door. But the Pro-fessor never
stopped for a mo-ment; he sawed down a couple of feet along one side of
the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. Tak-ing the
edge of the loose flange, he bent it back to-wards the foot of the
coffin, and hold-ing up the candle into the aper-ture, mo-tioned to me to
look.

I drew near and looked. The coffin was empty.

It was cer-tainly a sur-prise to me, and gave me a con-sid-er-able shock, but
Van Helsing was un-moved. He was now more sure than ever of his ground,
and so em-boldened to pro-ceed in his task. "Are you sat-is-fied now, friend
John?" he asked.

I felt all the dogged ar-gu-ment-at-ive-ness of my nature awake within me as
I answered him:--

"I am sat-is-fied that Lucy's body is not in that coffin; but that only
proves one thing."

"And what is that, friend John?"

"That it is not there."

"That is good lo-gic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how
can you--ac-count for it not be-ing there?"

"Per-haps a body-snatcher," I sug-ges-ted. "Some of the un-der-taker's people
may have stolen it." I felt that I was speak-ing folly, and yet it was
the only real cause which I could sug-gest. The Pro-fessor sighed. "Ah
well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me."

He put on the coffin-lid again, gathered up all his things and placed
them in the bag, blew out the light, and placed the candle also in the
bag. We opened the door, and went out. Be-hind us he closed the door and
locked it. He handed me the key, say-ing: "Will you keep it? You had
bet-ter be as-sured." I laughed--it was not a very cheer-ful laugh, I am
bound to say--as I mo-tioned him to keep it. "A key is noth-ing," I said;
"there may be du-plic-ates; and any-how it is not dif-fi-cult to pick a lock
of that kind." He said noth-ing, but put the key in his pocket. Then he
told me to watch at one side of the church-yard whilst he would watch at
the other. I took up my place be-hind a yew-tree, and I saw his dark
fig-ure move un-til the in-ter-ven-ing head-stones and trees hid it from my
sight.

It was a lonely vi-gil. Just after I had taken my place I heard a dis-tant
clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and
un-nerved, and angry with the Pro-fessor for tak-ing me on such an er-rand
and with my-self for com-ing. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly
ob-ser-v-ant, and not sleepy enough to be-tray my trust so al-to-gether I had
a dreary, miser-able time.

Sud-denly, as I turned round, I thought I saw some-thing like a white
streak, mov-ing between two dark yew-trees at the side of the church-yard
farthest from the tomb; at the same time a dark mass moved from the
Pro-fessor's side of the ground, and hur-riedly went to-wards it. Then I
too moved; but I had to go round head-stones and railed-off tombs, and I
stumbled over graves. The sky was over-cast, and some-where far off an
early cock crew. A little way off, bey-ond a line of scattered
ju-ni-per-trees, which marked the path-way to the church, a white, dim
fig-ure flit-ted in the dir-ec-tion of the tomb. The tomb it-self was hid-den
by trees, and I could not see where the fig-ure dis-ap-peared. I heard the
rustle of ac-tual move-ment where I had first seen the white fig-ure, and
com-ing over, found the Pro-fessor hold-ing in his arms a tiny child. When
he saw me he held it out to me, and said:--

"Are you sat-is-fied now?"

"No," I said, in a way that I felt was ag-gress-ive.

"Do you not see the child?"

"Yes, it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?" I
asked.

"We shall see," said the Pro-fessor, and with one im-pulse we took our way
out of the church-yard, he car-ry-ing the sleep-ing child.

When we had got some little dis-tance away, we went into a clump of
trees, and struck a match, and looked at the child's throat. It was
without a scratch or scar of any kind.

"Was I right?" I asked tri-umphantly.

"We were just in time," said the Pro-fessor thank-fully.

We had now to de-cide what we were to do with the child, and so con-sul-ted
about it. If we were to take it to a po-lice-sta-tion we should have to
give some ac-count of our move-ments dur-ing the night; at least, we should
have had to make some state-ment as to how we had come to find the child.
So fi-nally we de-cided that we would take it to the Heath, and when we
heard a po-lice-man com-ing, would leave it where he could not fail to find
it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as we could. All fell out
well. At the edge of Hamp-stead Heath we heard a po-lice-man's heavy
tramp, and lay-ing the child on the path-way, we waited and watched un-til
he saw it as he flashed his lan-tern to and fro. We heard his ex-clam-a-tion
of as-ton-ish-ment, and then we went away si-lently. By good chance we got a
cab near the "Span-iards," and drove to town.

I can-not sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to get a few hours'
sleep, as Van Helsing is to call for me at noon. He in-sists that I shall
go with him on an-other ex-ped-i-tion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 Septem-ber._--It was two o'clock be-fore we found a suit-able
op-por-tun-ity for our at-tempt. The fu-neral held at noon was all com-pleted,
and the last strag-glers of the mourn-ers had taken them-selves lazily
away, when, look-ing care-fully from be-hind a clump of alder-trees, we saw
the sex-ton lock the gate after him. We knew then that we were safe till
morn-ing did we de-sire it; but the Pro-fessor told me that we should not
want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that hor-rid sense of the
real-ity of things, in which any ef-fort of ima-gin-a-tion seemed out of
place; and I real-ised dis-tinctly the per-ils of the law which we were
in-cur-ring in our un-hal-lowed work. Besides, I felt it was all so use-less.
Out-rageous as it was to open a leaden coffin, to see if a wo-man dead
nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height of folly to
open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evid-ence of our own
eye-sight, that the coffin was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, how-ever,
and res-ted si-lent, for Van Helsing had a way of go-ing on his own road,
no mat-ter who re-mon-strated. He took the key, opened the vault, and again
cour-teously mo-tioned me to pre-cede. The place was not so grue-some as
last night, but oh, how un-ut-ter-ably mean-look-ing when the sun-shine
streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I fol-lowed.
He bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock
of sur-prise and dis-may shot through me.

There lay Lucy, seem-ingly just as we had seen her the night be-fore her
fu-neral. She was, if pos-sible, more ra-di-antly beau-ti-ful than ever; and I
could not be-lieve that she was dead. The lips were red, nay red-der than
be-fore; and on the cheeks was a del-ic-ate bloom.

"Is this a juggle?" I said to him.

"Are you con-vinced now?" said the Pro-fessor in re-sponse, and as he spoke
he put over his hand, and in a way that made me shud-der, pulled back the
dead lips and showed the white teeth.

"See," he went on, "see, they are even sharper than be-fore. With this
and this"--and he touched one of the can-ine teeth and that be-low
it--"the little chil-dren can be bit-ten. Are you of be-lief now, friend
John?" Once more, ar-gu-ment-at-ive hos-til-ity woke within me. I _could_ not
ac-cept such an over-whelm-ing idea as he sug-ges-ted; so, with an at-tempt to
ar-gue of which I was even at the mo-ment ashamed, I said:--

"She may have been placed here since last night."

"Indeed? That is so, and by whom?"

"I do not know. Some one has done it."

"And yet she has been dead one week. Most peoples in that time would not
look so." I had no an-swer for this, so was si-lent. Van Helsing did not
seem to no-tice my si-lence; at any rate, he showed neither chag-rin nor
tri-umph. He was look-ing in-tently at the face of the dead wo-man, rais-ing
the eye-lids and look-ing at the eyes, and once more open-ing the lips and
ex-amin-ing the teeth. Then he turned to me and said:--

"Here, there is one thing which is dif-fer-ent from all re-cor-ded; here is
some dual life that is not as the com-mon. She was bit-ten by the vam-pire
when she was in a trance, sleep-walk-ing--oh, you start; you do not know
that, friend John, but you shall know it all later--and in trance could
he best come to take more blood. In trance she died, and in trance she
is Un-Dead, too. So it is that she dif-fer from all other. Usu-ally when
the Un-Dead sleep at home"--as he spoke he made a com-pre-hens-ive sweep of
his arm to des-ig-nate what to a vam-pire was "home"--"their face show what
they are, but this so sweet that was when she not Un-Dead she go back to
the noth-ings of the com-mon dead. There is no ma-lign there, see, and so
it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep." This turned my blood
cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I was ac-cept-ing Van Helsing's
the-or-ies; but if she were really dead, what was there of ter-ror in the
idea of killing her? He looked up at me, and evid-ently saw the change in
my face, for he said al-most joy-ously:--

"Ah, you be-lieve now?"

I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I am will-ing to
ac-cept. How will you do this bloody work?"

"I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with gar-lic, and I shall
drive a stake through her body." It made me shud-der to think of so
mu-til-at-ing the body of the wo-man whom I had loved. And yet the feel-ing
was not so strong as I had ex-pec-ted. I was, in fact, be-gin-ning to
shud-der at the pres-ence of this be-ing, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing
called it, and to loathe it. Is it pos-sible that love is all sub-ject-ive,
or all ob-ject-ive?

I waited a con-sid-er-able time for Van Helsing to be-gin, but he stood as
if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed the catch of his bag with a
snap, and said:--

"I have been think-ing, and have made up my mind as to what is best. If I
did simply fol-low my in-clin-ing I would do now, at this mo-ment, what is
to be done; but there are other things to fol-low, and things that are
thou-sand times more dif-fi-cult in that them we do not know. This is
simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act
now would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may have to
want Ar-thur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw the
wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw the wounds so sim-ilar on the child's at
the hos-pital; if you, who saw the coffin empty last night and full
to-day with a wo-man who have not change only to be more rose and more
beau-ti-ful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this and know
of the white fig-ure last night that brought the child to the church-yard,
and yet of your own senses you did not be-lieve, how, then, can I ex-pect
Ar-thur, who know none of those things, to be-lieve? He doubted me when I
took him from her kiss when she was dy-ing. I know he has for-given me
be-cause in some mis-taken idea I have done things that pre-vent him say
good-bye as he ought; and he may think that in some more mis-taken idea
this wo-man was bur-ied alive; and that in most mis-take of all we have
killed her. He will then ar-gue back that it is we, mis-taken ones, that
have killed her by our ideas; and so he will be much un-happy al-ways. Yet
he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. And he will
some-times think that she he loved was bur-ied alive, and that will paint
his dreams with hor-rors of what she must have suffered; and again, he
will think that we may be right, and that his so be-loved was, after all,
an Un-Dead. No! I told him once, and since then I learn much. Now, since
I know it is all true, a hun-dred thou-sand times more do I know that he
must pass through the bit-ter wa-ters to reach the sweet. He, poor fel-low,
must have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow black to
him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is
made up. Let us go. You re-turn home for to-night to your asylum, and see
that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this
church-yard in my own way. To-mor-row night you will come to me to the
Berke-ley Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for Ar-thur to come too,
and also that so fine young man of Amer-ica that gave his blood. Later we
shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as Pic-ca-dilly and
there dine, for I must be back here be-fore the sun set."

So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the
church-yard, which was not much of a task, and drove back to Pic-ca-dilly.


_Note left by Van Helsing in his port-manteau, Berke-ley Hotel dir-ec-ted to
John Se-ward, M. D._

(Not de-livered.)

"_27 Septem-ber._

"Friend John,--

"I write this in case any-thing should hap-pen. I go alone to watch in
that church-yard. It pleases me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall not
leave to-night, that so on the mor-row night she may be more eager.
There-fore I shall fix some things she like not--gar-lic and a
cru-ci-fix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead,
and will heed. Moreover, these are only to pre-vent her com-ing out; they
may not pre-vail on her want-ing to get in; for then the Un-Dead is
des-per-ate, and must find the line of least res-ist-ance, what-so-ever it may
be. I shall be at hand all the night from sun-set till after the sun-rise,
and if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss
Lucy or from her, I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that
she is Un-Dead, he have now the power to seek her tomb and find shel-ter.
He is cun-ning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the way that all
along he have fooled us when he played with us for Miss Lucy's life, and
we lost; and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have al-ways the
strength in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength
to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can sum-mon his wolf and
I know not what. So if it be that he come thither on this night he shall
find me; but none other shall--un-til it be too late. But it may be that
he will not at-tempt the place. There is no reason why he should; his
hunt-ing ground is more full of game than the church-yard where the
Un-Dead wo-man sleep, and the one old man watch.

"There-fore I write this in case.... Take the pa-pers that are with this,
the di-ar-ies of Harker and the rest, and read them, and then find this
great Un-Dead, and cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake
through it, so that the world may rest from him.

"If it be so, farewell.

"VAN HELSING."



_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_28 Septem-ber._--It is won-der-ful what a good night's sleep will do for
one. Yes-ter-day I was al-most will-ing to ac-cept Van Helsing's mon-strous
ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid be-fore me as out-rages on
com-mon sense. I have no doubt that he be-lieves it all. I won-der if his
mind can have be-come in any way un-hinged. Surely there must be _some_
ra-tional ex-plan-a-tion of all these mys-ter-i-ous things. Is it pos-sible that
the Pro-fessor can have done it him-self? He is so ab-nor-mally clever that
if he went off his head he would carry out his in-tent with re-gard to
some fixed idea in a won-der-ful way. I am loath to think it, and in-deed
it would be al-most as great a mar-vel as the other to find that Van
Helsing was mad; but any-how I shall watch him care-fully. I may get some
light on the mys-tery.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 Septem-ber, morn-ing._.... Last night, at a little be-fore ten o'clock,
Ar-thur and Quin-cey came into Van Helsing's room; he told us all that he
wanted us to do, but es-pe-cially ad-dress-ing him-self to Ar-thur, as if all
our wills were centred in his. He began by say-ing that he hoped we would
all come with him too, "for," he said, "there is a grave duty to be done
there. You were doubt-less sur-prised at my let-ter?" This query was
dir-ectly ad-dressed to Lord Godalm-ing.

"I was. It rather up-set me for a bit. There has been so much trouble
around my house of late that I could do without any more. I have been
curi-ous, too, as to what you mean. Quin-cey and I talked it over; but the
more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now I can say for my-self
that I'm about up a tree as to any mean-ing about any-thing."

"Me too," said Quin-cey Mor-ris lac-on-ic-ally.

"Oh," said the Pro-fessor, "then you are nearer the be-gin-ning, both of
you, than friend John here, who has to go a long way back be-fore he can
even get so far as to be-gin."

It was evid-ent that he re-cog-nised my re-turn to my old doubt-ing frame of
mind without my say-ing a word. Then, turn-ing to the other two, he said
with in-tense grav-ity:--

"I want your per-mis-sion to do what I think good this night. It is, I
know, much to ask; and when you know what it is I pro-pose to do you will
know, and only then, how much. There-fore may I ask that you prom-ise me
in the dark, so that af-ter-wards, though you may be angry with me for a
time--I must not dis-guise from my-self the pos-sib-il-ity that such may
be--you shall not blame yourselves for any-thing."

"That's frank any-how," broke in Quin-cey. "I'll an-swer for the Pro-fessor.
I don't quite see his drift, but I swear he's hon-est; and that's good
enough for me."

"I thank you, sir," said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done my-self the
hon-our of count-ing you one trust-ing friend, and such en-dorse-ment is dear
to me." He held out a hand, which Quin-cey took.

Then Ar-thur spoke out:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they
say in Scot-land, and if it be any-thing in which my hon-our as a gen-tle-man
or my faith as a Chris-tian is con-cerned, I can-not make such a prom-ise.
If you can as-sure me that what you in-tend does not vi-ol-ate either of
these two, then I give my con-sent at once; though for the life of me, I
can-not un-der-stand what you are driv-ing at."

"I ac-cept your lim-it-a-tion," said Van Helsing, "and all I ask of you is
that if you feel it ne-ces-sary to con-demn any act of mine, you will first
con-sider it well and be sat-is-fied that it does not vi-ol-ate your
re-ser-va-tions."

"Agreed!" said Ar-thur; "that is only fair. And now that the
_pour-par-lers_ are over, may I ask what it is we are to do?"

"I want you to come with me, and to come in secret, to the church-yard at
King-stead."

Ar-thur's face fell as he said in an amazed sort of way:--

"Where poor Lucy is bur-ied?" The Pro-fessor bowed. Ar-thur went on: "And
when there?"

"To enter the tomb!" Ar-thur stood up.

"Pro-fessor, are you in earn-est; or it is some mon-strous joke? Par-don me,
I see that you are in earn-est." He sat down again, but I could see that
he sat firmly and proudly, as one who is on his dig-nity. There was
si-lence un-til he asked again:--

"And when in the tomb?"

"To open the coffin."

"This is too much!" he said, an-grily rising again. "I am will-ing to be
pa-tient in all things that are reas-on-able; but in this--this de-sec-ra-tion
of the grave--of one who----" He fairly choked with in-dig-na-tion. The
Pro-fessor looked pity-ingly at him.

"If I could spare you one pang, my poor friend," he said, "God knows I
would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and
for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!"

Ar-thur looked up with set white face and said:--

"Take care, sir, take care!"

"Would it not be well to hear what I have to say?" said Van Helsing.
"And then you will at least know the limit of my pur-pose. Shall I go
on?"

"That's fair enough," broke in Mor-ris.

After a pause Van Helsing went on, evid-ently with an ef-fort:--

"Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no wrong to
her. But if she be not dead----"

Ar-thur jumped to his feet.

"Good God!" he cried. "What do you mean? Has there been any mis-take; has
she been bur-ied alive?" He groaned in an-guish that not even hope could
soften.

"I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not think it. I go no
fur-ther than to say that she might be Un-Dead."

"Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you mean? Is this all a night-mare, or what
is it?"

"There are mys-ter-ies which men can only guess at, which age by age they
may solve only in part. Be-lieve me, we are now on the verge of one. But
I have not done. May I cut off the head of dead Miss Lucy?"

"Heavens and earth, no!" cried Ar-thur in a storm of pas-sion. "Not for
the wide world will I con-sent to any mu-til-a-tion of her dead body. Dr.
Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that you should
tor-ture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to
cast such dis-hon-our on her grave? Are you mad that speak such things, or
am I mad to listen to them? Don't dare to think more of such a
de-sec-ra-tion; I shall not give my con-sent to any-thing you do. I have a
duty to do in pro-tect-ing her grave from out-rage; and, by God, I shall do
it!"

Van Helsing rose up from where he had all the time been seated, and
said, gravely and sternly:--

"My Lord Godalm-ing, I, too, have a duty to do, a duty to oth-ers, a duty
to you, a duty to the dead; and, by God, I shall do it! All I ask you
now is that you come with me, that you look and listen; and if when
later I make the same re-quest you do not be more eager for its
ful-fil-ment even than I am, then--then I shall do my duty, whatever it
may seem to me. And then, to fol-low of your Lord-ship's wishes I shall
hold my-self at your dis-posal to render an ac-count to you, when and where
you will." His voice broke a little, and he went on with a voice full of
pity:--

"But, I be-seech you, do not go forth in an-ger with me. In a long life of
acts which were of-ten not pleas-ant to do, and which some-times did wring
my heart, I have never had so heavy a task as now. Be-lieve me that if
the time comes for you to change your mind to-wards me, one look from
you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do what a man can
to save you from sor-row. Just think. For why should I give my-self so
much of la-bour and so much of sor-row? I have come here from my own land
to do what I can of good; at the first to please my friend John, and
then to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to love. For her--I
am ashamed to say so much, but I say it in kind-ness--I gave what you
gave; the blood of my veins; I gave it, I, who was not, like you, her
lover, but only her phys-i-cian and her friend. I gave to her my nights
and days--be-fore death, after death; and if my death can do her good
even now, when she is the dead Un-Dead, she shall have it freely." He
said this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Ar-thur was much af-fected
by it. He took the old man's hand and said in a broken voice:--

"Oh, it is hard to think of it, and I can-not un-der-stand; but at least I
shall go with you and wait."




CHAPTER XVI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_con-tin-ued_


It was just a quarter be-fore twelve o'clock when we got into the
church-yard over the low wall. The night was dark with oc-ca-sional gleams
of moon-light between the rents of the heavy clouds that scud-ded across
the sky. We all kept some-how close to-gether, with Van Helsing slightly
in front as he led the way. When we had come close to the tomb I looked
well at Ar-thur, for I feared that the prox-im-ity to a place laden with so
sor-row-ful a memory would up-set him; but he bore him-self well. I took it
that the very mys-tery of the pro-ceed-ing was in some way a coun-ter-act-ant
to his grief. The Pro-fessor un-locked the door, and see-ing a nat-ural
hes-it-a-tion amongst us for vari-ous reas-ons, solved the dif-fi-culty by
en-ter-ing first him-self. The rest of us fol-lowed, and he closed the door.
He then lit a dark lan-tern and poin-ted to the coffin. Ar-thur stepped
for-ward hes-it-at-ingly; Van Helsing said to me:--

"You were with me here yes-ter-day. Was the body of Miss Lucy in that
coffin?"

"It was." The Pro-fessor turned to the rest say-ing:--

"You hear; and yet there is no one who does not be-lieve with me." He
took his screw-driver and again took off the lid of the coffin. Ar-thur
looked on, very pale but si-lent; when the lid was re-moved he stepped
for-ward. He evid-ently did not know that there was a leaden coffin, or,
at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw the rent in the lead,
the blood rushed to his face for an in-stant, but as quickly fell away
again, so that he re-mained of a ghastly white-ness; he was still si-lent.
Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and
re-coiled.

The coffin was empty!

For sev-eral minutes no one spoke a word. The si-lence was broken by
Quin-cey Mor-ris:--

"Pro-fessor, I answered for you. Your word is all I want. I wouldn't ask
such a thing or-din-ar-ily--I wouldn't so dis-hon-our you as to im-ply a
doubt; but this is a mys-tery that goes bey-ond any hon-our or dis-hon-our.
Is this your do-ing?"

"I swear to you by all that I hold sac-red that I have not re-moved nor
touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Se-ward and
I came here--with good pur-pose, be-lieve me. I opened that coffin, which
was then sealed up, and we found it, as now, empty. We then waited, and
saw some-thing white come through the trees. The next day we came here in
day-time, and she lay there. Did she not, friend John?"

"Yes."

"That night we were just in time. One more so small child was miss-ing,
and we find it, thank God, un-harmed amongst the graves. Yes-ter-day I came
here be-fore sun-down, for at sun-down the Un-Dead can move. I waited here
all the night till the sun rose, but I saw noth-ing. It was most prob-able
that it was be-cause I had laid over the clamps of those doors gar-lic,
which the Un-Dead can-not bear, and other things which they shun. Last
night there was no ex-odus, so to-night be-fore the sun-down I took away my
gar-lic and other things. And so it is we find this coffin empty. But
bear with me. So far there is much that is strange. Wait you with me
out-side, un-seen and un-heard, and things much stranger are yet to be.
So"--here he shut the dark slide of his lan-tern--"now to the out-side."
He opened the door, and we filed out, he com-ing last and lock-ing the
door be-hind him.

Oh! but it seemed fresh and pure in the night air after the ter-ror of
that vault. How sweet it was to see the clouds race by, and the passing
gleams of the moon-light between the scud-ding clouds cross-ing and
passing--like the glad-ness and sor-row of a man's life; how sweet it was
to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and de-cay; how
hu-man-ising to see the red light-ing of the sky bey-ond the hill, and to
hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great city. Each
in his own way was sol-emn and over-come. Ar-thur was si-lent, and was, I
could see, striv-ing to grasp the pur-pose and the in-ner mean-ing of the
mys-tery. I was my-self tol-er-ably pa-tient, and half in-clined again to
throw aside doubt and to ac-cept Van Helsing's con-clu-sions. Quin-cey
Mor-ris was phleg-matic in the way of a man who ac-cepts all things, and
ac-cepts them in the spirit of cool bravery, with haz-ard of all he has to
stake. Not be-ing able to smoke, he cut him-self a good-sized plug of
to-bacco and began to chew. As to Van Helsing, he was em-ployed in a
def-in-ite way. First he took from his bag a mass of what looked like
thin, wafer-like bis-cuit, which was care-fully rolled up in a white
nap-kin; next he took out a double-hand-ful of some whit-ish stuff, like
dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the
mass between his hands. This he then took, and rolling it into thin
strips, began to lay them into the crevices between the door and its
set-ting in the tomb. I was some-what puzzled at this, and be-ing close,
asked him what it was that he was do-ing. Ar-thur and Quin-cey drew near
also, as they too were curi-ous. He answered:--

"I am clos-ing the tomb, so that the Un-Dead may not enter."

"And is that stuff you have put there go-ing to do it?" asked Quin-cey.
"Great Scott! Is this a game?"

"It is."

"What is that which you are us-ing?" This time the ques-tion was by
Ar-thur. Van Helsing rev-er-ently lif-ted his hat as he answered:--

"The Host. I brought it from Am-s-ter-dam. I have an In-dul-gence." It was an
an-swer that ap-palled the most scep-tical of us, and we felt in-di-vidu-ally
that in the pres-ence of such earn-est pur-pose as the Pro-fessor's, a
pur-pose which could thus use the to him most sac-red of things, it was
im-possible to dis-trust. In re-spect-ful si-lence we took the places
as-signed to us close round the tomb, but hid-den from the sight of any
one ap-proach-ing. I pit-ied the oth-ers, es-pe-cially Ar-thur. I had my-self
been ap-pren-ticed by my former vis-its to this watch-ing hor-ror; and yet I,
who had up to an hour ago re-pu-di-ated the proofs, felt my heart sink
within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or
yew, or ju-ni-per so seem the em-bod-i-ment of fu-ner-eal gloom; never did tree
or grass wave or rustle so omin-ously; never did bough creak so
mys-ter-i-ously; and never did the far-away howl-ing of dogs send such a
woe-ful pres-age through the night.

There was a long spell of si-lence, a big, aching void, and then from the
Pro-fessor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He poin-ted; and far down the av-enue of yews
we saw a white fig-ure ad-vance--a dim white fig-ure, which held some-thing
dark at its breast. The fig-ure stopped, and at the mo-ment a ray of
moon-light fell upon the masses of driv-ing clouds and showed in start-ling
prom-in-ence a dark-haired wo-man, dressed in the cere-ments of the grave.
We could not see the face, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a
fair-haired child. There was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a
child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies be-fore the fire and dreams. We
were start-ing for-ward, but the Pro-fessor's warn-ing hand, seen by us as
he stood be-hind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the
white fig-ure moved for-wards again. It was now near enough for us to see
clearly, and the moon-light still held. My own heart grew cold as ice,
and I could hear the gasp of Ar-thur, as we re-cog-nised the fea-tures of
Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweet-ness was
turned to adam-antine, heart-less cruelty, and the pur-ity to vo-lup-tu-ous
wan-ton-ness. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obed-i-ent to his ges-ture, we
all ad-vanced too; the four of us ranged in a line be-fore the door of the
tomb. Van Helsing raised his lan-tern and drew the slide; by the
con-cen-trated light that fell on Lucy's face we could see that the lips
were crim-son with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her
chin and stained the pur-ity of her lawn death-robe.

We shuddered with hor-ror. I could see by the trem-u-lous light that even
Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Ar-thur was next to me, and if I had
not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen.

When Lucy--I call the thing that was be-fore us Lucy be-cause it bore her
shape--saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives
when taken un-awares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form
and col-our; but Lucy's eyes un-clean and full of hell-fire, in-stead of
the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that mo-ment the rem-nant of my love
passed into hate and loath-ing; had she then to be killed, I could have
done it with sav-age de-light. As she looked, her eyes blazed with un-holy
light, and the face be-came wreathed with a vo-lup-tu-ous smile. Oh, God,
how it made me shud-der to see it! With a care-less mo-tion, she flung to
the ground, cal-lous as a devil, the child that up to now she had
clutched strenu-ously to her breast, growl-ing over it as a dog growls
over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moan-ing. There
was a cold-blooded-ness in the act which wrung a groan from Ar-thur; when
she ad-vanced to him with out-stretched arms and a wan-ton smile he fell
back and hid his face in his hands.

She still ad-vanced, how-ever, and with a lan-guor-ous, vo-lup-tu-ous grace,
said:--

"Come to me, Ar-thur. Leave these oth-ers and come to me. My arms are
hungry for you. Come, and we can rest to-gether. Come, my hus-band, come!"

There was some-thing diabol-ic-ally sweet in her tones--some-thing of the
tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us
who heard the words ad-dressed to an-other. As for Ar-thur, he seemed un-der
a spell; mov-ing his hands from his face, he opened wide his arms. She
was leap-ing for them, when Van Helsing sprang for-ward and held between
them his little golden cru-ci-fix. She re-coiled from it, and, with a
sud-denly dis-tor-ted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter
the tomb.

When within a foot or two of the door, how-ever, she stopped, as if
ar-res-ted by some ir-res-ist-ible force. Then she turned, and her face was
shown in the clear burst of moon-light and by the lamp, which had now no
quiver from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I see such baffled
malice on a face; and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again by
mor-tal eyes. The beau-ti-ful col-our be-came livid, the eyes seemed to throw
out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the folds of
the flesh were the coils of Me-dusa's snakes, and the lovely,
blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the pas-sion masks of
the Greeks and Japan-ese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could
kill--we saw it at that mo-ment.

And so for full half a minute, which seemed an etern-ity, she re-mained
between the lif-ted cru-ci-fix and the sac-red clos-ing of her means of
entry. Van Helsing broke the si-lence by ask-ing Ar-thur:--

"An-swer me, oh my friend! Am I to pro-ceed in my work?"

Ar-thur threw him-self on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he
answered:--

"Do as you will, friend; do as you will. There can be no hor-ror like
this ever any more;" and he groaned in spirit. Quin-cey and I
sim-ul-tan-eously moved to-wards him, and took his arms. We could hear the
click of the clos-ing lan-tern as Van Helsing held it down; com-ing close
to the tomb, he began to re-move from the chinks some of the sac-red
em-blem which he had placed there. We all looked on in hor-ri-fied
amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the wo-man, with a cor-por-eal
body as real at that mo-ment as our own, pass in through the in-ter-stice
where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of
re-lief when we saw the Pro-fessor calmly restor-ing the strings of putty
to the edges of the door.

When this was done, he lif-ted the child and said:

"Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-mor-row. There is a
fu-neral at noon, so here we shall all come be-fore long after that. The
friends of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sex-ton lock
the gate we shall re-main. Then there is more to do; but not like this of
to-night. As for this little one, he is not much harm, and by to-mor-row
night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the po-lice will find
him, as on the other night; and then to home." Com-ing close to Ar-thur,
he said:--

"My friend Ar-thur, you have had a sore trial; but after, when you look
back, you will see how it was ne-ces-sary. You are now in the bit-ter
wa-ters, my child. By this time to-mor-row you will, please God, have
passed them, and have drunk of the sweet wa-ters; so do not mourn
over-much. Till then I shall not ask you to for-give me."

Ar-thur and Quin-cey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each other
on the way. We had left the child in safety, and were tired; so we all
slept with more or less real-ity of sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_29 Septem-ber, night._--A little be-fore twelve o'clock we three--Ar-thur,
Quin-cey Mor-ris, and my-self--called for the Pro-fessor. It was odd to
no-tice that by com-mon con-sent we had all put on black clothes. Of
course, Ar-thur wore black, for he was in deep mourn-ing, but the rest of
us wore it by in-stinct. We got to the church-yard by half-past one, and
strolled about, keep-ing out of of-fi-cial ob-ser-va-tion, so that when the
gravedig-gers had com-pleted their task and the sex-ton un-der the be-lief
that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to
ourselves. Van Helsing, in-stead of his little black bag, had with him a
long leather one, some-thing like a crick-et-ing bag; it was mani-festly of
fair weight.

When we were alone and had heard the last of the foot-steps die out up
the road, we si-lently, and as if by ordered in-ten-tion, fol-lowed the
Pro-fessor to the tomb. He un-locked the door, and we entered, clos-ing it
be-hind us. Then he took from his bag the lan-tern, which he lit, and also
two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melt-ing their own
ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light suf-fi-cient to work
by. When he again lif-ted the lid off Lucy's coffin we all looked--Ar-thur
trem-bling like an as-pen--and saw that the body lay there in all its
death-beauty. But there was no love in my own heart, noth-ing but
loath-ing for the foul Th-ing which had taken Lucy's shape without her
soul. I could see even Ar-thur's face grow hard as he looked. Presently
he said to Van Helsing:--

"Is this really Lucy's body, or only a de-mon in her shape?"

"It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and you all see her
as she was, and is."

She seemed like a night-mare of Lucy as she lay there; the poin-ted teeth,
the blood-stained, vo-lup-tu-ous mouth--which it made one shud-der to
see--the whole car-nal and un-spir-itual ap-pear-ance, seem-ing like a
dev-il-ish mock-ery of Lucy's sweet pur-ity. Van Helsing, with his usual
meth-od-ic-al-ness, began tak-ing the vari-ous con-tents from his bag and
pla-cing them ready for use. First he took out a sol-der-ing iron and some
plumb-ing solder, and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in
a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue
flame; then his op-er-at-ing knives, which he placed to hand; and last a
round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about
three feet long. One end of it was hardened by char-ring in the fire, and
was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy ham-mer, such
as in house-holds is used in the coal-cel-lar for break-ing the lumps. To
me, a doc-tor's pre-par-a-tions for work of any kind are stim-u-lat-ing and
bra-cing, but the ef-fect of these things on both Ar-thur and Quin-cey was
to cause them a sort of con-sterna-tion. They both, how-ever, kept their
cour-age, and re-mained si-lent and quiet.

When all was ready, Van Helsing said:--

"Be-fore we do any-thing, let me tell you this; it is out of the lore and
ex-per-i-ence of the an-cients and of all those who have stud-ied the powers
of the Un-Dead. When they be-come such, there comes with the change the
curse of im-mor-tal-ity; they can-not die, but must go on age after age
adding new vic-tims and mul-tiply-ing the evils of the world; for all that
die from the prey-ing of the Un-Dead be-comes them-selves Un-Dead, and prey
on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widen-ing, like as the
ripples from a stone thrown in the wa-ter. Friend Ar-thur, if you had met
that kiss which you know of be-fore poor Lucy die; or again, last night
when you open your arms to her, you would in time, when you had died,
have be-come _nos-fer-atu_, as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would
all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with hor-ror.
The ca-reer of this so un-happy dear lady is but just be-gun. Those
chil-dren whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if
she live on, Un-Dead, more and more they lose their blood and by her
power over them they come to her; and so she draw their blood with that
so wicked mouth. But if she die in truth, then all cease; the tiny
wounds of the throats dis-ap-pear, and they go back to their plays
un-know-ing ever of what has been. But of the most blessed of all, when
this now Un-Dead be made to rest as true dead, then the soul of the poor
lady whom we love shall again be free. In-stead of work-ing wicked-ness by
night and grow-ing more de-based in the as-sim-il-at-ing of it by day, she
shall take her place with the other An-gels. So that, my friend, it will
be a blessed hand for her that shall strike the blow that sets her free.
To this I am will-ing; but is there none amongst us who has a bet-ter
right? Will it be no joy to think of here-after in the si-lence of the
night when sleep is not: 'It was my hand that sent her to the stars; it
was the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that of all she would
her-self have chosen, had it been to her to choose?' Tell me if there be
such a one amongst us?"

We all looked at Ar-thur. He saw, too, what we all did, the in-fin-ite
kind-ness which sug-ges-ted that his should be the hand which would re-store
Lucy to us as a holy, and not an un-holy, memory; he stepped for-ward and
said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as
snow:--

"My true friend, from the bot-tom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me
what I am to do, and I shall not fal-ter!" Van Helsing laid a hand on his
shoulder, and said:--

"Brave lad! A mo-ment's cour-age, and it is done. This stake must be
driven through her. It will be a fear-ful or-deal--be not de-ceived in
that--but it will be only a short time, and you will then re-joice more
than your pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though
you tread on air. But you must not fal-ter when once you have be-gun. Only
think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we pray for
you all the time."

"Go on," said Ar-thur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am to do."

"Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the
heart, and the ham-mer in your right. Then when we be-gin our prayer for
the dead--I shall read him, I have here the book, and the oth-ers shall
fol-low--strike in God's name, that so all may be well with the dead that
we love and that the Un-Dead pass away."

Ar-thur took the stake and the ham-mer, and when once his mind was set on
ac-tion his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened
his missal and began to read, and Quin-cey and I fol-lowed as well as we
could. Ar-thur placed the point over the heart, and as I looked I could
see its dint in the white flesh. Then he struck with all his might.

The Th-ing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curd-ling screech
came from the opened red lips. The body shook and quivered and twis-ted
in wild con-tor-tions; the sharp white teeth champed to-gether till the
lips were cut, and the mouth was smeared with a crim-son foam. But Ar-thur
never faltered. He looked like a fig-ure of Thor as his un-trem-bling arm
rose and fell, driv-ing deeper and deeper the mercy-bear-ing stake, whilst
the blood from the pierced heart welled and spur-ted up around it. His
face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of it
gave us cour-age so that our voices seemed to ring through the little
vault.

And then the writh-ing and quiv-er-ing of the body be-came less, and the
teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver. Fin-ally it lay still. The
ter-rible task was over.

The ham-mer fell from Ar-thur's hand. He reeled and would have fallen had
we not caught him. The great drops of sweat sprang from his fore-head,
and his breath came in broken gasps. It had in-deed been an aw-ful strain
on him; and had he not been forced to his task by more than hu-man
con-sid-er-a-tions he could never have gone through with it. For a few
minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look to-wards the
coffin. When we did, how-ever, a mur-mur of startled sur-prise ran from one
to the other of us. We gazed so eagerly that Ar-thur rose, for he had
been seated on the ground, and came and looked too; and then a glad,
strange light broke over his face and dis-pelled al-to-gether the gloom of
hor-ror that lay upon it.

There, in the coffin lay no longer the foul Th-ing that we had so dreaded
and grown to hate that the work of her de-struc-tion was yiel-ded as a
priv-ilege to the one best en-titled to it, but Lucy as we had seen her in
her life, with her face of un-equalled sweet-ness and pur-ity. True that
there were there, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and
pain and waste; but these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth
to what we knew. One and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like
sun-shine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and
sym-bol of the calm that was to reign for ever.

Van Helsing came and laid his hand on Ar-thur's shoulder, and said to
him:--

"And now, Ar-thur my friend, dear lad, am I not for-given?"

The re-ac-tion of the ter-rible strain came as he took the old man's hand
in his, and rais-ing it to his lips, pressed it, and said:--

"For-given! God bless you that you have given my dear one her soul again,
and me peace." He put his hands on the Pro-fessor's shoulder, and lay-ing
his head on his breast, cried for a while si-lently, whilst we stood
un-mov-ing. When he raised his head Van Helsing said to him:--

"And now, my child, you may kiss her. Kiss her dead lips if you will, as
she would have you to, if for her to choose. For she is not a grin-ning
devil now--not any more a foul Th-ing for all etern-ity. No longer she is
the devil's Un-Dead. She is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!"

Ar-thur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and Quin-cey out of the
tomb; the Pro-fessor and I sawed the top off the stake, leav-ing the point
of it in the body. Then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with
gar-lic. We soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid,
and gath-er-ing up our be-long-ings, came away. When the Pro-fessor locked
the door he gave the key to Ar-thur.

Out-side the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it
seemed as if all nature were tuned to a dif-fer-ent pitch. There was
glad-ness and mirth and peace every-where, for we were at rest ourselves
on one ac-count, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy.

Be-fore we moved away Van Helsing said:--

"Now, my friends, one step of our work is done, one the most har-row-ing
to ourselves. But there re-mains a greater task: to find out the au-thor
of all this our sor-row and to stamp him out. I have clues which we can
fol-low; but it is a long task, and a dif-fi-cult, and there is danger in
it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to be-lieve, all
of us--is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do
we not prom-ise to go on to the bit-ter end?"

Each in turn, we took his hand, and the prom-ise was made. Then said the
Pro-fessor as we moved off:--

"Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine to-gether at seven of
the clock with friend John. I shall en-treat two oth-ers, two that you
know not as yet; and I shall be ready to all our work show and our plans
un-fold. Friend John, you come with me home, for I have much to con-sult
about, and you can help me. To-night I leave for Am-s-ter-dam, but shall
re-turn to-mor-row night. And then be-gins our great quest. But first I
shall have much to say, so that you may know what is to do and to dread.
Then our prom-ise shall be made to each other anew; for there is a
ter-rible task be-fore us, and once our feet are on the plough-share we
must not draw back."




CHAPTER XVII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_con-tin-ued_


When we ar-rived at the Berke-ley Hotel, Van Helsing found a tele-gram
wait-ing for him:--

     "Am com-ing up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Im-port-ant news.--MINA
     HARKER."

The Pro-fessor was de-lighted. "Ah, that won-der-ful Madam Mina," he said,
"pearl among wo-men! She ar-rive, but I can-not stay. She must go to your
house, friend John. You must meet her at the sta-tion. Tele-graph her _en
route_, so that she may be pre-pared."

When the wire was des-patched he had a cup of tea; over it he told me of
a di-ary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a type-writ-ten
copy of it, as also of Mrs. Harker's di-ary at Whitby. "Take these," he
said, "and study them well. When I have re-turned you will be mas-ter of
all the facts, and we can then bet-ter enter on our in-quis-i-tion. Keep
them safe, for there is in them much of treas-ure. You will need all your
faith, even you who have had such an ex-per-i-ence as that of to-day. What
is here told," he laid his hand heav-ily and gravely on the packet of
pa-pers as he spoke, "may be the be-gin-ning of the end to you and me and
many an-other; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead who walk the
earth. Read all, I pray you, with the open mind; and if you can add in
any way to the story here told do so, for it is all-im-port-ant. You have
kept di-ary of all these so strange things; is it not so? Yes! Then we
shall go through all these to-gether when we meet." He then made ready
for his de-par-ture, and shortly after drove off to Liver-pool Street. I
took my way to Pad-ding-ton, where I ar-rived about fif-teen minutes be-fore
the train came in.

The crowd melted away, after the bust-ling fash-ion com-mon to ar-rival
plat-forms; and I was be-gin-ning to feel un-easy, lest I might miss my
guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-look-ing girl stepped up to me, and,
after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Se-ward, is it not?"

"And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out
her hand.

"I knew you from the de-scrip-tion of poor dear Lucy; but----" She stopped
sud-denly, and a quick blush over-spread her face.

The blush that rose to my own cheeks some-how set us both at ease, for it
was a ta-cit an-swer to her own. I got her lug-gage, which in-cluded a
type-writer, and we took the Under-ground to Fen-church Street, after I had
sent a wire to my house-keeper to have a sit-ting-room and bed-room
pre-pared at once for Mrs. Harker.

In due time we ar-rived. She knew, of course, that the place was a
lun-atic asylum, but I could see that she was un-able to repress a shud-der
when we entered.

She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as
she had much to say. So here I am fin-ish-ing my entry in my phono-graph
di-ary whilst I await her. As yet I have not had the chance of look-ing at
the pa-pers which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open be-fore
me. I must get her in-ter-ested in some-thing, so that I may have an
op-por-tun-ity of read-ing them. She does not know how pre-cious time is, or
what a task we have in hand. I must be care-ful not to frighten her. Here
she is!


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_29 Septem-ber._--After I had ti-died my-self, I went down to Dr. Se-ward's
study. At the door I paused a mo-ment, for I thought I heard him talk-ing
with some one. As, how-ever, he had pressed me to be quick, I knocked at
the door, and on his call-ing out, "Come in," I entered.

To my in-tense sur-prise, there was no one with him. He was quite alone,
and on the table op-pos-ite him was what I knew at once from the
de-scrip-tion to be a phono-graph. I had never seen one, and was much
in-ter-ested.

"I hope I did not keep you wait-ing," I said; "but I stayed at the door
as I heard you talk-ing, and thought there was some one with you."

"Oh," he replied with a smile, "I was only en-ter-ing my di-ary."

"Your di-ary?" I asked him in sur-prise.

"Yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke he laid his hand on
the phono-graph. I felt quite ex-cited over it, and blur-ted out:--

"Why, this beats even short-hand! May I hear it say some-thing?"

"Cer-tainly," he replied with alac-rity, and stood up to put it in train
for speak-ing. Then he paused, and a troubled look over-spread his face.

"The fact is," he began awk-wardly, "I only keep my di-ary in it; and as
it is en-tirely--al-most en-tirely--about my cases, it may be awk-ward--that
is, I mean----" He stopped, and I tried to help him out of his
em-bar-rass-ment:--

"You helped to at-tend dear Lucy at the end. Let me hear how she died;
for all that I know of her, I shall be very grate-ful. She was very, very
dear to me."

To my sur-prise, he answered, with a hor-ror-struck look in his face:--

"Tell you of her death? Not for the wide world!"

"Why not?" I asked, for some grave, ter-rible feel-ing was com-ing over me.
Again he paused, and I could see that he was try-ing to in-vent an ex-cuse.
At length he stammered out:--

"You see, I do not know how to pick out any par-tic-u-lar part of the
di-ary." Even while he was speak-ing an idea dawned upon him, and he said
with un-con-scious sim-pli-city, in a dif-fer-ent voice, and with the naïveté
of a child: "That's quite true, upon my hon-our. Hon-est In-dian!" I could
not but smile, at which he grim-aced. "I gave my-self away that time!" he
said. "But do you know that, al-though I have kept the di-ary for months
past, it never once struck me how I was go-ing to find any par-tic-u-lar
part of it in case I wanted to look it up?" By this time my mind was
made up that the di-ary of a doc-tor who at-ten-ded Lucy might have
some-thing to add to the sum of our know-ledge of that ter-rible Be-ing, and
I said boldly:--

"Then, Dr. Se-ward, you had bet-ter let me copy it out for you on my
type-writer." He grew to a pos-it-ively deathly pal-lor as he said:--

"No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know that ter-rible
story!"

Then it was ter-rible; my in-tu-ition was right! For a mo-ment I thought,
and as my eyes ranged the room, un-con-sciously look-ing for some-thing or
some op-por-tun-ity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of type-writ-ing on
the table. His eyes caught the look in mine, and, without his think-ing,
fol-lowed their dir-ec-tion. As they saw the par-cel he real-ised my mean-ing.

"You do not know me," I said. "When you have read those pa-pers--my own
di-ary and my hus-band's also, which I have typed--you will know me
bet-ter. I have not faltered in giv-ing every thought of my own heart in
this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must not
ex-pect you to trust me so far."

He is cer-tainly a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy was right about
him. He stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were ar-ranged in
or-der a num-ber of hol-low cyl-in-ders of metal covered with dark wax, and
said:--

"You are quite right. I did not trust you be-cause I did not know you.
But I know you now; and let me say that I should have known you long
ago. I know that Lucy told you of me; she told me of you too. May I make
the only atone-ment in my power? Take the cyl-in-ders and hear them--the
first half-dozen of them are per-sonal to me, and they will not hor-rify
you; then you will know me bet-ter. Din-ner will by then be ready. In the
mean-time I shall read over some of these doc-u-ments, and shall be bet-ter
able to un-der-stand cer-tain things." He car-ried the phono-graph him-self up
to my sit-ting-room and ad-jus-ted it for me. Now I shall learn some-thing
pleas-ant, I am sure; for it will tell me the other side of a true love
epis-ode of which I know one side already....


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_29 Septem-ber._--I was so ab-sorbed in that won-der-ful di-ary of Jonathan
Harker and that other of his wife that I let the time run on without
think-ing. Mrs. Harker was not down when the maid came to an-nounce
din-ner, so I said: "She is pos-sibly tired; let din-ner wait an hour," and
I went on with my work. I had just fin-ished Mrs. Harker's di-ary, when
she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were
flushed with cry-ing. This some-how moved me much. Of late I have had
cause for tears, God knows! but the re-lief of them was denied me; and
now the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with re-cent tears, went
straight to my heart. So I said as gently as I could:--

"I greatly fear I have dis-tressed you."

"Oh, no, not dis-tressed me," she replied, "but I have been more touched
than I can say by your grief. That is a won-der-ful ma-chine, but it is
cruelly true. It told me, in its very tones, the an-guish of your heart.
It was like a soul cry-ing out to Almighty God. No one must hear them
spoken ever again! See, I have tried to be use-ful. I have copied out the
words on my type-writer, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as
I did."

"No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in a low voice. She
laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:--

"Ah, but they must!"

"Must! But why?" I asked.

"Be-cause it is a part of the ter-rible story, a part of poor dear Lucy's
death and all that led to it; be-cause in the struggle which we have
be-fore us to rid the earth of this ter-rible mon-ster we must have all
the know-ledge and all the help which we can get. I think that the
cyl-in-ders which you gave me con-tained more than you in-ten-ded me to know;
but I can see that there are in your re-cord many lights to this dark
mys-tery. You will let me help, will you not? I know all up to a cer-tain
point; and I see already, though your di-ary only took me to 7 Septem-ber,
how poor Lucy was be-set, and how her ter-rible doom was be-ing wrought
out. Jonathan and I have been work-ing day and night since Pro-fessor Van
Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more in-form-a-tion, and he
will be here to-mor-row to help us. We need have no secrets amongst us;
work-ing to-gether and with ab-so-lute trust, we can surely be stronger than
if some of us were in the dark." She looked at me so ap-peal-ingly, and at
the same time mani-fes-ted such cour-age and res-ol-u-tion in her bear-ing,
that I gave in at once to her wishes. "You shall," I said, "do as you
like in the mat-ter. God for-give me if I do wrong! There are ter-rible
things yet to learn of; but if you have so far trav-elled on the road to
poor Lucy's death, you will not be con-tent, I know, to re-main in the
dark. Nay, the end--the very end--may give you a gleam of peace. Come,
there is din-ner. We must keep one an-other strong for what is be-fore us;
we have a cruel and dread-ful task. When you have eaten you shall learn
the rest, and I shall an-swer any ques-tions you ask--if there be any-thing
which you do not un-der-stand, though it was ap-par-ent to us who were
present."


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_29 Septem-ber._--After din-ner I came with Dr. Se-ward to his study. He
brought back the phono-graph from my room, and I took my type-writer. He
placed me in a com-fort-able chair, and ar-ranged the phono-graph so that I
could touch it without get-ting up, and showed me how to stop it in case
I should want to pause. Then he very thought-fully took a chair, with his
back to me, so that I might be as free as pos-sible, and began to read. I
put the forked metal to my ears and listened.

When the ter-rible story of Lucy's death, and--and all that fol-lowed, was
done, I lay back in my chair power-less. For-tunately I am not of a
faint-ing dis-pos-i-tion. When Dr. Se-ward saw me he jumped up with a
hor-ri-fied ex-clam-a-tion, and hur-riedly tak-ing a case-bottle from a
cup-board, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes some-what re-stored
me. My brain was all in a whirl, and only that there came through all
the mul-ti-tude of hor-rors, the holy ray of light that my dear, dear Lucy
was at last at peace, I do not think I could have borne it without
mak-ing a scene. It is all so wild, and mys-ter-i-ous, and strange that if I
had not known Jonathan's ex-per-i-ence in Transylvania I could not have
be-lieved. As it was, I didn't know what to be-lieve, and so got out of my
dif-fi-culty by at-tend-ing to some-thing else. I took the cover off my
type-writer, and said to Dr. Se-ward:--

"Let me write this all out now. We must be ready for Dr. Van Helsing
when he comes. I have sent a tele-gram to Jonathan to come on here when
he ar-rives in Lon-don from Whitby. In this mat-ter dates are everything,
and I think that if we get all our ma-ter-ial ready, and have every item
put in chro-no-lo-gical or-der, we shall have done much. You tell me that
Lord Godalm-ing and Mr. Mor-ris are com-ing too. Let us be able to tell him
when they come." He ac-cord-ingly set the phono-graph at a slow pace, and I
began to type-write from the be-gin-ning of the sev-enth cyl-in-der. I used
man-i-fold, and so took three cop-ies of the di-ary, just as I had done with
all the rest. It was late when I got through, but Dr. Se-ward went about
his work of go-ing his round of the pa-tients; when he had fin-ished he
came back and sat near me, read-ing, so that I did not feel too lonely
whilst I worked. How good and thought-ful he is; the world seems full of
good men--even if there _are_ mon-sters in it. Be-fore I left him I
re-membered what Jonathan put in his di-ary of the Pro-fessor's
per-turb-a-tion at read-ing some-thing in an even-ing pa-per at the sta-tion at
Exeter; so, see-ing that Dr. Se-ward keeps his news-pa-pers, I bor-rowed the
files of "The West-min-ster Gaz-ette" and "The Pall Mall Gaz-ette," and took
them to my room. I re-mem-ber how much "The Daily-graph" and "The Whitby
Gaz-ette," of which I had made cut-tings, helped us to un-der-stand the
ter-rible events at Whitby when Count Drac-ula landed, so I shall look
through the even-ing pa-pers since then, and per-haps I shall get some new
light. I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_30 Septem-ber._--Mr. Harker ar-rived at nine o'clock. He had got his
wife's wire just be-fore start-ing. He is un-com-monly clever, if one can
judge from his face, and full of en-ergy. If this journal be true--and
judging by one's own won-der-ful ex-per-i-ences, it must be--he is also a man
of great nerve. That go-ing down to the vault a second time was a
re-mark-able piece of dar-ing. After read-ing his ac-count of it I was
pre-pared to meet a good spe-ci-men of man-hood, but hardly the quiet,
busi-ness-like gen-tle-man who came here to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to their own room,
and as I passed a while ago I heard the click of the type-writer. They
are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that they are knit-ting to-gether in
chro-no-lo-gical or-der every scrap of evid-ence they have. Harker has got
the let-ters between the con-signee of the boxes at Whitby and the
car-ri-ers in Lon-don who took charge of them. He is now read-ing his wife's
typescript of my di-ary. I won-der what they make out of it. Here it
is....

     Strange that it never struck me that the very next house might be
     the Count's hid-ing-place! Good-ness knows that we had enough clues
     from the con-duct of the pa-tient Ren-field! The bundle of let-ters
     re-lat-ing to the pur-chase of the house were with the typescript. Oh,
     if we had only had them earlier we might have saved poor Lucy!
     Stop; that way mad-ness lies! Harker has gone back, and is again
     col-lat-ing his ma-ter-ial. He says that by din-ner-time they will be
     able to show a whole con-nec-ted nar-rat-ive. He thinks that in the
     mean-time I should see Ren-field, as hitherto he has been a sort of
     in-dex to the com-ing and go-ing of the Count. I hardly see this yet,
     but when I get at the dates I sup-pose I shall. What a good thing
     that Mrs. Harker put my cyl-in-ders into type! We never could have
     found the dates oth-er-wise....

     I found Ren-field sit-ting pla-cidly in his room with his hands
     fol-ded, smil-ing be-nignly. At the mo-ment he seemed as sane as any
     one I ever saw. I sat down and talked with him on a lot of
     sub-jects, all of which he treated nat-ur-ally. He then, of his own
     ac-cord, spoke of go-ing home, a sub-ject he has never men-tioned to my
     know-ledge dur-ing his so-journ here. In fact, he spoke quite
     con-fid-ently of get-ting his dis-charge at once. I be-lieve that, had I
     not had the chat with Harker and read the let-ters and the dates of
     his out-bursts, I should have been pre-pared to sign for him after a
     brief time of ob-ser-va-tion. As it is, I am darkly sus-pi-cious. All
     those out-breaks were in some way linked with the prox-im-ity of the
     Count. What then does this ab-so-lute con-tent mean? Can it be that
     his in-stinct is sat-is-fied as to the vam-pire's ul-ti-mate tri-umph?
     Stay; he is him-self zoöphag-ous, and in his wild rav-ings out-side the
     chapel door of the deser-ted house he al-ways spoke of "mas-ter." This
     all seems con-firm-a-tion of our idea. However, after a while I came
     away; my friend is just a little too sane at present to make it
     safe to probe him too deep with ques-tions. He might be-gin to think,
     and then--! So I came away. I mis-trust these quiet moods of his; so
     I have given the at-tend-ant a hint to look closely after him, and to
     have a strait-waist-coat ready in case of need.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_29 Septem-ber, in train to Lon-don._--When I re-ceived Mr. Bil-ling-ton's
cour-teous mes-sage that he would give me any in-form-a-tion in his power I
thought it best to go down to Whitby and make, on the spot, such
in-quir-ies as I wanted. It was now my ob-ject to trace that hor-rid cargo
of the Count's to its place in Lon-don. Later, we may be able to deal
with it. Bil-ling-ton ju-nior, a nice lad, met me at the sta-tion, and
brought me to his father's house, where they had de-cided that I must
stay the night. They are hos-pit-able, with true York-shire hos-pit-al-ity:
give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as he likes. They all
knew that I was busy, and that my stay was short, and Mr. Bil-ling-ton had
ready in his of-fice all the pa-pers con-cern-ing the con-sign-ment of boxes.
It gave me al-most a turn to see again one of the let-ters which I had
seen on the Count's table be-fore I knew of his diabol-ical plans.
Everything had been care-fully thought out, and done sys-tem-at-ic-ally and
with pre-ci-sion. He seemed to have been pre-pared for every obstacle which
might be placed by ac-ci-dent in the way of his in-ten-tions be-ing car-ried
out. To use an Amer-ic-an-ism, he had "taken no chances," and the ab-so-lute
ac-cur-acy with which his in-struc-tions were ful-filled, was simply the
lo-gical res-ult of his care. I saw the in-voice, and took note of it:
"Fifty cases of com-mon earth, to be used for ex-per-i-mental pur-poses."
Also the copy of let-ter to Carter Pater-son, and their reply; of both of
these I got cop-ies. This was all the in-form-a-tion Mr. Bil-ling-ton could
give me, so I went down to the port and saw the coast-guards, the Cus-toms
of-ficers and the har-bour-mas-ter. They had all some-thing to say of the
strange entry of the ship, which is already tak-ing its place in local
tra-di-tion; but no one could add to the simple de-scrip-tion "Fifty cases
of com-mon earth." I then saw the sta-tion-mas-ter, who kindly put me in
com-mu-nic-a-tion with the men who had ac-tu-ally re-ceived the boxes. Their
tally was ex-act with the list, and they had noth-ing to add ex-cept that
the boxes were "main and mor-tal heavy," and that shift-ing them was dry
work. One of them ad-ded that it was hard lines that there wasn't any
gen-tle-man "such-like as your-self, squire," to show some sort of
ap-pre-ci-ation of their ef-forts in a li-quid form; an-other put in a rider
that the thirst then gen-er-ated was such that even the time which had
elapsed had not com-pletely al-layed it. Need-less to add, I took care
be-fore leav-ing to lift, for ever and ad-equately, this source of
re-proach.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 Septem-ber._--The sta-tion-mas-ter was good enough to give me a line to
his old com-pan-ion the sta-tion-mas-ter at King's Cross, so that when I
ar-rived there in the morn-ing I was able to ask him about the ar-rival of
the boxes. He, too, put me at once in com-mu-nic-a-tion with the proper
of-fi-cials, and I saw that their tally was cor-rect with the ori-ginal
in-voice. The op-por-tun-it-ies of ac-quir-ing an ab-nor-mal thirst had been here
lim-ited; a noble use of them had, how-ever, been made, and again I was
com-pelled to deal with the res-ult in an _ex post facto_ man-ner.

From thence I went on to Carter Pater-son's cent-ral of-fice, where I met
with the ut-most cour-tesy. They looked up the trans-ac-tion in their
day-book and let-ter-book, and at once tele-phoned to their King's Cross
of-fice for more de-tails. By good for-tune, the men who did the team-ing
were wait-ing for work, and the of-fi-cial at once sent them over, send-ing
also by one of them the way-bill and all the pa-pers con-nec-ted with the
de-liv-ery of the boxes at Car-fax. Here again I found the tally agree-ing
ex-actly; the car-ri-ers' men were able to sup-ple-ment the paucity of the
writ-ten words with a few de-tails. These were, I shortly found, con-nec-ted
al-most solely with the dusty nature of the job, and of the con-sequent
thirst en-gendered in the op-er-at-ors. On my af-ford-ing an op-por-tun-ity,
through the me-dium of the cur-rency of the realm, of the al-lay-ing, at a
later period, this be-ne-fi-cial evil, one of the men re-marked:--

"That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rum-mi-est I ever was in. Blyme! but it
ain't been touched sence a hun-dred years. There was dust that thick in
the place that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones;
an' the place was that neg-lected that yer might 'ave smelled ole
Jer-u-s-alem in it. But the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me
and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough. Lor', I
wouldn't take less nor a quid a mo-ment to stay there arter dark."

Hav-ing been in the house, I could well be-lieve him; but if he knew what
I know, he would, I think, have raised his terms.

Of one thing I am now sat-is-fied: that _all_ the boxes which ar-rived at
Whitby from Varna in the _De-meter_ were safely de-pos-ited in the old
chapel at Car-fax. There should be fifty of them there, un-less any have
since been re-moved--as from Dr. Se-ward's di-ary I fear.

I shall try to see the carter who took away the boxes from Car-fax when
Ren-field at-tacked them. By fol-low-ing up this clue we may learn a good
deal.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Mina and I have worked all day, and we have put all the pa-pers
into or-der.


_Mina Harker's Journ-al_

_30 Septem-ber._--I am so glad that I hardly know how to con-tain my-self.
It is, I sup-pose, the re-ac-tion from the haunt-ing fear which I have had:
that this ter-rible af-fair and the re-open-ing of his old wound might act
det-ri-ment-ally on Jonathan. I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a
face as I could, but I was sick with ap-pre-hen-sion. The ef-fort has,
how-ever, done him good. He was never so res-ol-ute, never so strong, never
so full of vol-canic en-ergy, as at present. It is just as that dear, good
Pro-fessor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he im-proves un-der
strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and
hope and de-term-in-a-tion; we have got everything in or-der for to-night. I
feel my-self quite wild with ex-cite-ment. I sup-pose one ought to pity any
thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Th-ing is not
hu-man--not even beast. To read Dr. Se-ward's ac-count of poor Lucy's
death, and what fol-lowed, is enough to dry up the springs of pity in
one's heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Lord Godalm-ing and Mr. Mor-ris ar-rived earlier than we
ex-pec-ted. Dr. Se-ward was out on busi-ness, and had taken Jonathan with
him, so I had to see them. It was to me a pain-ful meet-ing, for it
brought back all poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few months ago. Of
course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed that Dr. Van
Helsing, too, has been quite "blow-ing my trum-pet," as Mr. Mor-ris
ex-pressed it. Poor fel-lows, neither of them is aware that I know all
about the pro-pos-als they made to Lucy. They did not quite know what to
say or do, as they were ig-nor-ant of the amount of my know-ledge; so they
had to keep on neut-ral sub-jects. However, I thought the mat-ter over, and
came to the con-clu-sion that the best thing I could do would be to post
them in af-fairs right up to date. I knew from Dr. Se-ward's di-ary that
they had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not fear
to be-tray any secret be-fore the time. So I told them, as well as I
could, that I had read all the pa-pers and di-ar-ies, and that my hus-band
and I, hav-ing type-writ-ten them, had just fin-ished put-ting them in or-der.
I gave them each a copy to read in the lib-rary. When Lord Godalm-ing got
his and turned it over--it does make a pretty good pile--he said:--

"Did you write all this, Mrs. Harker?"

I nod-ded, and he went on:--

"I don't quite see the drift of it; but you people are all so good and
kind, and have been work-ing so earn-estly and so en-er-get-ic-ally, that all
I can do is to ac-cept your ideas blind-fold and try to help you. I have
had one les-son already in ac-cept-ing facts that should make a man humble
to the last hour of his life. Besides, I know you loved my poor Lucy--"
Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands. I could hear
the tears in his voice. Mr. Mor-ris, with in-stinct-ive del-ic-acy, just laid
a hand for a mo-ment on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the
room. I sup-pose there is some-thing in wo-man's nature that makes a man
free to break down be-fore her and ex-press his feel-ings on the tender or
emo-tional side without feel-ing it derog-at-ory to his man-hood; for when
Lord Godalm-ing found him-self alone with me he sat down on the sofa and
gave way ut-terly and openly. I sat down be-side him and took his hand. I
hope he didn't think it for-ward of me, and that if he ever thinks of it
af-ter-wards he never will have such a thought. There I wrong him; I
_know_ he never will--he is too true a gen-tle-man. I said to him, for I
could see that his heart was break-ing:--

"I loved dear Lucy, and I know what she was to you, and what you were to
her. She and I were like sis-ters; and now she is gone, will you not let
me be like a sis-ter to you in your trouble? I know what sor-rows you have
had, though I can-not meas-ure the depth of them. If sym-pathy and pity can
help in your af-flic-tion, won't you let me be of some little ser-vice--for
Lucy's sake?"

In an in-stant the poor dear fel-low was over-whelmed with grief. It seemed
to me that all that he had of late been suf-fer-ing in si-lence found a
vent at once. He grew quite hys-ter-ical, and rais-ing his open hands, beat
his palms to-gether in a per-fect agony of grief. He stood up and then sat
down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an in-fin-ite
pity for him, and opened my arms un-think-ingly. With a sob he laid his
head on my shoulder and cried like a wear-ied child, whilst he shook with
emo-tion.

We wo-men have some-thing of the mother in us that makes us rise above
smal-ler mat-ters when the mother-spirit is in-voked; I felt this big
sor-row-ing man's head rest-ing on me, as though it were that of the baby
that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he
were my own child. I never thought at the time how strange it all was.

After a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised him-self with an
apo-logy, though he made no dis-guise of his emo-tion. He told me that for
days and nights past--weary days and sleep-less nights--he had been
un-able to speak with any one, as a man must speak in his time of
sor-row. There was no wo-man whose sym-pathy could be given to him, or with
whom, ow-ing to the ter-rible cir-cum-stance with which his sor-row was
sur-roun-ded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said,
as he dried his eyes, "but I do not know even yet--and none other can
ever know--how much your sweet sym-pathy has been to me to-day. I shall
know bet-ter in time; and be-lieve me that, though I am not un-grate-ful
now, my grat-it-ude will grow with my un-der-stand-ing. You will let me be
like a brother, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?"

"For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we clasped hands. "Ay, and for your
own sake," he ad-ded, "for if a man's es-teem and grat-it-ude are ever worth
the win-ning, you have won mine to-day. If ever the fu-ture should bring
to you a time when you need a man's help, be-lieve me, you will not call
in vain. God grant that no such time may ever come to you to break the
sun-shine of your life; but if it should ever come, prom-ise me that you
will let me know." He was so earn-est, and his sor-row was so fresh, that
I felt it would com-fort him, so I said:--

"I prom-ise."

As I came along the cor-ridor I saw Mr. Mor-ris look-ing out of a win-dow.
He turned as he heard my foot-steps. "How is Art?" he said. Then no-ti-cing
my red eyes, he went on: "Ah, I see you have been com-fort-ing him. Poor
old fel-low! he needs it. No one but a wo-man can help a man when he is in
trouble of the heart; and he had no one to com-fort him."

He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart bled for him. I saw the
ma-nu-script in his hand, and I knew that when he read it he would real-ise
how much I knew; so I said to him:--

"I wish I could com-fort all who suf-fer from the heart. Will you let me
be your friend, and will you come to me for com-fort if you need it? You
will know, later on, why I speak." He saw that I was in earn-est, and
stoop-ing, took my hand, and rais-ing it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed
but poor com-fort to so brave and un-selfish a soul, and im-puls-ively I
bent over and kissed him. The tears rose in his eyes, and there was a
mo-ment-ary chok-ing in his throat; he said quite calmly:--

"Little girl, you will never re-gret that true-hearted kind-ness, so long
as ever you live!" Then he went into the study to his friend.

"Little girl!"--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he
proved him-self a friend!




CHAPTER XVIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_30 Septem-ber._--I got home at five o'clock, and found that Godalm-ing
and Mor-ris had not only ar-rived, but had already stud-ied the tran-script
of the vari-ous di-ar-ies and let-ters which Harker and his won-der-ful wife
had made and ar-ranged. Harker had not yet re-turned from his visit to the
car-ri-ers' men, of whom Dr. Hen-nes-sey had writ-ten to me. Mrs. Harker gave
us a cup of tea, and I can hon-estly say that, for the first time since I
have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had
fin-ished, Mrs. Harker said:--

"Dr. Se-ward, may I ask a fa-vour? I want to see your pa-tient, Mr.
Ren-field. Do let me see him. What you have said of him in your di-ary
in-terests me so much!" She looked so ap-peal-ing and so pretty that I
could not re-fuse her, and there was no pos-sible reason why I should; so
I took her with me. When I went into the room, I told the man that a
lady would like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?"

"She is go-ing through the house, and wants to see every one in it," I
answered. "Oh, very well," he said; "let her come in, by all means; but
just wait a minute till I tidy up the place." His method of tidy-ing was
pe-cu-liar: he simply swal-lowed all the flies and spiders in the boxes
be-fore I could stop him. It was quite evid-ent that he feared, or was
jeal-ous of, some in-ter-fer-ence. When he had got through his dis-gust-ing
task, he said cheer-fully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down on the
edge of his bed with his head down, but with his eye-lids raised so that
he could see her as she entered. For a mo-ment I thought that he might
have some hom-icidal in-tent; I re-membered how quiet he had been just
be-fore he at-tacked me in my own study, and I took care to stand where I
could seize him at once if he at-temp-ted to make a spring at her. She
came into the room with an easy grace-ful-ness which would at once com-mand
the re-spect of any lun-atic--for eas-i-ness is one of the qual-it-ies mad
people most re-spect. She walked over to him, smil-ing pleas-antly, and
held out her hand.

"Good-even-ing, Mr. Ren-field," said she. "You see, I know you, for Dr.
Se-ward has told me of you." He made no im-me-di-ate reply, but eyed her all
over in-tently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to one
of won-der, which merged in doubt; then, to my in-tense as-ton-ish-ment, he
said:--

"You're not the girl the doc-tor wanted to marry, are you? You can't be,
you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:--

"Oh no! I have a hus-band of my own, to whom I was mar-ried be-fore I ever
saw Dr. Se-ward, or he me. I am Mrs. Harker."

"Then what are you do-ing here?"

"My hus-band and I are stay-ing on a visit with Dr. Se-ward."

"Then don't stay."

"But why not?" I thought that this style of con-ver-sa-tion might not be
pleas-ant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to me, so I joined in:--

"How did you know I wanted to marry any one?" His reply was simply
con-temp-tu-ous, given in a pause in which he turned his eyes from Mrs.
Harker to me, in-stantly turn-ing them back again:--

"What an as-in-ine ques-tion!"

"I don't see that at all, Mr. Ren-field," said Mrs. Harker, at once
cham-pi-on-ing me. He replied to her with as much cour-tesy and re-spect as
he had shown con-tempt to me:--

"You will, of course, un-der-stand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is so
loved and hon-oured as our host is, everything re-gard-ing him is of
in-terest in our little com-munity. Dr. Se-ward is loved not only by his
house-hold and his friends, but even by his pa-tients, who, be-ing some of
them hardly in men-tal equi-lib-rium, are apt to dis-tort causes and
ef-fects. Since I my-self have been an in-mate of a lun-atic asylum, I
can-not but no-tice that the soph-istic tend-en-cies of some of its in-mates
lean to-wards the er-rors of _non causa_ and _ignor-atio elenchi_." I
pos-it-ively opened my eyes at this new de-vel-op-ment. Here was my own pet
lun-atic--the most pro-nounced of his type that I had ever met
with--talk-ing ele-mental philo-sophy, and with the man-ner of a pol-ished
gen-tle-man. I won-der if it was Mrs. Harker's pres-ence which had touched
some chord in his memory. If this new phase was spon-tan-eous, or in any
way due to her un-con-scious in-flu-ence, she must have some rare gift or
power.

We con-tin-ued to talk for some time; and, see-ing that he was seem-ingly
quite reas-on-able, she ven-tured, look-ing at me ques-tion-ingly as she
began, to lead him to his fa-vour-ite topic. I was again as-ton-ished, for
he ad-dressed him-self to the ques-tion with the im-par-ti-al-ity of the
com-pletest san-ity; he even took him-self as an ex-ample when he men-tioned
cer-tain things.

"Why, I my-self am an in-stance of a man who had a strange be-lief. Indeed,
it was no won-der that my friends were alarmed, and in-sisted on my be-ing
put un-der con-trol. I used to fancy that life was a pos-it-ive and
per-petual en-tity, and that by con-sum-ing a mul-ti-tude of live things, no
mat-ter how low in the scale of cre-ation, one might in-def-in-itely pro-long
life. At times I held the be-lief so strongly that I ac-tu-ally tried to
take hu-man life. The doc-tor here will bear me out that on one oc-ca-sion I
tried to kill him for the pur-pose of strength-en-ing my vi-tal powers by
the as-sim-il-a-tion with my own body of his life through the me-dium of his
blood--re-ly-ing, of course, upon the Scrip-tural phrase, 'For the blood is
the life.' Though, in-deed, the vendor of a cer-tain nos-trum has
vul-gar-ised the tru-ism to the very point of con-tempt. Isn't that true,
doc-tor?" I nod-ded as-sent, for I was so amazed that I hardly knew what to
either think or say; it was hard to ima-gine that I had seen him eat up
his spiders and flies not five minutes be-fore. Look-ing at my watch, I
saw that I should go to the sta-tion to meet Van Helsing, so I told Mrs.
Harker that it was time to leave. She came at once, after say-ing
pleas-antly to Mr. Ren-field: "Good-bye, and I hope I may see you of-ten,
un-der aus-pices pleas-anter to your-self," to which, to my as-ton-ish-ment, he
replied:--

"Good-bye, my dear. I pray God I may never see your sweet face again.
May He bless and keep you!"

When I went to the sta-tion to meet Van Helsing I left the boys be-hind
me. Poor Art seemed more cheer-ful than he has been since Lucy first took
ill, and Quin-cey is more like his own bright self than he has been for
many a long day.

Van Helsing stepped from the car-riage with the eager nimble-ness of a
boy. He saw me at once, and rushed up to me, say-ing:--

"Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been busy, for I come
here to stay if need be. All af-fairs are settled with me, and I have
much to tell. Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine hus-band? And
Ar-thur and my friend Quin-cey, they are with you, too? Good!"

As I drove to the house I told him of what had passed, and of how my own
di-ary had come to be of some use through Mrs. Harker's sug-ges-tion; at
which the Pro-fessor in-ter-rup-ted me:--

"Ah, that won-der-ful Madam Mina! She has man's brain--a brain that a man
should have were he much gif-ted--and a wo-man's heart. The good God
fash-ioned her for a pur-pose, be-lieve me, when He made that so good
com-bin-a-tion. Friend John, up to now for-tune has made that wo-man of help
to us; after to-night she must not have to do with this so ter-rible
af-fair. It is not good that she run a risk so great. We men are
de-term-ined--nay, are we not pledged?--to des-troy this mon-ster; but it is
no part for a wo-man. Even if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her
in so much and so many hor-rors; and here-after she may suf-fer--both in
wak-ing, from her nerves, and in sleep, from her dreams. And, be-sides,
she is young wo-man and not so long mar-ried; there may be other things to
think of some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then she
must con-sult with us; but to-mor-row she say good-bye to this work, and
we go alone." I agreed heart-ily with him, and then I told him what we
had found in his ab-sence: that the house which Drac-ula had bought was
the very next one to my own. He was amazed, and a great con-cern seemed
to come on him. "Oh that we had known it be-fore!" he said, "for then we
might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, 'the milk
that is spilt cries not out af-ter-wards,' as you say. We shall not think
of that, but go on our way to the end." Then he fell into a si-lence that
las-ted till we entered my own gate-way. Be-fore we went to pre-pare for
din-ner he said to Mrs. Harker:--

"I am told, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and your hus-band have
put up in ex-act or-der all things that have been, up to this mo-ment."

"Not up to this mo-ment, Pro-fessor," she said im-puls-ively, "but up to
this morn-ing."

"But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the
little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who
has told is the worse for it."

Mrs. Harker began to blush, and tak-ing a pa-per from her pock-ets, she
said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must go in. It
is my re-cord of to-day. I too have seen the need of put-ting down at
present everything, how-ever trivial; but there is little in this ex-cept
what is per-sonal. Must it go in?" The Pro-fessor read it over gravely,
and handed it back, say-ing:--

"It need not go in if you do not wish it; but I pray that it may. It can
but make your hus-band love you the more, and all us, your friends, more
hon-our you--as well as more es-teem and love." She took it back with
an-other blush and a bright smile.

And so now, up to this very hour, all the re-cords we have are com-plete
and in or-der. The Pro-fessor took away one copy to study after din-ner,
and be-fore our meet-ing, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of us
have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all
be in-formed as to facts, and can ar-range our plan of battle with this
ter-rible and mys-ter-i-ous en-emy.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 Septem-ber._--When we met in Dr. Se-ward's study two hours after
din-ner, which had been at six o'clock, we un-con-sciously formed a sort of
board or com-mit-tee. Pro-fessor Van Helsing took the head of the table, to
which Dr. Se-ward mo-tioned him as he came into the room. He made me sit
next to him on his right, and asked me to act as sec-ret-ary; Jonathan sat
next to me. Op-pos-ite us were Lord Godalm-ing, Dr. Se-ward, and Mr.
Mor-ris--Lord Godalm-ing be-ing next the Pro-fessor, and Dr. Se-ward in the
centre. The Pro-fessor said:--

"I may, I sup-pose, take it that we are all ac-quain-ted with the facts
that are in these pa-pers." We all ex-pressed as-sent, and he went on:--

"Then it were, I think good that I tell you some-thing of the kind of
en-emy with which we have to deal. I shall then make known to you
some-thing of the his-tory of this man, which has been as-cer-tained for me.
So we then can dis-cuss how we shall act, and can take our meas-ure
ac-cord-ing.

"There are such be-ings as vam-pires; some of us have evid-ence that they
ex-ist. Even had we not the proof of our own un-happy ex-per-i-ence, the
teach-ings and the re-cords of the past give proof enough for sane
peoples. I ad-mit that at the first I was scep-tic. Were it not that
through long years I have train my-self to keep an open mind, I could not
have be-lieve un-til such time as that fact thun-der on my ear. 'See! see!
I prove; I prove.' Alas! Had I known at the first what now I know--nay,
had I even guess at him--one so pre-cious life had been spared to many of
us who did love her. But that is gone; and we must so work, that other
poor souls per-ish not, whilst we can save. The _nos-fer-atu_ do not die
like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger; and be-ing
stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vam-pire which is
amongst us is of him-self so strong in per-son as twenty men; he is of
cun-ning more than mor-tal, for his cun-ning be the growth of ages; he have
still the aids of nec-ro-mancy, which is, as his ety-mo-logy im-ply, the
divin-a-tion by the dead, and all the dead that he can come nigh to are
for him at com-mand; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil in
cal-lous, and the heart of him is not; he can, within lim-it-a-tions, ap-pear
at will when, and where, and in any of the forms that are to him; he
can, within his range, dir-ect the ele-ments; the storm, the fog, the
thun-der; he can com-mand all the meaner things: the rat, and the owl, and
the bat--the moth, and the fox, and the wolf; he can grow and be-come
small; and he can at times van-ish and come un-known. How then are we to
be-gin our strike to des-troy him? How shall we find his where; and hav-ing
found it, how can we des-troy? My friends, this is much; it is a ter-rible
task that we un-der-take, and there may be con-sequence to make the brave
shud-der. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then
where end we? Life is noth-ings; I heed him not. But to fail here, is not
mere life or death. It is that we be-come as him; that we hence-for-ward
be-come foul things of the night like him--without heart or con-science,
prey-ing on the bod-ies and the souls of those we love best. To us for
ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again?
We go on for all time ab-horred by all; a blot on the face of God's
sun-shine; an ar-row in the side of Him who died for man. But we are face
to face with duty; and in such case must we shrink? For me, I say, no;
but then I am old, and life, with his sun-shine, his fair places, his
song of birds, his mu-sic and his love, lie far be-hind. You oth-ers are
young. Some have seen sor-row; but there are fair days yet in store. What
say you?"

Whilst he was speak-ing, Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so
much, that the ap-palling nature of our danger was over-com-ing him when I
saw his hand stretch out; but it was life to me to feel its touch--so
strong, so self-re-li-ant, so res-ol-ute. A brave man's hand can speak for
it-self; it does not even need a wo-man's love to hear its mu-sic.

When the Pro-fessor had done speak-ing my hus-band looked in my eyes, and I
in his; there was no need for speak-ing between us.

"I an-swer for Mina and my-self," he said.

"Count me in, Pro-fessor," said Mr. Quin-cey Mor-ris, lac-on-ic-ally as usual.

"I am with you," said Lord Godalm-ing, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other
reason."

Dr. Se-ward simply nod-ded. The Pro-fessor stood up and, after lay-ing his
golden cru-ci-fix on the table, held out his hand on either side. I took
his right hand, and Lord Godalm-ing his left; Jonathan held my right with
his left and stretched across to Mr. Mor-ris. So as we all took hands our
sol-emn com-pact was made. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not even
oc-cur to me to draw back. We re-sumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing
went on with a sort of cheer-ful-ness which showed that the ser-i-ous work
had be-gun. It was to be taken as gravely, and in as busi-ness-like a way,
as any other trans-ac-tion of life:--

"Well, you know what we have to con-tend against; but we, too, are not
without strength. We have on our side power of com-bin-a-tion--a power
denied to the vam-pire kind; we have sources of sci-ence; we are free to
act and think; and the hours of the day and the night are ours equally.
In fact, so far as our powers ex-tend, they are un-fettered, and we are
free to use them. We have self-de-vo-tion in a cause, and an end to
achieve which is not a selfish one. These things are much.

"Now let us see how far the gen-eral powers ar-rayed against us are
re-strict, and how the in-di-vidual can-not. In fine, let us con-sider the
lim-it-a-tions of the vam-pire in gen-eral, and of this one in par-tic-u-lar.

"All we have to go upon are tra-di-tions and su-per-sti-tions. These do not
at the first ap-pear much, when the mat-ter is one of life and death--nay
of more than either life or death. Yet must we be sat-is-fied; in the
first place be-cause we have to be--no other means is at our con-trol--and
secondly, be-cause, after all, these things--tra-di-tion and
su-per-sti-tion--are everything. Does not the be-lief in vam-pires rest for
oth-ers--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would
have re-ceived such a pos-sib-il-ity, in the midst of our sci-entific,
scep-tical, mat-ter-of-fact nine-teenth cen-tury? We even scouted a be-lief
that we saw jus-ti-fied un-der our very eyes. Take it, then, that the
vam-pire, and the be-lief in his lim-it-a-tions and his cure, rest for the
mo-ment on the same base. For, let me tell you, he is known every-where
that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flour-ish in Ger-many
all over, in France, in In-dia, even in the Chernosese; and in Ch-ina, so
far from us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at
this day. He have fol-low the wake of the ber-serker Icelander, the
devil-be-got-ten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Mag-yar. So far, then, we
have all we may act upon; and let me tell you that very much of the
be-liefs are jus-ti-fied by what we have seen in our own so un-happy
ex-per-i-ence. The vam-pire live on, and can-not die by mere passing of the
time; he can flour-ish when that he can fat-ten on the blood of the
liv-ing. Even more, we have seen amongst us that he can even grow
younger; that his vi-tal fac-ulties grow strenu-ous, and seem as though
they re-fresh them-selves when his spe-cial pab-u-lum is plenty. But he
can-not flour-ish without this diet; he eat not as oth-ers. Even friend
Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never!
He throws no shadow; he make in the mir-ror no re-flect, as again
Jonathan ob-serve. He has the strength of many of his hand--wit-ness again
Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he help him
from the di-li-gence too. He can trans-form him-self to wolf, as we gather
from the ship ar-rival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as
bat, as Madam Mina saw him on the win-dow at Whitby, and as friend John
saw him fly from this so near house, and as my friend Quin-cey saw him at
the win-dow of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he cre-ate--that noble
ship's cap-tain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the dis-tance
he can make this mist is lim-ited, and it can only be round him-self. He
come on moon-light rays as ele-mental dust--as again Jonathan saw those
sis-ters in the castle of Drac-ula. He be-come so small--we ourselves saw
Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hair-breadth space at the
tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from any-thing or
into any-thing, no mat-ter how close it be bound or even fused up with
fire--solder you call it. He can see in the dark--no small power this,
in a world which is one half shut from the light. Ah, but hear me
through. He can do all these things, yet he is not free. Nay; he is even
more pris-oner than the slave of the gal-ley, than the mad-man in his cell.
He can-not go where he lists; he who is not of nature has yet to obey
some of nature's laws--why we know not. He may not enter any-where at the
first, un-less there be some one of the house-hold who bid him to come;
though af-ter-wards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does
that of all evil things, at the com-ing of the day. Only at cer-tain times
can he have lim-ited free-dom. If he be not at the place whither he is
bound, he can only change him-self at noon or at ex-act sun-rise or sun-set.
These things are we told, and in this re-cord of ours we have proof by
in-fer-ence. Thus, whereas he can do as he will within his limit, when he
have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place
un-hal-lowed, as we saw when he went to the grave of the sui-cide at
Whitby; still at other time he can only change when the time come. It is
said, too, that he can only pass run-ning wa-ter at the slack or the flood
of the tide. Then there are things which so af-flict him that he has no
power, as the gar-lic that we know of; and as for things sac-red, as this
sym-bol, my cru-ci-fix, that was amongst us even now when we re-solve, to
them he is noth-ing, but in their pres-ence he take his place far off and
si-lent with re-spect. There are oth-ers, too, which I shall tell you of,
lest in our seek-ing we may need them. The branch of wild rose on his
coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sac-red bul-let fired into the
coffin kill him so that he be true dead; and as for the stake through
him, we know already of its peace; or the cut-off head that giv-eth rest.
We have seen it with our eyes.

"Thus when we find the hab-it-a-tion of this man-that-was, we can con-fine
him to his coffin and des-troy him, if we obey what we know. But he is
clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to
make his re-cord; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of what he
has been. He must, in-deed, have been that Voivode Drac-ula who won his
name against the Turk, over the great river on the very fron-tier of
Tur-key-land. If it be so, then was he no com-mon man; for in that time,
and for cen-tur-ies after, he was spoken of as the cleverest and the most
cun-ning, as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land bey-ond the
forest.' That mighty brain and that iron res-ol-u-tion went with him to his
grave, and are even now ar-rayed against us. The Drac-u-las were, says
Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who
were held by their co-evals to have had deal-ings with the Evil One. They
learned his secrets in the Scho-lo-mance, amongst the moun-tains over Lake
Her-man-stadt, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. In the
re-cords are such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'or-dog,' and
'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one ma-nu-script this very Drac-ula is
spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all un-der-stand too well. There have been
from the loins of this very one great men and good wo-men, and their
graves make sac-red the earth where alone this foul-ness can dwell. For it
is not the least of its ter-rors that this evil thing is rooted deep in
all good; in soil bar-ren of holy memor-ies it can-not rest."

Whilst they were talk-ing Mr. Mor-ris was look-ing stead-ily at the win-dow,
and he now got up quietly, and went out of the room. There was a little
pause, and then the Pro-fessor went on:--

"And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must
pro-ceed to lay out our cam-paign. We know from the in-quiry of Jonathan
that from the castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which
were de-livered at Car-fax; we also know that at least some of these boxes
have been re-moved. It seems to me, that our first step should be to
as-cer-tain whether all the rest re-main in the house bey-ond that wall
where we look to-day; or whether any more have been re-moved. If the
lat-ter, we must trace----"

Here we were in-ter-rup-ted in a very start-ling way. Out-side the house came
the sound of a pis-tol-shot; the glass of the win-dow was shattered with a
bul-let, which, ri-co-chet-ting from the top of the em-bras-ure, struck the
far wall of the room. I am afraid I am at heart a cow-ard, for I shrieked
out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalm-ing flew over to the
win-dow and threw up the sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Mor-ris's voice
without:--

"Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about
it." A minute later he came in and said:--

"It was an idi-otic thing of me to do, and I ask your par-don, Mrs.
Harker, most sin-cerely; I fear I must have frightened you ter-ribly. But
the fact is that whilst the Pro-fessor was talk-ing there came a big bat
and sat on the win-dow-sill. I have got such a hor-ror of the damned
brutes from re-cent events that I can-not stand them, and I went out to
have a shot, as I have been do-ing of late of even-ings, whenever I have
seen one. You used to laugh at me for it then, Art."

"Did you hit it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing.

"I don't know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood." Without
say-ing any more he took his seat, and the Pro-fessor began to re-sume his
state-ment:--

"We must trace each of these boxes; and when we are ready, we must
either cap-ture or kill this mon-ster in his lair; or we must, so to
speak, ster-il-ise the earth, so that no more he can seek safety in it.
Thus in the end we may find him in his form of man between the hours of
noon and sun-set, and so en-gage with him when he is at his most weak.

"And now for you, Madam Mina, this night is the end un-til all be well.
You are too pre-cious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you
no more must ques-tion. We shall tell you all in good time. We are men
and are able to bear; but you must be our star and our hope, and we
shall act all the more free that you are not in the danger, such as we
are."

All the men, even Jonathan, seemed re-lieved; but it did not seem to me
good that they should brave danger and, per-haps, lessen their
safety--strength be-ing the best safety--through care of me; but their
minds were made up, and, though it was a bit-ter pill for me to swal-low,
I could say noth-ing, save to ac-cept their chiv-al-rous care of me.

Mr. Mor-ris re-sumed the dis-cus-sion:--

"As there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his house right
now. Time is everything with him; and swift ac-tion on our part may save
an-other vic-tim."

I own that my heart began to fail me when the time for ac-tion came so
close, but I did not say any-thing, for I had a greater fear that if I
ap-peared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave
me out of their coun-sels al-to-gether. They have now gone off to Car-fax,
with means to get into the house.

Man-like, they had told me to go to bed and sleep; as if a wo-man can
sleep when those she loves are in danger! I shall lie down and pre-tend
to sleep, lest Jonathan have ad-ded anxi-ety about me when he re-turns.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_1 Octo-ber, 4 a. m._--Just as we were about to leave the house, an
ur-gent mes-sage was brought to me from Ren-field to know if I would see
him at once, as he had some-thing of the ut-most im-port-ance to say to me.
I told the mes-sen-ger to say that I would at-tend to his wishes in the
morn-ing; I was busy just at the mo-ment. The at-tend-ant ad-ded:--

"He seems very im-por-tunate, sir. I have never seen him so eager. I don't
know but what, if you don't see him soon, he will have one of his
vi-ol-ent fits." I knew the man would not have said this without some
cause, so I said: "All right; I'll go now"; and I asked the oth-ers to
wait a few minutes for me, as I had to go and see my "pa-tient."

"Take me with you, friend John," said the Pro-fessor. "His case in your
di-ary in-terest me much, and it had bear-ing, too, now and again on _our_
case. I should much like to see him, and es-pe-cial when his mind is
dis-turbed."

"May I come also?" asked Lord Godalm-ing.

"Me too?" said Quin-cey Mor-ris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nod-ded, and
we all went down the pas-sage to-gether.

We found him in a state of con-sid-er-able ex-cite-ment, but far more
ra-tional in his speech and man-ner than I had ever seen him. There was an
un-usual un-der-stand-ing of him-self, which was un-like any-thing I had ever
met with in a lun-atic; and he took it for gran-ted that his reas-ons would
pre-vail with oth-ers en-tirely sane. We all four went into the room, but
none of the oth-ers at first said any-thing. His re-quest was that I would
at once re-lease him from the asylum and send him home. This he backed up
with ar-gu-ments re-gard-ing his com-plete re-cov-ery, and ad-duced his own
ex-ist-ing san-ity. "I ap-peal to your friends," he said, "they will,
per-haps, not mind sit-ting in judg-ment on my case. By the way, you have
not in-tro-duced me." I was so much as-ton-ished, that the oddness of
in-tro-du-cing a mad-man in an asylum did not strike me at the mo-ment; and,
be-sides, there was a cer-tain dig-nity in the man's man-ner, so much of
the habit of equal-ity, that I at once made the in-tro-duc-tion: "Lord
Godalm-ing; Pro-fessor Van Helsing; Mr. Quin-cey Mor-ris, of Texas; Mr.
Ren-field." He shook hands with each of them, say-ing in turn:--

"Lord Godalm-ing, I had the hon-our of second-ing your father at the
Wind-ham; I grieve to know, by your hold-ing the title, that he is no
more. He was a man loved and hon-oured by all who knew him; and in his
youth was, I have heard, the in-ventor of a burnt rum punch, much
pat-ron-ised on Derby night. Mr. Mor-ris, you should be proud of your great
state. Its re-cep-tion into the Union was a pre-ced-ent which may have
far-reach-ing ef-fects here-after, when the Pole and the Trop-ics may hold
al-li-ance to the Stars and Stripes. The power of Treaty may yet prove a
vast en-gine of en-large-ment, when the Mon-roe doc-trine takes its true
place as a polit-ical fable. What shall any man say of his pleas-ure at
meet-ing Van Helsing? Sir, I make no apo-logy for drop-ping all forms of
con-ven-tional pre-fix. When an in-di-vidual has re-volu-tion-ised thera-peut-ics
by his dis-cov-ery of the con-tinu-ous evol-u-tion of brain-mat-ter,
con-ven-tional forms are un-fit-ting, since they would seem to limit him to
one of a class. You, gen-tle-men, who by na-tion-al-ity, by hered-ity, or by
the pos-ses-sion of nat-ural gifts, are fit-ted to hold your re-spect-ive
places in the mov-ing world, I take to wit-ness that I am as sane as at
least the ma-jor-ity of men who are in full pos-ses-sion of their liber-ties.
And I am sure that you, Dr. Se-ward, hu-man-it-arian and medico-jur-ist as
well as sci-ent-ist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one to
be con-sidered as un-der ex-cep-tional cir-cum-stances." He made this last
ap-peal with a courtly air of con-vic-tion which was not without its own
charm.

I think we were all staggered. For my own part, I was un-der the
con-vic-tion, des-pite my know-ledge of the man's char-ac-ter and his-tory,
that his reason had been re-stored; and I felt un-der a strong im-pulse to
tell him that I was sat-is-fied as to his san-ity, and would see about the
ne-ces-sary form-al-it-ies for his re-lease in the morn-ing. I thought it
bet-ter to wait, how-ever, be-fore mak-ing so grave a state-ment, for of old
I knew the sud-den changes to which this par-tic-u-lar pa-tient was li-able.
So I con-ten-ted my-self with mak-ing a gen-eral state-ment that he ap-peared
to be im-prov-ing very rap-idly; that I would have a longer chat with him
in the morn-ing, and would then see what I could do in the dir-ec-tion of
meet-ing his wishes. This did not at all sat-isfy him, for he said
quickly:--

"But I fear, Dr. Se-ward, that you hardly ap-pre-hend my wish. I de-sire to
go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very mo-ment, if I may. Time
presses, and in our im-plied agree-ment with the old scythe-man it is of
the es-sence of the con-tract. I am sure it is only ne-ces-sary to put
be-fore so ad-mir-able a prac-ti-tioner as Dr. Se-ward so simple, yet so
mo-ment-ous a wish, to en-sure its ful-fil-ment." He looked at me keenly, and
see-ing the neg-at-ive in my face, turned to the oth-ers, and scru-tin-ised
them closely. Not meet-ing any suf-fi-cient re-sponse, he went on:--

"Is it pos-sible that I have erred in my sup-pos-i-tion?"

"You have," I said frankly, but at the same time, as I felt, bru-tally.
There was a con-sid-er-able pause, and then he said slowly:--

"Then I sup-pose I must only shift my ground of re-quest. Let me ask for
this con-ces-sion--boon, priv-ilege, what you will. I am con-tent to im-plore
in such a case, not on per-sonal grounds, but for the sake of oth-ers. I
am not at liberty to give you the whole of my reas-ons; but you may, I
as-sure you, take it from me that they are good ones, sound and
un-selfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look,
sir, into my heart, you would ap-prove to the full the sen-ti-ments which
an-im-ate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of
your friends." Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a grow-ing
con-vic-tion that this sud-den change of his en-tire in-tel-lec-tual method was
but yet an-other form or phase of his mad-ness, and so de-term-ined to let
him go on a little longer, know-ing from ex-per-i-ence that he would, like
all lun-at-ics, give him-self away in the end. Van Helsing was gaz-ing at
him with a look of ut-most in-tens-ity, his bushy eye-brows al-most meet-ing
with the fixed con-cen-tra-tion of his look. He said to Ren-field in a tone
which did not sur-prise me at the time, but only when I thought of it
af-ter-wards--for it was as of one ad-dress-ing an equal:--

"Can you not tell frankly your real reason for wish-ing to be free
to-night? I will un-der-take that if you will sat-isfy even me--a stranger,
without pre-ju-dice, and with the habit of keep-ing an open mind--Dr.
Se-ward will give you, at his own risk and on his own re-spons-ib-il-ity, the
priv-ilege you seek." He shook his head sadly, and with a look of
poignant re-gret on his face. The Pro-fessor went on:--

"Come, sir, be-think your-self. You claim the priv-ilege of reason in the
highest de-gree, since you seek to im-press us with your com-plete
reas-on-able-ness. You do this, whose san-ity we have reason to doubt, since
you are not yet re-leased from med-ical treat-ment for this very de-fect. If
you will not help us in our ef-fort to choose the wisest course, how can
we per-form the duty which you your-self put upon us? Be wise, and help
us; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish." He still shook
his head as he said:--

"Dr. Van Helsing, I have noth-ing to say. Your ar-gu-ment is com-plete, and
if I were free to speak I should not hes-it-ate a mo-ment; but I am not my
own mas-ter in the mat-ter. I can only ask you to trust me. If I am
re-fused, the re-spons-ib-il-ity does not rest with me." I thought it was now
time to end the scene, which was be-com-ing too com-ic-ally grave, so I went
to-wards the door, simply say-ing:--

"Come, my friends, we have work to do. Good-night."

As, how-ever, I got near the door, a new change came over the pa-tient. He
moved to-wards me so quickly that for the mo-ment I feared that he was
about to make an-other hom-icidal at-tack. My fears, how-ever, were
ground-less, for he held up his two hands im-plor-ingly, and made his
pe-ti-tion in a mov-ing man-ner. As he saw that the very ex-cess of his
emo-tion was mil-it-at-ing against him, by restor-ing us more to our old
re-la-tions, he be-came still more demon-strat-ive. I glanced at Van Helsing,
and saw my con-vic-tion re-flec-ted in his eyes; so I be-came a little more
fixed in my man-ner, if not more stern, and mo-tioned to him that his
ef-forts were un-avail-ing. I had pre-vi-ously seen some-thing of the same
con-stantly grow-ing ex-cite-ment in him when he had to make some re-quest of
which at the time he had thought much, such, for in-stance, as when he
wanted a cat; and I was pre-pared to see the col-lapse into the same
sul-len ac-qui-es-cence on this oc-ca-sion. My ex-pect-a-tion was not real-ised,
for, when he found that his ap-peal would not be suc-cess-ful, he got into
quite a frantic con-di-tion. He threw him-self on his knees, and held up
his hands, wringing them in plaint-ive sup-plic-a-tion, and poured forth a
tor-rent of en-treaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his
whole face and form ex-press-ive of the deep-est emo-tion:--

"Let me en-treat you, Dr. Se-ward, oh, let me im-plore you, to let me out
of this house at once. Send me away how you will and where you will;
send keep-ers with me with whips and chains; let them take me in a
strait-waist-coat, man-acled and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let me go
out of this. You don't know what you do by keep-ing me here. I am
speak-ing from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. You don't know
whom you wrong, or how; and I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell.
By all you hold sac-red--by all you hold dear--by your love that is
lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of the Almighty, take me out
of this and save my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you
un-der-stand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that I am sane and
earn-est now; that I am no lun-atic in a mad fit, but a sane man fight-ing
for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go! let me go!"

I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so
would bring on a fit; so I took him by the hand and raised him up.

"Come," I said sternly, "no more of this; we have had quite enough
already. Get to your bed and try to be-have more dis-creetly."

He sud-denly stopped and looked at me in-tently for sev-eral mo-ments. Then,
without a word, he rose and mov-ing over, sat down on the side of the
bed. The col-lapse had come, as on former oc-ca-sion, just as I had
ex-pec-ted.

When I was leav-ing the room, last of our party, he said to me in a
quiet, well-bred voice:--

"You will, I trust, Dr. Se-ward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later
on, that I did what I could to con-vince you to-night."




CHAPTER XIX

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 Octo-ber, 5 a. m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy
mind, for I think I never saw Mina so ab-so-lutely strong and well. I am
so glad that she con-sen-ted to hold back and let us men do the work.
Some-how, it was a dread to me that she was in this fear-ful busi-ness at
all; but now that her work is done, and that it is due to her en-ergy and
brains and foresight that the whole story is put to-gether in such a way
that every point tells, she may well feel that her part is fin-ished, and
that she can hence-forth leave the rest to us. We were, I think, all a
little up-set by the scene with Mr. Ren-field. When we came away from his
room we were si-lent till we got back to the study. Then Mr. Mor-ris said
to Dr. Se-ward:--

"Say, Jack, if that man wasn't at-tempt-ing a bluff, he is about the
sanest lun-atic I ever saw. I'm not sure, but I be-lieve that he had some
ser-i-ous pur-pose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a
chance." Lord Godalm-ing and I were si-lent, but Dr. Van Helsing ad-ded:--

"Friend John, you know more of lun-at-ics than I do, and I'm glad of it,
for I fear that if it had been to me to de-cide I would be-fore that last
hys-ter-ical out-burst have given him free. But we live and learn, and in
our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quin-cey would say.
All is best as they are." Dr. Se-ward seemed to an-swer them both in a
dreamy kind of way:--

"I don't know but that I agree with you. If that man had been an
or-din-ary lun-atic I would have taken my chance of trust-ing him; but he
seems so mixed up with the Count in an in-dexy kind of way that I am
afraid of do-ing any-thing wrong by help-ing his fads. I can't for-get how
he prayed with al-most equal fer-vour for a cat, and then tried to tear my
throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and
mas-ter,' and he may want to get out to help him in some diabol-ical way.
That hor-rid thing has the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help
him, so I sup-pose he isn't above try-ing to use a re-spect-able lun-atic. He
cer-tainly did seem earn-est, though. I only hope we have done what is
best. These things, in con-junc-tion with the wild work we have in hand,
help to un-nerve a man." The Pro-fessor stepped over, and lay-ing his hand
on his shoulder, said in his grave, kindly way:--

"Friend John, have no fear. We are try-ing to do our duty in a very sad
and ter-rible case; we can only do as we deem best. What else have we to
hope for, ex-cept the pity of the good God?" Lord Godalm-ing had slipped
away for a few minutes, but now he re-turned. He held up a little sil-ver
whistle, as he re-marked:--

"That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an an-ti-dote on
call." Hav-ing passed the wall, we took our way to the house, tak-ing care
to keep in the shad-ows of the trees on the lawn when the moon-light shone
out. When we got to the porch the Pro-fessor opened his bag and took out
a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sort-ing them into four
little groups, evid-ently one for each. Then he spoke:--

"My friends, we are go-ing into a ter-rible danger, and we need arms of
many kinds. Our en-emy is not merely spir-itual. Re-mem-ber that he has the
strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our wind-pipes are
of the com-mon kind--and there-fore break-able or crush-able--his are not
amen-able to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong
in all than him, can at cer-tain times hold him; but they can-not hurt him
as we can be hurt by him. We must, there-fore, guard ourselves from his
touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he lif-ted a little sil-ver
cru-ci-fix and held it out to me, I be-ing nearest to him--"put these
flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of withered
gar-lic blos-soms--"for other en-emies more mundane, this re-volver and this
knife; and for aid in all, these so small elec-tric lamps, which you can
fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, this,
which we must not de-sec-rate need-less." This was a por-tion of Sacred
Wafer, which he put in an en-vel-ope and handed to me. Each of the oth-ers
was sim-il-arly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the
skel-eton keys? If so that we can open the door, we need not break house
by the win-dow, as be-fore at Miss Lucy's."

Dr. Se-ward tried one or two skel-eton keys, his mech-an-ical dex-ter-ity as a
sur-geon stand-ing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after
a little play back and for-ward the bolt yiel-ded, and, with a rusty
clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and
it slowly opened. It was start-lingly like the im-age con-veyed to me in
Dr. Se-ward's di-ary of the open-ing of Miss Westenra's tomb; I fancy that
the same idea seemed to strike the oth-ers, for with one ac-cord they
shrank back. The Pro-fessor was the first to move for-ward, and stepped
into the open door.

"_In manus tuas, Dom-ine!_" he said, cross-ing him-self as he passed over
the threshold. We closed the door be-hind us, lest when we should have
lit our lamps we should pos-sibly at-tract at-ten-tion from the road. The
Pro-fessor care-fully tried the lock, lest we might not be able to open it
from within should we be in a hurry mak-ing our exit. Then we all lit our
lamps and pro-ceeded on our search.

The light from the tiny lamps fell in all sorts of odd forms, as the
rays crossed each other, or the opa-city of our bod-ies threw great
shad-ows. I could not for my life get away from the feel-ing that there
was some one else amongst us. I sup-pose it was the re-col-lec-tion, so
power-fully brought home to me by the grim sur-round-ings, of that ter-rible
ex-per-i-ence in Transylvania. I think the feel-ing was com-mon to us all,
for I no-ticed that the oth-ers kept look-ing over their shoulders at every
sound and every new shadow, just as I felt my-self do-ing.

The whole place was thick with dust. The floor was seem-ingly inches
deep, ex-cept where there were re-cent foot-steps, in which on hold-ing down
my lamp I could see marks of hob-nails where the dust was cracked. The
walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and in the corners were masses of
spider's webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old
tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the
hall was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yel-lowed la-bel on each. They
had been used sev-eral times, for on the table were sev-eral sim-ilar rents
in the blanket of dust, sim-ilar to that ex-posed when the Pro-fessor
lif-ted them. He turned to me and said:--

"You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and you know
it at least more than we do. Which is the way to the chapel?" I had an
idea of its dir-ec-tion, though on my former visit I had not been able to
get ad-mis-sion to it; so I led the way, and after a few wrong turn-ings
found my-self op-pos-ite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands.
"This is the spot," said the Pro-fessor as he turned his lamp on a small
map of the house, copied from the file of my ori-ginal cor-res-pond-ence
re-gard-ing the pur-chase. With a little trouble we found the key on the
bunch and opened the door. We were pre-pared for some un-pleas-ant-ness, for
as we were open-ing the door a faint, malodor-ous air seemed to ex-hale
through the gaps, but none of us ever ex-pec-ted such an odour as we
en-countered. None of the oth-ers had met the Count at all at close
quar-ters, and when I had seen him he was either in the fast-ing stage of
his ex-ist-ence in his rooms or, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in
a ruined build-ing open to the air; but here the place was small and
close, and the long dis-use had made the air stag-nant and foul. There was
an earthy smell, as of some dry mi-asma, which came through the fouler
air. But as to the odour it-self, how shall I de-scribe it? It was not
alone that it was com-posed of all the ills of mor-tal-ity and with the
pun-gent, ac-rid smell of blood, but it seemed as though cor-rup-tion had
be-come it-self cor-rupt. Faugh! it sick-ens me to think of it. Every breath
ex-haled by that mon-ster seemed to have clung to the place and
in-tens-i-fied its loath-some-ness.

Under or-din-ary cir-cum-stances such a stench would have brought our
en-ter-prise to an end; but this was no or-din-ary case, and the high and
ter-rible pur-pose in which we were in-volved gave us a strength which rose
above merely phys-ical con-sid-er-a-tions. After the in-vol-un-tary shrink-ing
con-sequent on the first naus-eous whiff, we one and all set about our
work as though that loath-some place were a garden of roses.

We made an ac-cur-ate ex-am-in-a-tion of the place, the Pro-fessor say-ing as we
began:--

"The first thing is to see how many of the boxes are left; we must then
ex-am-ine every hole and corner and cranny and see if we can-not get some
clue as to what has be-come of the rest." A glance was suf-fi-cient to show
how many re-mained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was
no mis-tak-ing them.

There were only twenty-nine left out of the fifty! Once I got a fright,
for, see-ing Lord Godalm-ing sud-denly turn and look out of the vaul-ted
door into the dark pas-sage bey-ond, I looked too, and for an in-stant my
heart stood still. Some-where, look-ing out from the shadow, I seemed to
see the high lights of the Count's evil face, the ridge of the nose, the
red eyes, the red lips, the aw-ful pal-lor. It was only for a mo-ment, for,
as Lord Godalm-ing said, "I thought I saw a face, but it was only the
shad-ows," and re-sumed his in-quiry, I turned my lamp in the dir-ec-tion,
and stepped into the pas-sage. There was no sign of any one; and as there
were no corners, no doors, no aper-ture of any kind, but only the solid
walls of the pas-sage, there could be no hid-ing-place even for _him_. I
took it that fear had helped ima-gin-a-tion, and said noth-ing.

A few minutes later I saw Mor-ris step sud-denly back from a corner, which
he was ex-amin-ing. We all fol-lowed his move-ments with our eyes, for
un-doubtedly some nervous-ness was grow-ing on us, and we saw a whole mass
of phos-phor-es-cence, which twinkled like stars. We all in-stinct-ively drew
back. The whole place was be-com-ing alive with rats.

For a mo-ment or two we stood ap-palled, all save Lord Godalm-ing, who was
seem-ingly pre-pared for such an emer-gency. Rush-ing over to the great
iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Se-ward had de-scribed from the out-side,
and which I had seen my-self, he turned the key in the lock, drew the
huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, tak-ing his little sil-ver
whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered
from be-hind Dr. Se-ward's house by the yelp-ing of dogs, and after about a
minute three ter-ri-ers came dash-ing round the corner of the house.
Un-con-sciously we had all moved to-wards the door, and as we moved I
no-ticed that the dust had been much dis-turbed: the boxes which had been
taken out had been brought this way. But even in the minute that had
elapsed the num-ber of the rats had vastly in-creased. They seemed to
swarm over the place all at once, till the lamp-light, shin-ing on their
mov-ing dark bod-ies and glit-ter-ing, bale-ful eyes, made the place look
like a bank of earth set with fire-flies. The dogs dashed on, but at the
threshold sud-denly stopped and snarled, and then, sim-ul-tan-eously lift-ing
their noses, began to howl in most lugubri-ous fash-ion. The rats were
mul-tiply-ing in thou-sands, and we moved out.

Lord Godalm-ing lif-ted one of the dogs, and car-ry-ing him in, placed him
on the floor. The in-stant his feet touched the ground he seemed to
re-cover his cour-age, and rushed at his nat-ural en-emies. They fled be-fore
him so fast that be-fore he had shaken the life out of a score, the other
dogs, who had by now been lif-ted in the same man-ner, had but small prey
ere the whole mass had van-ished.

With their go-ing it seemed as if some evil pres-ence had de-par-ted, for
the dogs frisked about and barked mer-rily as they made sud-den darts at
their pros-trate foes, and turned them over and over and tossed them in
the air with vi-cious shakes. We all seemed to find our spir-its rise.
Whether it was the puri-fy-ing of the deadly at-mo-sphere by the open-ing of
the chapel door, or the re-lief which we ex-per-i-enced by find-ing ourselves
in the open I know not; but most cer-tainly the shadow of dread seemed to
slip from us like a robe, and the oc-ca-sion of our com-ing lost some-thing
of its grim sig-ni-fic-ance, though we did not slacken a whit in our
res-ol-u-tion. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and
bring-ing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. We found
noth-ing through-out ex-cept dust in ex-traordin-ary pro-por-tions, and all
un-touched save for my own foot-steps when I had made my first visit.
Never once did the dogs ex-hibit any symp-tom of un-eas-i-ness, and even when
we re-turned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been
rab-bit-hunt-ing in a sum-mer wood.

The morn-ing was quick-en-ing in the east when we emerged from the front.
Dr. Van Helsing had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and
locked the door in or-tho-dox fash-ion, put-ting the key into his pocket
when he had done.

"So far," he said, "our night has been em-in-ently suc-cess-ful. No harm has
come to us such as I feared might be and yet we have as-cer-tained how
many boxes are miss-ing. More than all do I re-joice that this, our
first--and per-haps our most dif-fi-cult and dan-ger-ous--step has been
ac-com-plished without the bring-ing there-into our most sweet Madam Mina or
troub-ling her wak-ing or sleep-ing thoughts with sights and sounds and
smells of hor-ror which she might never for-get. One les-son, too, we have
learned, if it be al-low-able to ar-gue _a par-tic-u-lari_: that the brute
beasts which are to the Count's com-mand are yet them-selves not amen-able
to his spir-itual power; for look, these rats that would come to his
call, just as from his castle top he sum-mon the wolves to your go-ing and
to that poor mother's cry, though they come to him, they run pell-mell
from the so little dogs of my friend Ar-thur. We have other mat-ters
be-fore us, other dangers, other fears; and that mon-ster--he has not used
his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night.
So be it that he has gone else-where. Good! It has given us op-por-tun-ity
to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for the
stake of hu-man souls. And now let us go home. The dawn is close at hand,
and we have reason to be con-tent with our first night's work. It may be
or-dained that we have many nights and days to fol-low, if full of peril;
but we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink."

The house was si-lent when we got back, save for some poor creature who
was scream-ing away in one of the dis-tant wards, and a low, moan-ing sound
from Ren-field's room. The poor wretch was doubt-less tor-tur-ing him-self,
after the man-ner of the in-sane, with need-less thoughts of pain.

I came tip-toe into our own room, and found Mina asleep, breath-ing so
softly that I had to put my ear down to hear it. She looks paler than
usual. I hope the meet-ing to-night has not up-set her. I am truly
thank-ful that she is to be left out of our fu-ture work, and even of our
de-lib-er-a-tions. It is too great a strain for a wo-man to bear. I did not
think so at first, but I know bet-ter now. There-fore I am glad that it is
settled. There may be things which would frighten her to hear; and yet
to con-ceal them from her might be worse than to tell her if once she
sus-pec-ted that there was any con-ceal-ment. Hence-forth our work is to be a
sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that all
is fin-ished, and the earth free from a mon-ster of the nether world. I
daresay it will be dif-fi-cult to be-gin to keep si-lence after such
con-fid-ence as ours; but I must be res-ol-ute, and to-mor-row I shall keep
dark over to-night's do-ings, and shall re-fuse to speak of any-thing that
has happened. I rest on the sofa, so as not to dis-turb her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 Octo-ber, later._--I sup-pose it was nat-ural that we should have all
over-slept ourselves, for the day was a busy one, and the night had no
rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its ex-haus-tion, for though I slept
till the sun was high, I was awake be-fore her, and had to call two or
three times be-fore she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for a
few seconds she did not re-cog-nize me, but looked at me with a sort of
blank ter-ror, as one looks who has been waked out of a bad dream. She
com-plained a little of be-ing tired, and I let her rest till later in the
day. We now know of twenty-one boxes hav-ing been re-moved, and if it be
that sev-eral were taken in any of these re-movals we may be able to trace
them all. Such will, of course, im-mensely sim-plify our la-bour, and the
sooner the mat-ter is at-ten-ded to the bet-ter. I shall look up Tho-mas
Snelling to-day.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_1 Octo-ber._--It was to-wards noon when I was awakened by the Pro-fessor
walk-ing into my room. He was more jolly and cheer-ful than usual, and it
is quite evid-ent that last night's work has helped to take some of the
brood-ing weight off his mind. After go-ing over the ad-ven-ture of the
night he sud-denly said:--

"Your pa-tient in-terests me much. May it be that with you I visit him
this morn-ing? Or if that you are too oc-cupy, I can go alone if it may
be. It is a new ex-per-i-ence to me to find a lun-atic who talk philo-sophy,
and reason so sound." I had some work to do which pressed, so I told him
that if he would go alone I would be glad, as then I should not have to
keep him wait-ing; so I called an at-tend-ant and gave him the ne-ces-sary
in-struc-tions. Be-fore the Pro-fessor left the room I cau-tioned him against
get-ting any false im-pres-sion from my pa-tient. "But," he answered, "I
want him to talk of him-self and of his de-lu-sion as to con-sum-ing live
things. He said to Madam Mina, as I see in your di-ary of yes-ter-day, that
he had once had such a be-lief. Why do you smile, friend John?"

"Ex-cuse me," I said, "but the an-swer is here." I laid my hand on the
type-writ-ten mat-ter. "When our sane and learned lun-atic made that very
state-ment of how he _used_ to con-sume life, his mouth was ac-tu-ally
naus-eous with the flies and spiders which he had eaten just be-fore Mrs.
Harker entered the room." Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said.
"Your memory is true, friend John. I should have re-membered. And yet it
is this very ob-liquity of thought and memory which makes men-tal dis-ease
such a fas-cin-at-ing study. Per-haps I may gain more know-ledge out of the
folly of this mad-man than I shall from the teach-ing of the most wise.
Who knows?" I went on with my work, and be-fore long was through that in
hand. It seemed that the time had been very short in-deed, but there was
Van Helsing back in the study. "Do I in-ter-rupt?" he asked po-litely as he
stood at the door.

"Not at all," I answered. "Come in. My work is fin-ished, and I am free.
I can go with you now, if you like.

"It is need-less; I have seen him!"

"Well?"

"I fear that he does not ap-praise me at much. Our in-ter-view was short.
When I entered his room he was sit-ting on a stool in the centre, with
his el-bows on his knees, and his face was the pic-ture of sul-len
dis-con-tent. I spoke to him as cheer-fully as I could, and with such a
meas-ure of re-spect as I could as-sume. He made no reply whatever. "Don't
you know me?" I asked. His an-swer was not re-as-sur-ing: "I know you well
enough; you are the old fool Van Helsing. I wish you would take your-self
and your idi-otic brain the-or-ies some-where else. Damn all thick-headed
Dutch-men!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his im-plac-able
sul-len-ness as in-dif-fer-ent to me as though I had not been in the room at
all. Thus de-par-ted for this time my chance of much learn-ing from this so
clever lun-atic; so I shall go, if I may, and cheer my-self with a few
happy words with that sweet soul Madam Mina. Friend John, it does
re-joice me un-speak-able that she is no more to be pained, no more to be
wor-ried with our ter-rible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it
is bet-ter so."

"I agree with you with all my heart," I answered earn-estly, for I did
not want him to weaken in this mat-ter. "Mrs. Harker is bet-ter out of it.
Th-ings are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have
been in many tight places in our time; but it is no place for a wo-man,
and if she had re-mained in touch with the af-fair, it would in time
in-fal-libly have wrecked her."

So Van Helsing has gone to con-fer with Mrs. Harker and Harker; Quin-cey
and Art are all out fol-low-ing up the clues as to the earth-boxes. I
shall fin-ish my round of work and we shall meet to-night.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_1 Octo-ber._--It is strange to me to be kept in the dark as I am to-day;
after Jonathan's full con-fid-ence for so many years, to see him
mani-festly avoid cer-tain mat-ters, and those the most vi-tal of all. This
morn-ing I slept late after the fa-tigues of yes-ter-day, and though
Jonathan was late too, he was the earlier. He spoke to me be-fore he went
out, never more sweetly or ten-derly, but he never men-tioned a word of
what had happened in the visit to the Count's house. And yet he must
have known how ter-ribly anxious I was. Poor dear fel-low! I sup-pose it
must have dis-tressed him even more than it did me. They all agreed that
it was best that I should not be drawn fur-ther into this aw-ful work, and
I ac-qui-esced. But to think that he keeps any-thing from me! And now I am
cry-ing like a silly fool, when I _know_ it comes from my hus-band's great
love and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men.

That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all; and
lest it should ever be that he should think for a mo-ment that I kept
any-thing from him, I still keep my journal as usual. Then if he has
feared of my trust I shall show it to him, with every thought of my
heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and
low-spir-ited to-day. I sup-pose it is the re-ac-tion from the ter-rible
ex-cite-ment.

Last night I went to bed when the men had gone, simply be-cause they told
me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of de-vour-ing anxi-ety. I
kept think-ing over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came to
see me in Lon-don, and it all seems like a hor-rible tragedy, with fate
press-ing on re-lent-lessly to some destined end. Everything that one does
seems, no mat-ter how right it may be, to bring on the very thing which
is most to be de-plored. If I hadn't gone to Whitby, per-haps poor dear
Lucy would be with us now. She hadn't taken to vis-it-ing the church-yard
till I came, and if she hadn't come there in the day-time with me she
wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at
night and asleep, that mon-ster couldn't have des-troyed her as he did.
Oh, why did I ever go to Whitby? There now, cry-ing again! I won-der what
has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he knew
that I had been cry-ing twice in one morn-ing--I, who never cried on my
own ac-count, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear
fel-low would fret his heart out. I shall put a bold face on, and if I do
feel weepy, he shall never see it. I sup-pose it is one of the les-sons
that we poor wo-men have to learn....

I can't quite re-mem-ber how I fell asleep last night. I re-mem-ber hear-ing
the sud-den bark-ing of the dogs and a lot of queer sounds, like pray-ing
on a very tu-mul-tu-ous scale, from Mr. Ren-field's room, which is some-where
un-der this. And then there was si-lence over everything, si-lence so
pro-found that it startled me, and I got up and looked out of the win-dow.
All was dark and si-lent, the black shad-ows thrown by the moon-light
seem-ing full of a si-lent mys-tery of their own. Not a thing seemed to be
stir-ring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin
streak of white mist, that crept with al-most im-per-cept-ible slow-ness
across the grass to-wards the house, seemed to have a sen-tience and a
vi-tal-ity of its own. I think that the di-gres-sion of my thoughts must
have done me good, for when I got back to bed I found a leth-argy
creep-ing over me. I lay a while, but could not quite sleep, so I got out
and looked out of the win-dow again. The mist was spread-ing, and was now
close up to the house, so that I could see it ly-ing thick against the
wall, as though it were steal-ing up to the win-dows. The poor man was
more loud than ever, and though I could not dis-tin-guish a word he said,
I could in some way re-cog-nise in his tones some pas-sion-ate en-treaty on
his part. Then there was the sound of a struggle, and I knew that the
at-tend-ants were deal-ing with him. I was so frightened that I crept into
bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, put-ting my fin-gers in my ears.
I was not then a bit sleepy, at least so I thought; but I must have
fallen asleep, for, ex-cept dreams, I do not re-mem-ber any-thing un-til the
morn-ing, when Jonathan woke me. I think that it took me an ef-fort and a
little time to real-ise where I was, and that it was Jonathan who was
bend-ing over me. My dream was very pe-cu-liar, and was al-most typ-ical of
the way that wak-ing thoughts be-come merged in, or con-tin-ued in, dreams.

I thought that I was asleep, and wait-ing for Jonathan to come back. I
was very anxious about him, and I was power-less to act; my feet, and my
hands, and my brain were weighted, so that noth-ing could pro-ceed at the
usual pace. And so I slept un-eas-ily and thought. Then it began to dawn
upon me that the air was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the
clothes from my face, and found, to my sur-prise, that all was dim
around. The gas-light which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down,
came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evid-ently
grown thicker and poured into the room. Then it oc-curred to me that I
had shut the win-dow be-fore I had come to bed. I would have got out to
make cer-tain on the point, but some leaden leth-argy seemed to chain my
limbs and even my will. I lay still and en-dured; that was all. I closed
my eyes, but could still see through my eye-lids. (It is won-der-ful what
tricks our dreams play us, and how con-veni-ently we can ima-gine.) The
mist grew thicker and thicker and I could see now how it came in, for I
could see it like smoke--or with the white en-ergy of boil-ing
wa-ter--pour-ing in, not through the win-dow, but through the join-ings of
the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it be-came
con-cen-trated into a sort of pil-lar of cloud in the room, through the top
of which I could see the light of the gas shin-ing like a red eye. Th-ings
began to whirl through my brain just as the cloudy column was now
whirl-ing in the room, and through it all came the scrip-tural words "a
pil-lar of cloud by day and of fire by night." Was it in-deed some such
spir-itual guid-ance that was com-ing to me in my sleep? But the pil-lar was
com-posed of both the day and the night-guid-ing, for the fire was in the
red eye, which at the thought got a new fas-cin-a-tion for me; till, as I
looked, the fire di-vided, and seemed to shine on me through the fog like
two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of in her mo-ment-ary men-tal wan-der-ing
when, on the cliff, the dy-ing sun-light struck the win-dows of St. Mary's
Church. Sud-denly the hor-ror burst upon me that it was thus that Jonathan
had seen those aw-ful wo-men grow-ing into real-ity through the whirl-ing mist
in the moon-light, and in my dream I must have fain-ted, for all be-came
black dark-ness. The last con-scious ef-fort which ima-gin-a-tion made was to
show me a livid white face bend-ing over me out of the mist. I must be
care-ful of such dreams, for they would un-seat one's reason if there were
too much of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Se-ward to pre-scribe
some-thing for me which would make me sleep, only that I fear to alarm
them. Such a dream at the present time would be-come woven into their
fears for me. To-night I shall strive hard to sleep nat-ur-ally. If I do
not, I shall to-mor-row night get them to give me a dose of chloral; that
can-not hurt me for once, and it will give me a good night's sleep. Last
night tired me more than if I had not slept at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 Octo-ber 10 p. m._--Last night I slept, but did not dream. I must have
slept soundly, for I was not waked by Jonathan com-ing to bed; but the
sleep has not re-freshed me, for to-day I feel ter-ribly weak and
spir-it-less. I spent all yes-ter-day try-ing to read, or ly-ing down doz-ing.
In the af-ter-noon Mr. Ren-field asked if he might see me. Poor man, he was
very gentle, and when I came away he kissed my hand and bade God bless
me. Some way it af-fected me much; I am cry-ing when I think of him. This
is a new weak-ness, of which I must be care-ful. Jonathan would be
miser-able if he knew I had been cry-ing. He and the oth-ers were out till
din-ner-time, and they all came in tired. I did what I could to brighten
them up, and I sup-pose that the ef-fort did me good, for I for-got how
tired I was. After din-ner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke
to-gether, as they said, but I knew that they wanted to tell each other
of what had oc-curred to each dur-ing the day; I could see from Jonathan's
man-ner that he had some-thing im-port-ant to com-mu-nic-ate. I was not so
sleepy as I should have been; so be-fore they went I asked Dr. Se-ward to
give me a little opi-ate of some kind, as I had not slept well the night
be-fore. He very kindly made me up a sleep-ing draught, which he gave to
me, telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was very mild.... I
have taken it, and am wait-ing for sleep, which still keeps aloof. I hope
I have not done wrong, for as sleep be-gins to flirt with me, a new fear
comes: that I may have been fool-ish in thus de-priving my-self of the
power of wak-ing. I might want it. Here comes sleep. Good-night.




CHAPTER XX

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 Octo-ber, even-ing._--I found Tho-mas Snelling in his house at Beth-nal
Green, but un-hap-pily he was not in a con-di-tion to re-mem-ber any-thing. The
very pro-spect of beer which my ex-pec-ted com-ing had opened to him had
proved too much, and he had be-gun too early on his ex-pec-ted de-bauch. I
learned, how-ever, from his wife, who seemed a de-cent, poor soul, that he
was only the as-sist-ant to Smol-let, who of the two mates was the
re-spons-ible per-son. So off I drove to Wal-worth, and found Mr. Joseph
Smol-let at home and in his shirtsleeves, tak-ing a late tea out of a
sau-cer. He is a de-cent, in-tel-li-gent fel-low, dis-tinctly a good, re-li-able
type of work-man, and with a head-piece of his own. He re-membered all
about the in-cid-ent of the boxes, and from a won-der-ful dog's-eared
note-book, which he pro-duced from some mys-ter-i-ous re-cept-acle about the
seat of his trousers, and which had hiero-glyph-ical entries in thick,
half-ob-lit-er-ated pen-cil, he gave me the des-tin-a-tions of the boxes. There
were, he said, six in the cart-load which he took from Car-fax and left at
197, Chick-sand Street, Mile End New Town, and an-other six which he
de-pos-ited at Ja-maica Lane, Ber-mond-sey. If then the Count meant to
scat-ter these ghastly refuges of his over Lon-don, these places were
chosen as the first of de-liv-ery, so that later he might dis-trib-ute more
fully. The sys-tem-atic man-ner in which this was done made me think that
he could not mean to con-fine him-self to two sides of Lon-don. He was now
fixed on the far east of the north-ern shore, on the east of the south-ern
shore, and on the south. The north and west were surely never meant to
be left out of his diabol-ical scheme--let alone the City it-self and the
very heart of fash-ion-able Lon-don in the south-west and west. I went back
to Smol-let, and asked him if he could tell us if any other boxes had
been taken from Car-fax.

He replied:--

"Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a
sov-er-eign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I heard a man by the name of
Bloxam say four nights ago in the 'Are an' 'Ounds, in Pincher's Al-ley,
as 'ow he an' his mate 'ad 'ad a rare dusty job in a old 'ouse at
Pur-fect. There ain't a-many such jobs as this 'ere, an' I'm thinkin'
that maybe Sam Bloxam could tell ye sum-mut." I asked if he could tell me
where to find him. I told him that if he could get me the ad-dress it
would be worth an-other half-sov-er-eign to him. So he gulped down the rest
of his tea and stood up, say-ing that he was go-ing to be-gin the search
then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:--

"Look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I
may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but any-how he ain't like to be in a way
to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze.
If you can give me a en-vel-ope with a stamp on it, and put yer ad-dress on
it, I'll find out where Sam is to be found and post it ye to-night. But
ye'd bet-ter be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch
'im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore."

This was all prac-tical, so one of the chil-dren went off with a penny to
buy an en-vel-ope and a sheet of pa-per, and to keep the change. When she
came back, I ad-dressed the en-vel-ope and stamped it, and when Smol-let had
again faith-fully prom-ised to post the ad-dress when found, I took my way
to home. We're on the track any-how. I am tired to-night, and want sleep.
Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too pale; her eyes look as
though she had been cry-ing. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be
kept in the dark, and it may make her doubly anxious about me and the
oth-ers. But it is best as it is. It is bet-ter to be dis-ap-poin-ted and
wor-ried in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doc-tors
were quite right to in-sist on her be-ing kept out of this dread-ful
busi-ness. I must be firm, for on me this par-tic-u-lar bur-den of si-lence
must rest. I shall not ever enter on the sub-ject with her un-der any
cir-cum-stances. Indeed, it may not be a hard task, after all, for she
her-self has be-come reti-cent on the sub-ject, and has not spoken of the
Count or his do-ings ever since we told her of our de-cision.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 Octo-ber, even-ing._--A long and try-ing and ex-cit-ing day. By the first
post I got my dir-ec-ted en-vel-ope with a dirty scrap of pa-per en-closed, on
which was writ-ten with a car-penter's pen-cil in a sprawl-ing hand:--

"Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bar-tel Street, Wal-worth. Arsk for
the de-pite."

I got the let-ter in bed, and rose without wak-ing Mina. She looked heavy
and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I de-term-ined not to wake her,
but that, when I should re-turn from this new search, I would ar-range for
her go-ing back to Exeter. I think she would be hap-pier in our own home,
with her daily tasks to in-terest her, than in be-ing here amongst us and
in ig-nor-ance. I only saw Dr. Se-ward for a mo-ment, and told him where I
was off to, prom-ising to come back and tell the rest so soon as I should
have found out any-thing. I drove to Wal-worth and found, with some
dif-fi-culty, Pot-ter's Court. Mr. Smol-let's spelling misled me, as I asked
for Poter's Court in-stead of Pot-ter's Court. However, when I had found
the court, I had no dif-fi-culty in dis-cov-er-ing Corcoran's lodging-house.
When I asked the man who came to the door for the "de-pite," he shook his
head, and said: "I dunno 'im. There ain't no such a per-son 'ere; I never
'eard of 'im in all my bloomin' days. Don't be-lieve there ain't nobody
of that kind livin' ere or any-wheres." I took out Smol-let's let-ter, and
as I read it it seemed to me that the les-son of the spelling of the name
of the court might guide me. "What are you?" I asked.

"I'm the de-pity," he answered. I saw at once that I was on the right
track; phon-etic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put the
deputy's know-ledge at my dis-posal, and I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who
had slept off the re-mains of his beer on the pre-vi-ous night at
Corcoran's, had left for his work at Po-plar at five o'clock that
morn-ing. He could not tell me where the place of work was situ-ated, but
he had a vague idea that it was some kind of a "new-fangled ware'us";
and with this slender clue I had to start for Po-plar. It was twelve
o'clock be-fore I got any sat-is-fact-ory hint of such a build-ing, and this
I got at a cof-fee-shop, where some work-men were hav-ing their din-ner. One
of these sug-ges-ted that there was be-ing erec-ted at Cross An-gel Street a
new "cold stor-age" build-ing; and as this suited the con-di-tion of a
"new-fangled ware'us," I at once drove to it. An in-ter-view with a surly
gate-keeper and a sur-lier fore-man, both of whom were ap-peased with the
coin of the realm, put me on the track of Bloxam; he was sent for on my
sug-gest-ing that I was will-ing to pay his day's wages to his fore-man for
the priv-ilege of ask-ing him a few ques-tions on a private mat-ter. He was
a smart enough fel-low, though rough of speech and bear-ing. When I had
prom-ised to pay for his in-form-a-tion and given him an earn-est, he told me
that he had made two jour-neys between Car-fax and a house in Pic-ca-dilly,
and had taken from this house to the lat-ter nine great boxes--"main
heavy ones"--with a horse and cart hired by him for this pur-pose. I
asked him if he could tell me the num-ber of the house in Pic-ca-dilly, to
which he replied:--

"Well, guv'nor, I for-gits the num-ber, but it was only a few doors from a
big white church or some-think of the kind, not long built. It was a
dusty old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to the dusti-ness of the 'ouse we
tooked the bloomin' boxes from."

"How did you get into the houses if they were both empty?"

"There was the old party what en-gaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at
Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the boxes and put them in the dray. Curse
me, but he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller,
with a white mous-tache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw
a shad-der."

How this phrase thrilled through me!

"Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and
me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine any-how--an' I'm no
chicken, neither."

"How did you get into the house in Pic-ca-dilly?" I asked.

"He was there too. He must 'a' star-ted off and got there afore me, for
when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'is-self an' 'elped me
to carry the boxes into the 'all."

"The whole nine?" I asked.

"Yus; there was five in the first load an' four in the second. It was
main dry work, an' I don't so well re-mem-ber 'ow I got 'ome." I
in-ter-rup-ted him:--

"Were the boxes left in the hall?"

"Yus; it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in it." I made one
more at-tempt to fur-ther mat-ters:--

"You didn't have any key?"

"Never used no key nor no-think. The old gent, he opened the door 'is-self
an' shut it again when I druv off. I don't re-mem-ber the last time--but
that was the beer."

"And you can't re-mem-ber the num-ber of the house?"

"No, sir. But ye needn't have no dif-fi-culty about that. It's a 'igh 'un
with a stone front with a bow on it, an' 'igh steps up to the door. I
know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers
what come round to earn a cop-per. The old gent give them shil-lin's, an'
they seein' they got so much, they wanted more; but 'e took one of them
by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot
of them went away cussin'." I thought that with this de-scrip-tion I could
find the house, so, hav-ing paid my friend for his in-form-a-tion, I star-ted
off for Pic-ca-dilly. I had gained a new pain-ful ex-per-i-ence; the Count
could, it was evid-ent, handle the earth-boxes him-self. If so, time was
pre-cious; for, now that he had achieved a cer-tain amount of
dis-tri-bu-tion, he could, by choos-ing his own time, com-plete the task
un-ob-served. At Pic-ca-dilly Cir-cus I dis-charged my cab, and walked
west-ward; bey-ond the Junior Con-sti-tu-tional I came across the house
de-scribed, and was sat-is-fied that this was the next of the lairs
ar-ranged by Drac-ula. The house looked as though it had been long
un-ten-an-ted. The win-dows were en-crus-ted with dust, and the shut-ters were
up. All the frame-work was black with time, and from the iron the paint
had mostly scaled away. It was evid-ent that up to lately there had been
a large no-tice-board in front of the bal-cony; it had, how-ever, been
roughly torn away, the up-rights which had sup-por-ted it still re-main-ing.
Be-hind the rails of the bal-cony I saw there were some loose boards,
whose raw edges looked white. I would have given a good deal to have
been able to see the no-tice-board in-tact, as it would, per-haps, have
given some clue to the own-er-ship of the house. I re-membered my
ex-per-i-ence of the in-vest-ig-a-tion and pur-chase of Car-fax, and I could not
but feel that if I could find the former owner there might be some means
dis-covered of gain-ing ac-cess to the house.

There was at present noth-ing to be learned from the Pic-ca-dilly side, and
noth-ing could be done; so I went round to the back to see if any-thing
could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were act-ive, the
Pic-ca-dilly houses be-ing mostly in oc-cu-pa-tion. I asked one or two of the
grooms and help-ers whom I saw around if they could tell me any-thing
about the empty house. One of them said that he heard it had lately been
taken, but he couldn't say from whom. He told me, how-ever, that up to
very lately there had been a no-tice-board of "For Sale" up, and that
per-haps Mitchell, Sons, & Candy, the house agents, could tell me
some-thing, as he thought he re-membered see-ing the name of that firm on
the board. I did not wish to seem too eager, or to let my in-form-ant know
or guess too much, so, thank-ing him in the usual man-ner, I strolled
away. It was now grow-ing dusk, and the au-tumn night was clos-ing in, so I
did not lose any time. Hav-ing learned the ad-dress of Mitchell, Sons, &
Candy from a dir-ect-ory at the Berke-ley, I was soon at their of-fice in
Sack-ville Street.

The gen-tle-man who saw me was par-tic-u-larly suave in man-ner, but
un-com-mu-nic-at-ive in equal pro-por-tion. Hav-ing once told me that the
Pic-ca-dilly house--which through-out our in-ter-view he called a
"man-sion"--was sold, he con-sidered my busi-ness as con-cluded. When I
asked who had pur-chased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and
paused a few seconds be-fore reply-ing:--

"It is sold, sir."

"Par-don me," I said, with equal po-lite-ness, "but I have a spe-cial reason
for wish-ing to know who pur-chased it."

Again he paused longer, and raised his eye-brows still more. "It is sold,
sir," was again his lac-onic reply.

"Surely," I said, "you do not mind let-ting me know so much."

"But I do mind," he answered. "The af-fairs of their cli-ents are
ab-so-lutely safe in the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy." This was
mani-festly a prig of the first wa-ter, and there was no use ar-guing with
him. I thought I had best meet him on his own ground, so I said:--

"Your cli-ents, sir, are happy in hav-ing so res-ol-ute a guard-ian of their
con-fid-ence. I am my-self a pro-fes-sional man." Here I handed him my card.
"In this in-stance I am not promp-ted by curi-os-ity; I act on the part of
Lord Godalm-ing, who wishes to know some-thing of the prop-erty which was,
he un-der-stood, lately for sale." These words put a dif-fer-ent com-plex-ion
on af-fairs. He said:--

"I would like to ob-lige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and es-pe-cially would
I like to ob-lige his lord-ship. We once car-ried out a small mat-ter of
rent-ing some cham-bers for him when he was the Hon-our-able Ar-thur
Holm-wood. If you will let me have his lord-ship's ad-dress I will con-sult
the House on the sub-ject, and will, in any case, com-mu-nic-ate with his
lord-ship by to-night's post. It will be a pleas-ure if we can so far
de-vi-ate from our rules as to give the re-quired in-form-a-tion to his
lord-ship."

I wanted to se-cure a friend, and not to make an en-emy, so I thanked him,
gave the ad-dress at Dr. Se-ward's and came away. It was now dark, and I
was tired and hungry. I got a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Com-pany
and came down to Purfleet by the next train.

I found all the oth-ers at home. Mina was look-ing tired and pale, but she
made a gal-lant ef-fort to be bright and cheer-ful, it wrung my heart to
think that I had had to keep any-thing from her and so caused her
in-quiet-ude. Thank God, this will be the last night of her look-ing on at
our con-fer-ences, and feel-ing the sting of our not show-ing our
con-fid-ence. It took all my cour-age to hold to the wise res-ol-u-tion of
keep-ing her out of our grim task. She seems some-how more re-con-ciled; or
else the very sub-ject seems to have be-come re-pug-nant to her, for when
any ac-ci-dental al-lu-sion is made she ac-tu-ally shud-ders. I am glad we
made our res-ol-u-tion in time, as with such a feel-ing as this, our grow-ing
know-ledge would be tor-ture to her.

I could not tell the oth-ers of the day's dis-cov-ery till we were alone;
so after din-ner--fol-lowed by a little mu-sic to save ap-pear-ances even
amongst ourselves--I took Mina to her room and left her to go to bed.
The dear girl was more af-fec-tion-ate with me than ever, and clung to me
as though she would de-tain me; but there was much to be talked of and I
came away. Thank God, the ceas-ing of telling things has made no
dif-fer-ence between us.

When I came down again I found the oth-ers all gathered round the fire in
the study. In the train I had writ-ten my di-ary so far, and simply read
it off to them as the best means of let-ting them get abreast of my own
in-form-a-tion; when I had fin-ished Van Helsing said:--

"This has been a great day's work, friend Jonathan. Doubt-less we are on
the track of the miss-ing boxes. If we find them all in that house, then
our work is near the end. But if there be some miss-ing, we must search
un-til we find them. Then shall we make our fi-nal _coup_, and hunt the
wretch to his real death." We all sat si-lent awhile and all at once Mr.
Mor-ris spoke:--

"Say! how are we go-ing to get into that house?"

"We got into the other," answered Lord Godalm-ing quickly.

"But, Art, this is dif-fer-ent. We broke house at Car-fax, but we had night
and a walled park to pro-tect us. It will be a mighty dif-fer-ent thing to
com-mit burg-lary in Pic-ca-dilly, either by day or night. I con-fess I don't
see how we are go-ing to get in un-less that agency duck can find us a key
of some sort; per-haps we shall know when you get his let-ter in the
morn-ing." Lord Godalm-ing's brows con-trac-ted, and he stood up and walked
about the room. By-and-by he stopped and said, turn-ing from one to
an-other of us:--

"Quin-cey's head is level. This burg-lary busi-ness is get-ting ser-i-ous; we
got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--un-less we
can find the Count's key bas-ket."

As noth-ing could well be done be-fore morn-ing, and as it would be at
least ad-vis-able to wait till Lord Godalm-ing should hear from Mitchell's,
we de-cided not to take any act-ive step be-fore break-fast time. For a good
while we sat and smoked, dis-cuss-ing the mat-ter in its vari-ous lights and
bear-ings; I took the op-por-tun-ity of bring-ing this di-ary right up to the
mo-ment. I am very sleepy and shall go to bed....

Just a line. Mina sleeps soundly and her breath-ing is reg-u-lar. Her
fore-head is puckered up into little wrinkles, as though she thinks even
in her sleep. She is still too pale, but does not look so hag-gard as she
did this morn-ing. To-mor-row will, I hope, mend all this; she will be
her-self at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am sleepy!


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_1 Octo-ber._--I am puzzled afresh about Ren-field. His moods change so
rap-idly that I find it dif-fi-cult to keep touch of them, and as they
al-ways mean some-thing more than his own well-be-ing, they form a more
than in-ter-est-ing study. This morn-ing, when I went to see him after his
re-pulse of Van Helsing, his man-ner was that of a man com-mand-ing des-tiny.
He was, in fact, com-mand-ing des-tiny--sub-ject-ively. He did not really
care for any of the things of mere earth; he was in the clouds and
looked down on all the weak-nesses and wants of us poor mor-tals. I
thought I would im-prove the oc-ca-sion and learn some-thing, so I asked
him:--

"What about the flies these times?" He smiled on me in quite a su-per-ior
sort of way--such a smile as would have be-come the face of Mal-volio--as
he answered me:--

"The fly, my dear sir, has one strik-ing fea-ture; its wings are typ-ical
of the aërial powers of the psychic fac-ulties. The an-cients did well
when they typ-i-fied the soul as a but-ter-fly!"

I thought I would push his ana-logy to its ut-most lo-gic-ally, so I said
quickly:--

"Oh, it is a soul you are after now, is it?" His mad-ness foiled his
reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face as, shak-ing his head
with a de-cision which I had but sel-dom seen in him, he said:--

"Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all I want." Here he brightened
up; "I am pretty in-dif-fer-ent about it at present. Life is all right; I
have all I want. You must get a new pa-tient, doc-tor, if you wish to
study zoöphagy!"

This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:--

"Then you com-mand life; you are a god, I sup-pose?" He smiled with an
in-ef-fably be-nign su-peri-or-ity.

"Oh no! Far be it from me to ar-rog-ate to my-self the at-trib-utes of the
Deity. I am not even con-cerned in His es-pe-cially spir-itual do-ings. If I
may state my in-tel-lec-tual po-s-i-tion I am, so far as con-cerns things
purely ter-restrial, some-what in the po-s-i-tion which Enoch oc-cu-pied
spir-itu-ally!" This was a poser to me. I could not at the mo-ment re-call
Enoch's ap-pos-ite-ness; so I had to ask a simple ques-tion, though I felt
that by so do-ing I was lower-ing my-self in the eyes of the lun-atic:--

"And why with Enoch?"

"Be-cause he walked with God." I could not see the ana-logy, but did not
like to ad-mit it; so I harked back to what he had denied:--

"So you don't care about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put
my ques-tion quickly and some-what sternly, on pur-pose to dis-con-cert him.
The ef-fort suc-ceeded; for an in-stant he un-con-sciously re-lapsed into his
old servile man-ner, bent low be-fore me, and ac-tu-ally fawned upon me as
he replied:--

"I don't want any souls, in-deed, in-deed! I don't. I couldn't use them if
I had them; they would be no man-ner of use to me. I couldn't eat them
or----" He sud-denly stopped and the old cun-ning look spread over his
face, like a wind-sweep on the sur-face of the wa-ter. "And doc-tor, as to
life, what is it after all? When you've got all you re-quire, and you
know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good
friends--like you, Dr. Se-ward"; this was said with a leer of
in-ex-press-ible cun-ning. "I know that I shall never lack the means of
life!"

I think that through the cloud-i-ness of his in-san-ity he saw some
ant-ag-on-ism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as
he--a dogged si-lence. After a short time I saw that for the present it
was use-less to speak to him. He was sulky, and so I came away.

Later in the day he sent for me. Ordin-ar-ily I would not have come
without spe-cial reason, but just at present I am so in-ter-ested in him
that I would gladly make an ef-fort. Besides, I am glad to have any-thing
to help to pass the time. Harker is out, fol-low-ing up clues; and so are
Lord Godalm-ing and Quin-cey. Van Helsing sits in my study por-ing over the
re-cord pre-pared by the Hark-ers; he seems to think that by ac-cur-ate
know-ledge of all de-tails he will light upon some clue. He does not wish
to be dis-turbed in the work, without cause. I would have taken him with
me to see the pa-tient, only I thought that after his last re-pulse he
might not care to go again. There was also an-other reason: Ren-field
might not speak so freely be-fore a third per-son as when he and I were
alone.

I found him sit-ting out in the middle of the floor on his stool, a pose
which is gen-er-ally in-dic-at-ive of some men-tal en-ergy on his part. When I
came in, he said at once, as though the ques-tion had been wait-ing on his
lips:--

"What about souls?" It was evid-ent then that my sur-mise had been
cor-rect. Un-con-scious cereb-ra-tion was do-ing its work, even with the
lun-atic. I de-term-ined to have the mat-ter out. "What about them
your-self?" I asked. He did not reply for a mo-ment but looked all round
him, and up and down, as though he ex-pec-ted to find some in-spir-a-tion for
an an-swer.

"I don't want any souls!" he said in a feeble, apo-lo-getic way. The
mat-ter seemed prey-ing on his mind, and so I de-term-ined to use it--to "be
cruel only to be kind." So I said:--

"You like life, and you want life?"

"Oh yes! but that is all right; you needn't worry about that!"

"But," I asked, "how are we to get the life without get-ting the soul
also?" This seemed to puzzle him, so I fol-lowed it up:--

"A nice time you'll have some time when you're fly-ing out there, with
the souls of thou-sands of flies and spiders and birds and cats buzz-ing
and twit-ter-ing and mi-auing all round you. You've got their lives, you
know, and you must put up with their souls!" So-mething seemed to af-fect
his ima-gin-a-tion, for he put his fin-gers to his ears and shut his eyes,
screw-ing them up tightly just as a small boy does when his face is be-ing
soaped. There was some-thing pathetic in it that touched me; it also gave
me a les-son, for it seemed that be-fore me was a child--only a child,
though the fea-tures were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It
was evid-ent that he was un-der-go-ing some pro-cess of men-tal dis-turb-ance,
and, know-ing how his past moods had in-ter-preted things seem-ingly for-eign
to him-self, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I could and
go with him. The first step was to re-store con-fid-ence, so I asked him,
speak-ing pretty loud so that he would hear me through his closed ears:--

"Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?" He seemed to
wake up all at once, and shook his head. With a laugh he replied:--

"Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause he ad-ded,
"But I don't want their souls buzz-ing round me, all the same."

"Or spiders?" I went on.

"Blow spiders! What's the use of spiders? There isn't any-thing in them
to eat or"--he stopped sud-denly, as though re-minded of a for-bid-den
topic.

"So, so!" I thought to my-self, "this is the second time he has sud-denly
stopped at the word 'drink'; what does it mean?" Ren-field seemed him-self
aware of hav-ing made a lapse, for he hur-ried on, as though to dis-tract
my at-ten-tion from it:--

"I don't take any stock at all in such mat-ters. 'Rats and mice and such
small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the lar-der' they
might be called. I'm past all that sort of non-sense. You might as well
ask a man to eat mo-lecules with a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to
in-terest me about the lesser car-ni-vora, when I know of what is be-fore
me."

"I see," I said. "You want big things that you can make your teeth meet
in? How would you like to break-fast on ele-phant?"

"What ri-dicu-lous non-sense you are talk-ing!" He was get-ting too wide
awake, so I thought I would press him hard. "I won-der," I said
re-flect-ively, "what an ele-phant's soul is like!"

The ef-fect I de-sired was ob-tained, for he at once fell from his
high-horse and be-came a child again.

"I don't want an ele-phant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a
few mo-ments he sat des-pond-ently. Sud-denly he jumped to his feet, with
his eyes blaz-ing and all the signs of in-tense cereb-ral ex-cite-ment. "To
hell with you and your souls!" he shouted. "Why do you plague me about
souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and dis-tract me already,
without think-ing of souls!" He looked so hos-tile that I thought he was
in for an-other hom-icidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The in-stant,
how-ever, that I did so he be-came calm, and said apo-lo-get-ic-ally:--

"For-give me, Doc-tor; I for-got my-self. You do not need any help. I am so
wor-ried in my mind that I am apt to be ir-rit-able. If you only knew the
prob-lem I have to face, and that I am work-ing out, you would pity, and
tol-er-ate, and par-don me. Pray do not put me in a strait-waist-coat. I
want to think and I can-not think freely when my body is con-fined. I am
sure you will un-der-stand!" He had evid-ently self-con-trol; so when the
at-tend-ants came I told them not to mind, and they with-drew. Ren-field
watched them go; when the door was closed he said, with con-sid-er-able
dig-nity and sweet-ness:--

"Dr. Se-ward, you have been very con-sid-er-ate to-wards me. Be-lieve me that
I am very, very grate-ful to you!" I thought it well to leave him in this
mood, and so I came away. There is cer-tainly some-thing to pon-der over in
this man's state. Several points seem to make what the Amer-ican
in-ter-viewer calls "a story," if one could only get them in proper or-der.
Here they are:--

Will not men-tion "drink-ing."

Fears the thought of be-ing burdened with the "soul" of any-thing.

Has no dread of want-ing "life" in the fu-ture.

Despises the meaner forms of life al-to-gether, though he dreads be-ing
haunted by their souls.

Lo-gic-ally all these things point one way! he has as-sur-ance of some kind
that he will ac-quire some higher life. He dreads the con-sequence--the
bur-den of a soul. Then it is a hu-man life he looks to!

And the as-sur-ance--?

Mer-ci-ful God! the Count has been to him, and there is some new scheme of
ter-ror afoot!

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and told him my
sus-pi-cion. He grew very grave; and, after think-ing the mat-ter over for a
while asked me to take him to Ren-field. I did so. As we came to the door
we heard the lun-atic within singing gaily, as he used to do in the time
which now seems so long ago. When we entered we saw with amazement that
he had spread out his sugar as of old; the flies, leth-ar-gic with the
au-tumn, were be-gin-ning to buzz into the room. We tried to make him talk
of the sub-ject of our pre-vi-ous con-ver-sa-tion, but he would not at-tend. He
went on with his singing, just as though we had not been present. He had
got a scrap of pa-per and was fold-ing it into a note-book. We had to come
away as ig-nor-ant as we went in.

His is a curi-ous case in-deed; we must watch him to-night.


_Let-ter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalm-ing._

_"1 Octo-ber._

"My Lord,

"We are at all times only too happy to meet your wishes. We beg, with
re-gard to the de-sire of your Lord-ship, ex-pressed by Mr. Harker on your
be-half, to sup-ply the fol-low-ing in-form-a-tion con-cern-ing the sale and
pur-chase of No. 347, Pic-ca-dilly. The ori-ginal vendors are the ex-ecut-ors
of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suf-field. The pur-chaser is a for-eign
no-ble-man, Count de Ville, who ef-fected the pur-chase him-self pay-ing the
pur-chase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lord-ship will par-don
us us-ing so vul-gar an ex-pres-sion. Bey-ond this we know noth-ing whatever
of him.

"We are, my Lord,

"Your Lord-ship's humble ser-vants,

"MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_2 Octo-ber._--I placed a man in the cor-ridor last night, and told him to
make an ac-cur-ate note of any sound he might hear from Ren-field's room,
and gave him in-struc-tions that if there should be any-thing strange he
was to call me. After din-ner, when we had all gathered round the fire
in the study--Mrs. Harker hav-ing gone to bed--we dis-cussed the at-tempts
and dis-cov-er-ies of the day. Harker was the only one who had any res-ult,
and we are in great hopes that his clue may be an im-port-ant one.

Be-fore go-ing to bed I went round to the pa-tient's room and looked in
through the ob-ser-va-tion trap. He was sleep-ing soundly, and his heart
rose and fell with reg-u-lar res-pir-a-tion.

This morn-ing the man on duty re-por-ted to me that a little after mid-night
he was rest-less and kept say-ing his pray-ers some-what loudly. I asked him
if that was all; he replied that it was all he heard. There was
some-thing about his man-ner so sus-pi-cious that I asked him point blank if
he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but ad-mit-ted to hav-ing "dozed" for
a while. It is too bad that men can-not be trus-ted un-less they are
watched.

To-day Harker is out fol-low-ing up his clue, and Art and Quin-cey are
look-ing after horses. Godalm-ing thinks that it will be well to have
horses al-ways in read-i-ness, for when we get the in-form-a-tion which we
seek there will be no time to lose. We must ster-il-ise all the im-por-ted
earth between sun-rise and sun-set; we shall thus catch the Count at his
weak-est, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off to the
Brit-ish Mu-seum look-ing up some au-thor-it-ies on an-cient medi-cine. The old
phys-i-cians took ac-count of things which their fol-low-ers do not ac-cept,
and the Pro-fessor is search-ing for witch and de-mon cures which may be
use-ful to us later.

I some-times think we must be all mad and that we shall wake to san-ity in
strait-waist-coats.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--We have met again. We seem at last to be on the track, and our
work of to-mor-row may be the be-gin-ning of the end. I won-der if
Ren-field's quiet has any-thing to do with this. His moods have so
fol-lowed the do-ings of the Count, that the com-ing de-struc-tion of the
mon-ster may be car-ried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get
some hint as to what passed in his mind, between the time of my ar-gu-ment
with him to-day and his re-sump-tion of fly-catch-ing, it might af-ford us a
valu-able clue. He is now seem-ingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That
wild yell seemed to come from his room....

       *       *       *       *       *

The at-tend-ant came burst-ing into my room and told me that Ren-field had
some-how met with some ac-ci-dent. He had heard him yell; and when he went
to him found him ly-ing on his face on the floor, all covered with blood.
I must go at once....




CHAPTER XXI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_3 Octo-ber._--Let me put down with ex-act-ness all that happened, as well
as I can re-mem-ber it, since last I made an entry. Not a de-tail that I
can re-call must be for-got-ten; in all calmness I must pro-ceed.

When I came to Ren-field's room I found him ly-ing on the floor on his
left side in a glit-ter-ing pool of blood. When I went to move him, it
be-came at once ap-par-ent that he had re-ceived some ter-rible in-jur-ies;
there seemed none of that unity of pur-pose between the parts of the body
which marks even leth-ar-gic san-ity. As the face was ex-posed I could see
that it was hor-ribly bruised, as though it had been beaten against the
floor--in-deed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood
ori-gin-ated. The at-tend-ant who was kneel-ing be-side the body said to me as
we turned him over:--

"I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg and
the whole side of his face are para-lysed." How such a thing could have
happened puzzled the at-tend-ant bey-ond meas-ure. He seemed quite
be-wildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:--

"I can't un-der-stand the two things. He could mark his face like that by
beat-ing his own head on the floor. I saw a young wo-man do it once at the
Eversfield Asylum be-fore any-one could lay hands on her. And I sup-pose he
might have broke his neck by fall-ing out of bed, if he got in an awk-ward
kink. But for the life of me I can't ima-gine how the two things
oc-curred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his
face was like that be-fore the fall out of bed, there would be marks of
it." I said to him:--

"Go to Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to kindly come here at once. I want
him without an in-stant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few
minutes the Pro-fessor, in his dress-ing gown and slip-pers, ap-peared. When
he saw Ren-field on the ground, he looked keenly at him a mo-ment, and
then turned to me. I think he re-cog-nised my thought in my eyes, for he
said very quietly, mani-festly for the ears of the at-tend-ant:--

"Ah, a sad ac-ci-dent! He will need very care-ful watch-ing, and much
at-ten-tion. I shall stay with you my-self; but I shall first dress my-self.
If you will re-main I shall in a few minutes join you."

The pa-tient was now breath-ing ster-tor-ously and it was easy to see that
he had suffered some ter-rible in-jury. Van Helsing re-turned with
ex-traordin-ary celer-ity, bear-ing with him a sur-gical case. He had
evid-ently been think-ing and had his mind made up; for, al-most be-fore he
looked at the pa-tient, he whispered to me:--

"Send the at-tend-ant away. We must be alone with him when he be-comes
con-scious, after the op-er-a-tion." So I said:--

"I think that will do now, Sim-mons. We have done all that we can at
present. You had bet-ter go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing will op-er-ate.
Let me know in-stantly if there be any-thing un-usual any-where."

The man with-drew, and we went into a strict ex-am-in-a-tion of the pa-tient.
The wounds of the face was su-per-fi-cial; the real in-jury was a de-pressed
frac-ture of the skull, ex-tend-ing right up through the mo-tor area. The
Pro-fessor thought a mo-ment and said:--

"We must re-duce the pres-sure and get back to nor-mal con-di-tions, as far
as can be; the rapid-ity of the suf-fu-sion shows the ter-rible nature of
his in-jury. The whole mo-tor area seems af-fected. The suf-fu-sion of the
brain will in-crease quickly, so we must tre-phine at once or it may be
too late." As he was speak-ing there was a soft tap-ping at the door. I
went over and opened it and found in the cor-ridor without, Ar-thur and
Quin-cey in pa-ja-mas and slip-pers: the former spoke:--

"I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell him of an ac-ci-dent.
So I woke Quin-cey or rather called for him as he was not asleep. Th-ings
are mov-ing too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us
these times. I've been think-ing that to-mor-row night will not see things
as they have been. We'll have to look back--and for-ward a little more
than we have done. May we come in?" I nod-ded, and held the door open
till they had entered; then I closed it again. When Quin-cey saw the
at-ti-tude and state of the pa-tient, and noted the hor-rible pool on the
floor, he said softly:--

"My God! what has happened to him? Poor, poor devil!" I told him
briefly, and ad-ded that we ex-pec-ted he would re-cover con-scious-ness after
the op-er-a-tion--for a short time, at all events. He went at once and sat
down on the edge of the bed, with Godalm-ing be-side him; we all watched
in pa-tience.

"We shall wait," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best
spot for tre-phin-ing, so that we may most quickly and per-fectly re-move
the blood clot; for it is evid-ent that the hæ-mor-rhage is in-creas-ing."

The minutes dur-ing which we waited passed with fear-ful slow-ness. I had a
hor-rible sink-ing in my heart, and from Van Helsing's face I gathered
that he felt some fear or ap-pre-hen-sion as to what was to come. I dreaded
the words that Ren-field might speak. I was pos-it-ively afraid to think;
but the con-vic-tion of what was com-ing was on me, as I have read of men
who have heard the death-watch. The poor man's breath-ing came in
un-cer-tain gasps. Each in-stant he seemed as though he would open his eyes
and speak; but then would fol-low a pro-longed ster-tor-ous breath, and he
would re-lapse into a more fixed in-sens-ib-il-ity. Inured as I was to sick
beds and death, this sus-pense grew, and grew upon me. I could al-most
hear the beat-ing of my own heart; and the blood sur-ging through my
temples soun-ded like blows from a ham-mer. The si-lence fi-nally be-came
ag-on-ising. I looked at my com-pan-ions, one after an-other, and saw from
their flushed faces and damp brows that they were en-dur-ing equal
tor-ture. There was a nervous sus-pense over us all, as though over-head
some dread bell would peal out power-fully when we should least ex-pect
it.

At last there came a time when it was evid-ent that the pa-tient was
sink-ing fast; he might die at any mo-ment. I looked up at the Pro-fessor
and caught his eyes fixed on mine. His face was sternly set as he
spoke:--

"There is no time to lose. His words may be worth many lives; I have
been think-ing so, as I stood here. It may be there is a soul at stake!
We shall op-er-ate just above the ear."

Without an-other word he made the op-er-a-tion. For a few mo-ments the
breath-ing con-tin-ued to be ster-tor-ous. Then there came a breath so
pro-longed that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest.
Sud-denly his eyes opened, and be-came fixed in a wild, help-less stare.
This was con-tin-ued for a few mo-ments; then it softened into a glad
sur-prise, and from the lips came a sigh of re-lief. He moved
con-vuls-ively, and as he did so, said:--

"I'll be quiet, Doc-tor. Tell them to take off the strait-waist-coat. I
have had a ter-rible dream, and it has left me so weak that I can-not
move. What's wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts
dread-fully." He tried to turn his head; but even with the ef-fort his
eyes seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back. Then Van
Helsing said in a quiet grave tone:--

"Tell us your dream, Mr. Ren-field." As he heard the voice his face
brightened, through its mu-til-a-tion, and he said:--

"That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be here. Give me some
wa-ter, my lips are dry; and I shall try to tell you. I dreamed"--he
stopped and seemed faint-ing, I called quietly to Quin-cey--"The
brandy--it is in my study--quick!" He flew and re-turned with a glass,
the de-canter of brandy and a carafe of wa-ter. We moistened the parched
lips, and the pa-tient quickly re-vived. It seemed, how-ever, that his poor
in-jured brain had been work-ing in the in-ter-val, for, when he was quite
con-scious, he looked at me pier-cingly with an ag-on-ised con-fu-sion which I
shall never for-get, and said:--

"I must not de-ceive my-self; it was no dream, but all a grim real-ity."
Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the two
fig-ures sit-ting pa-tiently on the edge of the bed he went on:--

"If I were not sure already, I would know from them." For an in-stant his
eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but vol-un-tar-ily, as though he were
bring-ing all his fac-ulties to bear; when he opened them he said,
hur-riedly, and with more en-ergy than he had yet dis-played:--

"Quick, Doc-tor, quick. I am dy-ing! I feel that I have but a few minutes;
and then I must go back to death--or worse! Wet my lips with brandy
again. I have some-thing that I must say be-fore I die; or be-fore my poor
crushed brain dies any-how. Thank you! It was that night after you left
me, when I im-plored you to let me go away. I couldn't speak then, for I
felt my tongue was tied; but I was as sane then, ex-cept in that way, as
I am now. I was in an agony of des-pair for a long time after you left
me; it seemed hours. Then there came a sud-den peace to me. My brain
seemed to be-come cool again, and I real-ised where I was. I heard the
dogs bark be-hind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, Van
Helsing's eyes never blinked, but his hand came out and met mine and
gripped it hard. He did not, how-ever, be-tray him-self; he nod-ded slightly
and said: "Go on," in a low voice. Ren-field pro-ceeded:--

"He came up to the win-dow in the mist, as I had seen him of-ten be-fore;
but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a
man's when angry. He was laugh-ing with his red mouth; the sharp white
teeth glin-ted in the moon-light when he turned to look back over the belt
of trees, to where the dogs were bark-ing. I wouldn't ask him to come in
at first, though I knew he wanted to--just as he had wanted all along.
Then he began prom-ising me things--not in words but by do-ing them." He
was in-ter-rup-ted by a word from the Pro-fessor:--

"How?"

"By mak-ing them hap-pen; just as he used to send in the flies when the
sun was shin-ing. Great big fat ones with steel and sap-phire on their
wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their
backs." Van Helsing nod-ded to him as he whispered to me un-con-sciously:--

"The _Acheron-tia Aitet-r-o-pos of the Sphinges_--what you call the
'Death's-head Moth'?" The pa-tient went on without stop-ping.

"Then he began to whis-per: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hun-dreds, thou-sands,
mil-lions of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats
too. All lives! all red blood, with years of life in it; and not merely
buzz-ing flies!' I laughed at him, for I wanted to see what he could do.
Then the dogs howled, away bey-ond the dark trees in His house. He
beckoned me to the win-dow. I got up and looked out, and He raised his
hands, and seemed to call out without us-ing any words. A dark mass
spread over the grass, com-ing on like the shape of a flame of fire; and
then He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could see that there
were thou-sands of rats with their eyes blaz-ing red--like His, only
smal-ler. He held up his hand, and they all stopped; and I thought he
seemed to be say-ing: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more
and greater, through count-less ages, if you will fall down and wor-ship
me!' And then a red cloud, like the col-our of blood, seemed to close
over my eyes; and be-fore I knew what I was do-ing, I found my-self open-ing
the sash and say-ing to Him: 'Come in, Lord and Master!' The rats were
all gone, but He slid into the room through the sash, though it was only
open an inch wide--just as the Moon her-self has of-ten come in through
the ti-ni-est crack and has stood be-fore me in all her size and
splend-our."

His voice was weaker, so I moistened his lips with the brandy again, and
he con-tin-ued; but it seemed as though his memory had gone on work-ing in
the in-ter-val for his story was fur-ther ad-vanced. I was about to call him
back to the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me: "Let him go on. Do
not in-ter-rupt him; he can-not go back, and maybe could not pro-ceed at all
if once he lost the thread of his thought." He pro-ceeded:--

"All day I waited to hear from him, but he did not send me any-thing, not
even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him.
When he slid in through the win-dow, though it was shut, and did not even
knock, I got mad with him. He sneered at me, and his white face looked
out of the mist with his red eyes gleam-ing, and he went on as though he
owned the whole place, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same
as he went by me. I couldn't hold him. I thought that, some-how, Mrs.
Harker had come into the room."

The two men sit-ting on the bed stood up and came over, stand-ing be-hind
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear bet-ter.
They were both si-lent, but the Pro-fessor star-ted and quivered; his face,
how-ever, grew grim-mer and sterner still. Ren-field went on without
no-ti-cing:--

"When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this af-ter-noon she wasn't the same;
it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved,
but no one said a word; he went on:--

"I didn't know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look the
same. I don't care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood
in them, and hers had all seemed to have run out. I didn't think of it
at the time; but when she went away I began to think, and it made me mad
to know that He had been tak-ing the life out of her." I could feel that
the rest quivered, as I did, but we re-mained oth-er-wise still. "So when
He came to-night I was ready for Him. I saw the mist steal-ing in, and I
grabbed it tight. I had heard that mad-men have un-nat-ural strength; and
as I knew I was a mad-man--at times any-how--I re-solved to use my power.
Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out of the mist to struggle
with me. I held tight; and I thought I was go-ing to win, for I didn't
mean Him to take any more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned
into me, and my strength be-came like wa-ter. He slipped through it, and
when I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There
was a red cloud be-fore me, and a noise like thun-der, and the mist seemed
to steal away un-der the door." His voice was be-com-ing fainter and his
breath more ster-tor-ous. Van Helsing stood up in-stinct-ively.

"We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we know his pur-pose.
It may not be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were the other
night, but lose no time; there is not an in-stant to spare." There was no
need to put our fear, nay our con-vic-tion, into words--we shared them in
com-mon. We all hur-ried and took from our rooms the same things that we
had when we entered the Count's house. The Pro-fessor had his ready, and
as we met in the cor-ridor he poin-ted to them sig-ni-fic-antly as he said:--

"They never leave me; and they shall not till this un-happy busi-ness is
over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no com-mon en-emy that we deal with.
Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina should suf-fer!" He stopped; his
voice was break-ing, and I do not know if rage or ter-ror pre-dom-in-ated in
my own heart.

Out-side the Hark-ers' door we paused. Art and Quin-cey held back, and the
lat-ter said:--

"Should we dis-turb her?"

"We must," said Van Helsing grimly. "If the door be locked, I shall
break it in."

"May it not frighten her ter-ribly? It is un-usual to break into a lady's
room!"

Van Helsing said sol-emnly, "You are al-ways right; but this is life and
death. All cham-bers are alike to the doc-tor; and even were they not they
are all as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the handle, if
the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you
too, my friends. Now!"

He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not yield. We threw
ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and we al-most fell
head-long into the room. The Pro-fessor did ac-tu-ally fall, and I saw
across him as he gathered him-self up from hands and knees. What I saw
ap-palled me. I felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my neck,
and my heart seemed to stand still.

The moon-light was so bright that through the thick yel-low blind the room
was light enough to see. On the bed be-side the win-dow lay Jonathan
Harker, his face flushed and breath-ing heav-ily as though in a stupor.
Kneel-ing on the near edge of the bed fa-cing out-wards was the white-clad
fig-ure of his wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black.
His face was turned from us, but the in-stant we saw we all re-cog-nised
the Count--in every way, even to the scar on his fore-head. With his left
hand he held both Mrs. Harker's hands, keep-ing them away with her arms
at full ten-sion; his right hand gripped her by the back of the neck,
for-cing her face down on his bosom. Her white night-dress was smeared
with blood, and a thin stream trickled down the man's bare breast which
was shown by his torn-open dress. The at-ti-tude of the two had a ter-rible
re-semb-lance to a child for-cing a kit-ten's nose into a sau-cer of milk to
com-pel it to drink. As we burst into the room, the Count turned his
face, and the hellish look that I had heard de-scribed seemed to leap
into it. His eyes flamed red with dev-il-ish pas-sion; the great nos-trils
of the white aquil-ine nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the
white sharp teeth, be-hind the full lips of the blood-drip-ping mouth,
champed to-gether like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw
his vic-tim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned
and sprang at us. But by this time the Pro-fessor had gained his feet,
and was hold-ing to-wards him the en-vel-ope which con-tained the Sacred
Wafer. The Count sud-denly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done out-side
the tomb, and cowered back. Fur-ther and fur-ther back he cowered, as we,
lift-ing our cru-ci-fixes, ad-vanced. The moon-light sud-denly failed, as a
great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the gas-light sprang up
un-der Quin-cey's match, we saw noth-ing but a faint va-pour. This, as we
looked, trailed un-der the door, which with the re-coil from its burst-ing
open, had swung back to its old po-s-i-tion. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved
for-ward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with
it had given a scream so wild, so ear-pier-cing, so des-pair-ing that it
seems to me now that it will ring in my ears till my dy-ing day. For a
few seconds she lay in her help-less at-ti-tude and dis-ar-ray. Her face was
ghastly, with a pal-lor which was ac-cen-tu-ated by the blood which smeared
her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of
blood; her eyes were mad with ter-ror. Then she put be-fore her face her
poor crushed hands, which bore on their white-ness the red mark of the
Count's ter-rible grip, and from be-hind them came a low des-ol-ate wail
which made the ter-rible scream seem only the quick ex-pres-sion of an
end-less grief. Van Helsing stepped for-ward and drew the cov-er-let gently
over her body, whilst Art, after look-ing at her face for an in-stant
des-pair-ingly, ran out of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me:--

"Jonathan is in a stupor such as we know the Vam-pire can pro-duce. We can
do noth-ing with poor Madam Mina for a few mo-ments till she re-cov-ers
her-self; I must wake him!" He dipped the end of a towel in cold wa-ter
and with it began to flick him on the face, his wife all the while
hold-ing her face between her hands and sob-bing in a way that was
heart-break-ing to hear. I raised the blind, and looked out of the
win-dow. There was much moon-shine; and as I looked I could see Quin-cey
Mor-ris run across the lawn and hide him-self in the shadow of a great
yew-tree. It puzzled me to think why he was do-ing this; but at the
in-stant I heard Harker's quick ex-clam-a-tion as he woke to par-tial
con-scious-ness, and turned to the bed. On his face, as there might well
be, was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a few seconds, and
then full con-scious-ness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he
star-ted up. His wife was aroused by the quick move-ment, and turned to
him with her arms stretched out, as though to em-brace him; in-stantly,
how-ever, she drew them in again, and put-ting her el-bows to-gether, held
her hands be-fore her face, and shuddered till the bed be-neath her shook.

"In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Se-ward, Dr.
Van Helsing, what is it? What has happened? What is wrong? Mina, dear,
what is it? What does that blood mean? My God, my God! has it come to
this!" and, rais-ing him-self to his knees, he beat his hands wildly
to-gether. "Good God help us! help her! oh, help her!" With a quick
move-ment he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the
man in him awake at the need for in-stant ex-er-tion. "What has happened?
Tell me all about it!" he cried without paus-ing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you
love Mina, I know. Oh, do some-thing to save her. It can-not have gone too
far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!" His wife, through her ter-ror
and hor-ror and dis-tress, saw some sure danger to him: in-stantly
for-get-ting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried out:--

"No! no! Jonathan, you must not leave me. I have suffered enough
to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harm-ing you. You must stay
with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over you!" Her
ex-pres-sion be-came frantic as she spoke; and, he yield-ing to her, she
pulled him down sit-ting on the bed side, and clung to him fiercely.

Van Helsing and I tried to calm them both. The Pro-fessor held up his
little golden cru-ci-fix, and said with won-der-ful calmness:--

"Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you no
foul thing can ap-proach. You are safe for to-night; and we must be calm
and take coun-sel to-gether." She shuddered and was si-lent, hold-ing down
her head on her hus-band's breast. When she raised it, his white
night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where
the thin open wound in her neck had sent forth drops. The in-stant she
saw it she drew back, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst chok-ing
sobs:--

"Un-clean, un-clean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it
should be that it is I who am now his worst en-emy, and whom he may have
most cause to fear." To this he spoke out res-ol-utely:--

"Non-sense, Mina. It is a shame to me to hear such a word. I would not
hear it of you; and I shall not hear it from you. May God judge me by my
deserts, and pun-ish me with more bit-ter suf-fer-ing than even this hour,
if by any act or will of mine any-thing ever come between us!" He put out
his arms and fol-ded her to his breast; and for a while she lay there
sob-bing. He looked at us over her bowed head, with eyes that blinked
damply above his quiv-er-ing nos-trils; his mouth was set as steel. After a
while her sobs be-came less fre-quent and more faint, and then he said to
me, speak-ing with a stud-ied calmness which I felt tried his nervous
power to the ut-most:--

"And now, Dr. Se-ward, tell me all about it. Too well I know the broad
fact; tell me all that has been." I told him ex-actly what had happened,
and he listened with seem-ing im-pass-ive-ness; but his nos-trils twitched
and his eyes blazed as I told how the ruth-less hands of the Count had
held his wife in that ter-rible and hor-rid po-s-i-tion, with her mouth to
the open wound in his breast. It in-ter-ested me, even at that mo-ment, to
see, that, whilst the face of white set pas-sion worked con-vuls-ively over
the bowed head, the hands ten-derly and lov-ingly stroked the ruffled
hair. Just as I had fin-ished, Quin-cey and Godalm-ing knocked at the door.
They entered in obed-i-ence to our sum-mons. Van Helsing looked at me
ques-tion-ingly. I un-der-stood him to mean if we were to take ad-vant-age of
their com-ing to di-vert if pos-sible the thoughts of the un-happy hus-band
and wife from each other and from them-selves; so on nod-ding ac-qui-es-cence
to him he asked them what they had seen or done. To which Lord Godalm-ing
answered:--

"I could not see him any-where in the pas-sage, or in any of our rooms. I
looked in the study but, though he had been there, he had gone. He had,
how-ever----" He stopped sud-denly, look-ing at the poor droop-ing fig-ure on
the bed. Van Helsing said gravely:--

"Go on, friend Ar-thur. We want here no more con-ceal-ments. Our hope now
is in know-ing all. Tell freely!" So Art went on:--

"He had been there, and though it could only have been for a few
seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the ma-nu-script had been
burned, and the blue flames were flick-er-ing amongst the white ashes; the
cyl-in-ders of your phono-graph too were thrown on the fire, and the wax
had helped the flames." Here I in-ter-rup-ted. "Thank God there is the
other copy in the safe!" His face lit for a mo-ment, but fell again as he
went on: "I ran down-stairs then, but could see no sign of him. I looked
into Ren-field's room; but there was no trace there ex-cept----!" Again he
paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and
moisten-ing his lips with his tongue, ad-ded: "ex-cept that the poor fel-low
is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, look-ing from one to the other of
us she said sol-emnly:--

"God's will be done!" I could not but feel that Art was keep-ing back
some-thing; but, as I took it that it was with a pur-pose, I said noth-ing.
Van Helsing turned to Mor-ris and asked:--

"And you, friend Quin-cey, have you any to tell?"

"A little," he answered. "It may be much even-tu-ally, but at present I
can't say. I thought it well to know if pos-sible where the Count would
go when he left the house. I did not see him; but I saw a bat rise from
Ren-field's win-dow, and flap west-ward. I ex-pec-ted to see him in some
shape go back to Car-fax; but he evid-ently sought some other lair. He
will not be back to-night; for the sky is red-den-ing in the east, and the
dawn is close. We must work to-mor-row!"

He said the lat-ter words through his shut teeth. For a space of per-haps
a couple of minutes there was si-lence, and I could fancy that I could
hear the sound of our hearts beat-ing; then Van Helsing said, pla-cing his
hand very ten-derly on Mrs. Harker's head:--

"And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina--tell us ex-actly what
happened. God knows that I do not want that you be pained; but it is
need that we know all. For now more than ever has all work to be done
quick and sharp, and in deadly earn-est. The day is close to us that must
end all, if it may be so; and now is the chance that we may live and
learn."

The poor, dear lady shivered, and I could see the ten-sion of her nerves
as she clasped her hus-band closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. Then she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to Van Helsing who took it in his, and, after stoop-ing and
kiss-ing it rev-er-ently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in that
of her hus-band, who held his other arm thrown round her pro-tect-ingly.
After a pause in which she was evid-ently or-der-ing her thoughts, she
began:--

"I took the sleep-ing draught which you had so kindly given me, but for a
long time it did not act. I seemed to be-come more wake-ful, and myri-ads
of hor-rible fan-cies began to crowd in upon my mind--all of them
con-nec-ted with death, and vam-pires; with blood, and pain, and trouble."
Her hus-band in-vol-un-tar-ily groaned as she turned to him and said
lov-ingly: "Do not fret, dear. You must be brave and strong, and help me
through the hor-rible task. If you only knew what an ef-fort it is to me
to tell of this fear-ful thing at all, you would un-der-stand how much I
need your help. Well, I saw I must try to help the medi-cine to its work
with my will, if it was to do me any good, so I res-ol-utely set my-self to
sleep. Sure enough sleep must soon have come to me, for I re-mem-ber no
more. Jonathan com-ing in had not waked me, for he lay by my side when
next I re-mem-ber. There was in the room the same thin white mist that I
had be-fore no-ticed. But I for-get now if you know of this; you will find
it in my di-ary which I shall show you later. I felt the same vague
ter-ror which had come to me be-fore and the same sense of some pres-ence.
I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he slept so soundly that it
seemed as if it was he who had taken the sleep-ing draught, and not I. I
tried, but I could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I
looked around ter-ri-fied. Then in-deed, my heart sank within me: be-side
the bed, as if he had stepped out of the mist--or rather as if the mist
had turned into his fig-ure, for it had en-tirely dis-ap-peared--stood a
tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the de-scrip-tion of
the oth-ers. The waxen face; the high aquil-ine nose, on which the light
fell in a thin white line; the par-ted red lips, with the sharp white
teeth show-ing between; and the red eyes that I had seemed to see in the
sun-set on the win-dows of St. Mary's Church at Whitby. I knew, too, the
red scar on his fore-head where Jonathan had struck him. For an in-stant
my heart stood still, and I would have screamed out, only that I was
para-lysed. In the pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cut-ting whis-per,
point-ing as he spoke to Jonathan:--

"'Si-lence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash his brains out
be-fore your very eyes.' I was ap-palled and was too be-wildered to do or
say any-thing. With a mock-ing smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder
and, hold-ing me tight, bared my throat with the other, say-ing as he did
so, 'First, a little re-fresh-ment to re-ward my ex-er-tions. You may as well
be quiet; it is not the first time, or the second, that your veins have
ap-peased my thirst!' I was be-wildered, and, strangely enough, I did not
want to hinder him. I sup-pose it is a part of the hor-rible curse that
such is, when his touch is on his vic-tim. And oh, my God, my God, pity
me! He placed his reek-ing lips upon my throat!" Her hus-band groaned
again. She clasped his hand harder, and looked at him pity-ingly, as if
he were the in-jured one, and went on:--

"I felt my strength fad-ing away, and I was in a half swoon. How long
this hor-rible thing las-ted I know not; but it seemed that a long time
must have passed be-fore he took his foul, aw-ful, sneer-ing mouth away. I
saw it drip with the fresh blood!" The re-mem-brance seemed for a while to
over-power her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
hus-band's sus-tain-ing arm. With a great ef-fort she re-covered her-self and
went on:--

"Then he spoke to me mock-ingly, 'And so you, like the oth-ers, would play
your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and
frus-trate me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part already,
and will know in full be-fore long, what it is to cross my path. They
should have kept their en-er-gies for use closer to home. Whilst they
played wits against me--against me who com-manded na-tions, and in-trigued
for them, and fought for them, hun-dreds of years be-fore they were
born--I was coun-ter-min-ing them. And you, their best be-loved one, are now
to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my boun-ti-ful
wine-press for a while; and shall be later on my com-pan-ion and my
helper. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them but shall
min-is-ter to your needs. But as yet you are to be pun-ished for what you
have done. You have aided in thwart-ing me; now you shall come to my
call. When my brain says "Come!" to you, you shall cross land or sea to
do my bid-ding; and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his
shirt, and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When
the blood began to spurt out, he took my hands in one of his, hold-ing
them tight, and with the other seized my neck and pressed my mouth to
the wound, so that I must either suf-foc-ate or swal-low some of the---- Oh
my God! my God! what have I done? What have I done to de-serve such a
fate, I who have tried to walk in meek-ness and right-eous-ness all my
days. God pity me! Look down on a poor soul in worse than mor-tal peril;
and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!" Then she began to rub her
lips as though to cleanse them from pol-lu-tion.

As she was telling her ter-rible story, the east-ern sky began to quicken,
and everything be-came more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet;
but over his face, as the aw-ful nar-rat-ive went on, came a grey look
which deepened and deepened in the morn-ing light, till when the first
red streak of the com-ing dawn shot up, the flesh stood darkly out
against the whiten-ing hair.

We have ar-ranged that one of us is to stay within call of the un-happy
pair till we can meet to-gether and ar-range about tak-ing ac-tion.

Of this I am sure: the sun rises to-day on no more miser-able house in
all the great round of its daily course.




CHAPTER XXII

JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL


_3 Octo-ber._--As I must do some-thing or go mad, I write this di-ary. It
is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour and
take some-thing to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Se-ward are agreed
that if we do not eat we can-not work our best. Our best will be, God
knows, re-quired to-day. I must keep writ-ing at every chance, for I dare
not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; per-haps at the end
the little things may teach us most. The teach-ing, big or little, could
not have landed Mina or me any-where worse than we are to-day. However,
we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just now, with the tears
run-ning down her dear cheeks, that it is in trouble and trial that our
faith is tested--that we must keep on trust-ing; and that God will aid us
up to the end. The end! oh my God! what end?... To work! To work!

When Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Se-ward had come back from see-ing poor
Ren-field, we went gravely into what was to be done. First, Dr. Se-ward
told us that when he and Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to the room be-low
they had found Ren-field ly-ing on the floor, all in a heap. His face was
all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were broken.

Dr. Se-ward asked the at-tend-ant who was on duty in the pas-sage if he had
heard any-thing. He said that he had been sit-ting down--he con-fessed to
half doz-ing--when he heard loud voices in the room, and then Ren-field
had called out loudly sev-eral times, "God! God! God!" after that there
was a sound of fall-ing, and when he entered the room he found him ly-ing
on the floor, face down, just as the doc-tors had seen him. Van Helsing
asked if he had heard "voices" or "a voice," and he said he could not
say; that at first it had seemed to him as if there were two, but as
there was no one in the room it could have been only one. He could swear
to it, if re-quired, that the word "God" was spoken by the pa-tient. Dr.
Se-ward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go into
the mat-ter; the ques-tion of an in-quest had to be con-sidered, and it
would never do to put for-ward the truth, as no one would be-lieve it. As
it was, he thought that on the at-tend-ant's evid-ence he could give a
cer-ti-fic-ate of death by mis-ad-ven-ture in fall-ing from bed. In case the
cor-oner should de-mand it, there would be a formal in-quest, ne-ces-sar-ily
to the same res-ult.

When the ques-tion began to be dis-cussed as to what should be our next
step, the very first thing we de-cided was that Mina should be in full
con-fid-ence; that noth-ing of any sort--no mat-ter how pain-ful--should be
kept from her. She her-self agreed as to its wis-dom, and it was pi-ti-ful
to see her so brave and yet so sor-row-ful, and in such a depth of
des-pair. "There must be no con-ceal-ment," she said, "Alas! we have had
too much already. And be-sides there is noth-ing in all the world that can
give me more pain than I have already en-dured--than I suf-fer now!
Whatever may hap-pen, it must be of new hope or of new cour-age to me!"
Van Helsing was look-ing at her fix-edly as she spoke, and said, sud-denly
but quietly:--

"But dear Madam Mina, are you not afraid; not for your-self, but for
oth-ers from your-self, after what has happened?" Her face grew set in its
lines, but her eyes shone with the de-vo-tion of a mar-tyr as she
answered:--

"Ah no! for my mind is made up!"

"To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were all very still; for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. Her an-swer
came with dir-ect sim-pli-city, as though she were simply stat-ing a fact:--

"Be-cause if I find in my-self--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of
harm to any that I love, I shall die!"

"You would not kill your-self?" he asked, hoarsely.

"I would; if there were no friend who loved me, who would save me such a
pain, and so des-per-ate an ef-fort!" She looked at him mean-ingly as she
spoke. He was sit-ting down; but now he rose and came close to her and
put his hand on her head as he said sol-emnly:

"My child, there is such an one if it were for your good. For my-self I
could hold it in my ac-count with God to find such an eu-thanasia for you,
even at this mo-ment if it were best. Nay, were it safe! But my
child----" For a mo-ment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his
throat; he gulped it down and went on:--

"There are here some who would stand between you and death. You must not
die. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own. Until
the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not
die; for if he is still with the quick Un-Dead, your death would make
you even as he is. No, you must live! You must struggle and strive to
live, though death would seem a boon un-speak-able. You must fight Death
him-self, though he come to you in pain or in joy; by the day, or the
night; in safety or in peril! On your liv-ing soul I charge you that you
do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The
poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have seen a
quick-sand shake and shiver at the in-com-ing of the tide. We were all
si-lent; we could do noth-ing. At length she grew more calm and turn-ing to
him said, sweetly, but oh! so sor-row-fully, as she held out her hand:--

"I prom-ise you, my dear friend, that if God will let me live, I shall
strive to do so; till, if it may be in His good time, this hor-ror may
have passed away from me." She was so good and brave that we all felt
that our hearts were strengthened to work and en-dure for her, and we
began to dis-cuss what we were to do. I told her that she was to have all
the pa-pers in the safe, and all the pa-pers or di-ar-ies and phono-graphs we
might here-after use; and was to keep the re-cord as she had done be-fore.
She was pleased with the pro-spect of any-thing to do--if "pleased" could
be used in con-nec-tion with so grim an in-terest.

As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of every-one else, and was
pre-pared with an ex-act or-der-ing of our work.

"It is per-haps well," he said, "that at our meet-ing after our visit to
Car-fax we de-cided not to do any-thing with the earth-boxes that lay
there. Had we done so, the Count must have guessed our pur-pose, and
would doubt-less have taken meas-ures in ad-vance to frus-trate such an
ef-fort with re-gard to the oth-ers; but now he does not know our
in-ten-tions. Nay, more, in all prob-ab-il-ity, he does not know that such a
power ex-ists to us as can ster-il-ise his lairs, so that he can-not use
them as of old. We are now so much fur-ther ad-vanced in our know-ledge as
to their dis-pos-i-tion that, when we have ex-amined the house in
Pic-ca-dilly, we may track the very last of them. To-day, then, is ours;
and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose on our sor-row this morn-ing
guards us in its course. Until it sets to-night, that mon-ster must
re-tain whatever form he now has. He is con-fined within the lim-it-a-tions
of his earthly en-vel-ope. He can-not melt into thin air nor dis-ap-pear
through cracks or chinks or cran-nies. If he go through a door-way, he
must open the door like a mor-tal. And so we have this day to hunt out
all his lairs and ster-il-ise them. So we shall, if we have not yet catch
him and des-troy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catch-ing
and the des-troy-ing shall be, in time, sure." Here I star-ted up for I
could not con-tain my-self at the thought that the minutes and seconds so
pre-ciously laden with Mina's life and hap-pi-ness were fly-ing from us,
since whilst we talked ac-tion was im-possible. But Van Helsing held up
his hand warn-ingly. "Nay, friend Jonathan," he said, "in this, the
quick-est way home is the longest way, so your pro-verb say. We shall all
act and act with des-per-ate quick, when the time has come. But think, in
all prob-able the key of the situ-ation is in that house in Pic-ca-dilly.
The Count may have many houses which he has bought. Of them he will have
deeds of pur-chase, keys and other things. He will have pa-per that he
write on; he will have his book of cheques. There are many be-long-ings
that he must have some-where; why not in this place so cent-ral, so quiet,
where he come and go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the
very vast of the traffic there is none to no-tice. We shall go there and
search that house; and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our
friend Ar-thur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we
run down our old fox--so? is it not?"

"Then let us come at once," I cried, "we are wast-ing the pre-cious,
pre-cious time!" The Pro-fessor did not move, but simply said:--

"And how are we to get into that house in Pic-ca-dilly?"

"Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be."

"And your po-lice; where will they be, and what will they say?"

I was staggered; but I knew that if he wished to delay he had a good
reason for it. So I said, as quietly as I could:--

"Don't wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what tor-ture I am
in."

"Ah, my child, that I do; and in-deed there is no wish of me to add to
your an-guish. But just think, what can we do, un-til all the world be at
move-ment. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it
seems to me that the simplest way is the best of all. Now we wish to get
into the house, but we have no key; is it not so?" I nod-ded.

"Now sup-pose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and could
not still get it; and think there was to you no con-science of the
house-breaker, what would you do?"

"I should get a re-spect-able lock-smith, and set him to work to pick the
lock for me."

"And your po-lice, they would in-ter-fere, would they not?"

"Oh, no! not if they knew the man was prop-erly em-ployed."

"Then," he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, "all that is in doubt is
the con-science of the em-ployer, and the be-lief of your po-lice-men as to
whether or no that em-ployer has a good con-science or a bad one. Your
po-lice must in-deed be zeal-ous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in read-ing
the heart, that they trouble them-selves in such mat-ter. No, no, my
friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hun-dred empty house in this
your Lon-don, or of any city in the world; and if you do it as such
things are rightly done, and at the time such things are rightly done,
no one will in-ter-fere. I have read of a gen-tle-man who owned a so fine
house in Lon-don, and when he went for months of sum-mer to Switzer-land
and lock up his house, some burg-lar came and broke win-dow at back and
got in. Then he went and made open the shut-ters in front and walk out
and in through the door, be-fore the very eyes of the po-lice. Then he
have an auc-tion in that house, and ad-vert-ise it, and put up big no-tice;
and when the day come he sell off by a great auc-tion-eer all the goods of
that other man who own them. Then he go to a builder, and he sell him
that house, mak-ing an agree-ment that he pull it down and take all away
within a cer-tain time. And your po-lice and other au-thor-ity help him all
they can. And when that owner come back from his hol-i-day in Switzer-land
he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This was all done
_en règle_; and in our work we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not go
so early that the po-lice-men who have then little to think of, shall deem
it strange; but we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are many
about, and such things would be done were we in-deed own-ers of the
house."

I could not but see how right he was and the ter-rible des-pair of Mina's
face be-came re-laxed a thought; there was hope in such good coun-sel. Van
Helsing went on:--

"When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate some of
us can re-main there whilst the rest find the other places where there be
more earth-boxes--at Ber-mond-sey and Mile End."

Lord Godalm-ing stood up. "I can be of some use here," he said. "I shall
wire to my people to have horses and car-riages where they will be most
con-veni-ent."

"Look here, old fel-low," said Mor-ris, "it is a cap-ital idea to have all
ready in case we want to go horse-back-ing; but don't you think that one
of your snappy car-riages with its her-aldic ad-orn-ments in a by-way of
Wal-worth or Mile End would at-tract too much at-ten-tion for our pur-poses?
It seems to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and
even leave them some-where near the neigh-bour-hood we are go-ing to."

"Friend Quin-cey is right!" said the Pro-fessor. "His head is what you
call in plane with the ho-ri-zon. It is a dif-fi-cult thing that we go to
do, and we do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may."

Mina took a grow-ing in-terest in everything and I was re-joiced to see
that the ex-i-gency of af-fairs was help-ing her to for-get for a time the
ter-rible ex-per-i-ence of the night. She was very, very pale--al-most
ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, show-ing her teeth in
some-what of prom-in-ence. I did not men-tion this last, lest it should give
her need-less pain; but it made my blood run cold in my veins to think of
what had oc-curred with poor Lucy when the Count had sucked her blood. As
yet there was no sign of the teeth grow-ing sharper; but the time as yet
was short, and there was time for fear.

When we came to the dis-cus-sion of the se-quence of our ef-forts and of the
dis-pos-i-tion of our forces, there were new sources of doubt. It was
fi-nally agreed that be-fore start-ing for Pic-ca-dilly we should des-troy the
Count's lair close at hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we
should thus be still ahead of him in our work of de-struc-tion; and his
pres-ence in his purely ma-ter-ial shape, and at his weak-est, might give us
some new clue.

As to the dis-posal of forces, it was sug-ges-ted by the Pro-fessor that,
after our visit to Car-fax, we should all enter the house in Pic-ca-dilly;
that the two doc-tors and I should re-main there, whilst Lord Godalm-ing
and Quin-cey found the lairs at Wal-worth and Mile End and des-troyed them.
It was pos-sible, if not likely, the Pro-fessor urged, that the Count
might ap-pear in Pic-ca-dilly dur-ing the day, and that if so we might be
able to cope with him then and there. At any rate, we might be able to
fol-low him in force. To this plan I strenu-ously ob-jec-ted, and so far as
my go-ing was con-cerned, for I said that I in-ten-ded to stay and pro-tect
Mina, I thought that my mind was made up on the sub-ject; but Mina would
not listen to my ob-jec-tion. She said that there might be some law mat-ter
in which I could be use-ful; that amongst the Count's pa-pers might be
some clue which I could un-der-stand out of my ex-per-i-ence in Transylvania;
and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster was re-quired to
cope with the Count's ex-traordin-ary power. I had to give in, for Mina's
res-ol-u-tion was fixed; she said that it was the last hope for _her_ that
we should all work to-gether. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear.
Th-ings have been as bad as they can be; and whatever may hap-pen must
have in it some ele-ment of hope or com-fort. Go, my hus-band! God can, if
He wishes it, guard me as well alone as with any one present." So I
star-ted up cry-ing out: "Then in God's name let us come at once, for we
are los-ing time. The Count may come to Pic-ca-dilly earlier than we
think."

"Not so!" said Van Helsing, hold-ing up his hand.

"But why?" I asked.

"Do you for-get," he said, with ac-tu-ally a smile, "that last night he
ban-queted heav-ily, and will sleep late?"

Did I for-get! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us ever for-get that
ter-rible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her brave coun-ten-ance; but
the pain over-mastered her and she put her hands be-fore her face, and
shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had not in-ten-ded to re-call her
fright-ful ex-per-i-ence. He had simply lost sight of her and her part in
the af-fair in his in-tel-lec-tual ef-fort. When it struck him what he said,
he was hor-ri-fied at his thought-less-ness and tried to com-fort her. "Oh,
Madam Mina," he said, "dear, dear Madam Mina, alas! that I of all who so
rev-er-ence you should have said any-thing so for-get-ful. These stu-pid old
lips of mine and this stu-pid old head do not de-serve so; but you will
for-get it, will you not?" He bent low be-side her as he spoke; she took
his hand, and look-ing at him through her tears, said hoarsely:--

"No, I shall not for-get, for it is well that I re-mem-ber; and with it I
have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that I take it all
to-gether. Now, you must all be go-ing soon. Break-fast is ready, and we
must all eat that we may be strong."

Break-fast was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be cheer-ful and
en-cour-age each other, and Mina was the bright-est and most cheer-ful of
us. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up and said:--

"Now, my dear friends, we go forth to our ter-rible en-ter-prise. Are we
all armed, as we were on that night when first we vis-ited our en-emy's
lair; armed against ghostly as well as car-nal at-tack?" We all as-sured
him. "Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in any case _quite_ safe
here un-til the sun-set; and be-fore then we shall re-turn--if---- We shall
re-turn! But be-fore we go let me see you armed against per-sonal at-tack. I
have my-self, since you came down, pre-pared your cham-ber by the pla-cing
of things of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me guard
your-self. On your fore-head I touch this piece of Sacred Wafer in the
name of the Father, the Son, and----"

There was a fear-ful scream which al-most froze our hearts to hear. As he
had placed the Wafer on Mina's fore-head, it had seared it--had burned
into the flesh as though it had been a piece of white-hot metal. My poor
darling's brain had told her the sig-ni-fic-ance of the fact as quickly as
her nerves re-ceived the pain of it; and the two so over-whelmed her that
her over-wrought nature had its voice in that dread-ful scream. But the
words to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceased
to ring on the air when there came the re-ac-tion, and she sank on her
knees on the floor in an agony of abase-ment. Pulling her beau-ti-ful hair
over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:--

"Un-clean! Un-clean! Even the Almighty shuns my pol-luted flesh! I must
bear this mark of shame upon my fore-head un-til the Judg-ment Day." They
all paused. I had thrown my-self be-side her in an agony of help-less
grief, and put-ting my arms around held her tight. For a few minutes our
sor-row-ful hearts beat to-gether, whilst the friends around us turned away
their eyes that ran tears si-lently. Then Van Helsing turned and said
gravely; so gravely that I could not help feel-ing that he was in some
way in-spired, and was stat-ing things out-side him-self:--

"It may be that you may have to bear that mark till God him-self see fit,
as He most surely shall, on the Judg-ment Day, to re-dress all wrongs of
the earth and of His chil-dren that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam
Mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that
red scar, the sign of God's know-ledge of what has been, shall pass away,
and leave your fore-head as pure as the heart we know. For so surely as
we live, that scar shall pass away when God sees right to lift the
bur-den that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our Cross, as His Son did
in obed-i-ence to His Will. It may be that we are chosen in-stru-ments of
His good pleas-ure, and that we as-cend to His bid-ding as that other
through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and
fears, and all that makes the dif-fer-ence between God and man."

There was hope in his words, and com-fort; and they made for resig-na-tion.
Mina and I both felt so, and sim-ul-tan-eously we each took one of the old
man's hands and bent over and kissed it. Then without a word we all
knelt down to-gether, and, all hold-ing hands, swore to be true to each
other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sor-row from the
head of her whom, each in his own way, we loved; and we prayed for help
and guid-ance in the ter-rible task which lay be-fore us.

It was then time to start. So I said farewell to Mina, a part-ing which
neither of us shall for-get to our dy-ing day; and we set out.

To one thing I have made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a
vam-pire in the end, then she shall not go into that un-known and ter-rible
land alone. I sup-pose it is thus that in old times one vam-pire meant
many; just as their hideous bod-ies could only rest in sac-red earth, so
the holi-est love was the re-cruit-ing ser-geant for their ghastly ranks.

We entered Car-fax without trouble and found all things the same as on
the first oc-ca-sion. It was hard to be-lieve that amongst so pro-saic
sur-round-ings of neg-lect and dust and de-cay there was any ground for such
fear as already we knew. Had not our minds been made up, and had there
not been ter-rible memor-ies to spur us on, we could hardly have pro-ceeded
with our task. We found no pa-pers, or any sign of use in the house; and
in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had seen them last.
Dr. Van Helsing said to us sol-emnly as we stood be-fore them:--

"And now, my friends, we have a duty here to do. We must ster-il-ise this
earth, so sac-red of holy memor-ies, that he has brought from a far
dis-tant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth be-cause it has
been holy. Thus we de-feat him with his own weapon, for we make it more
holy still. It was sanc-ti-fied to such use of man, now we sanc-tify it to
God." As he spoke he took from his bag a screw-driver and a wrench, and
very soon the top of one of the cases was thrown open. The earth smelled
musty and close; but we did not some-how seem to mind, for our at-ten-tion
was con-cen-trated on the Pro-fessor. Tak-ing from his box a piece of the
Sacred Wafer he laid it rev-er-ently on the earth, and then shut-ting down
the lid began to screw it home, we aid-ing him as he worked.

One by one we treated in the same way each of the great boxes, and left
them as we had found them to all ap-pear-ance; but in each was a por-tion
of the Host.

When we closed the door be-hind us, the Pro-fessor said sol-emnly:--

"So much is already done. If it may be that with all the oth-ers we can
be so suc-cess-ful, then the sun-set of this even-ing may shine on Madam
Mina's fore-head all white as ivory and with no stain!"

As we passed across the lawn on our way to the sta-tion to catch our
train we could see the front of the asylum. I looked eagerly, and in the
win-dow of my own room saw Mina. I waved my hand to her, and nod-ded to
tell that our work there was suc-cess-fully ac-com-plished. She nod-ded in
reply to show that she un-der-stood. The last I saw, she was wav-ing her
hand in farewell. It was with a heavy heart that we sought the sta-tion
and just caught the train, which was steam-ing in as we reached the
plat-form.

I have writ-ten this in the train.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pic-ca-dilly, 12:30 o'clock._--Just be-fore we reached Fen-church Street
Lord Godalm-ing said to me:--

"Quin-cey and I will find a lock-smith. You had bet-ter not come with us in
case there should be any dif-fi-culty; for un-der the cir-cum-stances it
wouldn't seem so bad for us to break into an empty house. But you are a
so-li-citor and the In-cor-por-ated Law So-ci-ety might tell you that you
should have known bet-ter." I de-murred as to my not shar-ing any danger
even of odium, but he went on: "Besides, it will at-tract less at-ten-tion
if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with
the lock-smith, and with any po-lice-man that may come along. You had
bet-ter go with Jack and the Pro-fessor and stay in the Green Park,
some-where in sight of the house; and when you see the door opened and
the smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the
lookout for you, and shall let you in."

"The ad-vice is good!" said Van Helsing, so we said no more. Godalm-ing
and Mor-ris hur-ried off in a cab, we fol-low-ing in an-other. At the corner
of Ar-ling-ton Street our con-tin-gent got out and strolled into the Green
Park. My heart beat as I saw the house on which so much of our hope was
centred, loom-ing up grim and si-lent in its deser-ted con-di-tion amongst
its more lively and spruce-look-ing neigh-bours. We sat down on a bench
within good view, and began to smoke ci-gars so as to at-tract as little
at-ten-tion as pos-sible. The minutes seemed to pass with leaden feet as we
waited for the com-ing of the oth-ers.

At length we saw a four-wheeler drive up. Out of it, in leis-urely
fash-ion, got Lord Godalm-ing and Mor-ris; and down from the box des-cen-ded
a thick-set work-ing man with his rush-woven bas-ket of tools. Mor-ris paid
the cab-man, who touched his hat and drove away. To-gether the two
as-cen-ded the steps, and Lord Godalm-ing poin-ted out what he wanted done.
The work-man took off his coat leis-urely and hung it on one of the spikes
of the rail, say-ing some-thing to a po-lice-man who just then sauntered
along. The po-lice-man nod-ded ac-qui-es-cence, and the man kneel-ing down
placed his bag be-side him. After search-ing through it, he took out a
se-lec-tion of tools which he pro-duced to lay be-side him in or-derly
fash-ion. Then he stood up, looked into the key-hole, blew into it, and
turn-ing to his em-ploy-ers, made some re-mark. Lord Godalm-ing smiled, and
the man lif-ted a good-sized bunch of keys; se-lect-ing one of them, he
began to probe the lock, as if feel-ing his way with it. After fum-bling
about for a bit he tried a second, and then a third. All at once the
door opened un-der a slight push from him, and he and the two oth-ers
entered the hall. We sat still; my own ci-gar burnt furi-ously, but Van
Helsing's went cold al-to-gether. We waited pa-tiently as we saw the
work-man come out and bring in his bag. Then he held the door partly
open, steady-ing it with his knees, whilst he fit-ted a key to the lock.
This he fi-nally handed to Lord Godalm-ing, who took out his purse and
gave him some-thing. The man touched his hat, took his bag, put on his
coat and de-par-ted; not a soul took the slight-est no-tice of the whole
trans-ac-tion.

When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at
the door. It was im-me-di-ately opened by Quin-cey Mor-ris, be-side whom stood
Lord Godalm-ing light-ing a ci-gar.

"The place smells so vilely," said the lat-ter as we came in. It did
in-deed smell vilely--like the old chapel at Car-fax--and with our
pre-vi-ous ex-per-i-ence it was plain to us that the Count had been us-ing the
place pretty freely. We moved to ex-plore the house, all keep-ing to-gether
in case of at-tack; for we knew we had a strong and wily en-emy to deal
with, and as yet we did not know whether the Count might not be in the
house. In the din-ing-room, which lay at the back of the hall, we found
eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the nine, which we sought!
Our work was not over, and would never be un-til we should have found the
miss-ing box. First we opened the shut-ters of the win-dow which looked out
across a nar-row stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable,
poin-ted to look like the front of a mini-ature house. There were no
win-dows in it, so we were not afraid of be-ing over-looked. We did not
lose any time in ex-amin-ing the chests. With the tools which we had
brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had
treated those oth-ers in the old chapel. It was evid-ent to us that the
Count was not at present in the house, and we pro-ceeded to search for
any of his ef-fects.

After a curs-ory glance at the rest of the rooms, from base-ment to at-tic,
we came to the con-clu-sion that the din-ing-room con-tained any ef-fects
which might be-long to the Count; and so we pro-ceeded to minutely ex-am-ine
them. They lay in a sort of or-derly dis-order on the great din-ing-room
table. There were title deeds of the Pic-ca-dilly house in a great bundle;
deeds of the pur-chase of the houses at Mile End and Ber-mond-sey;
note-pa-per, en-vel-opes, and pens and ink. All were covered up in thin
wrap-ping pa-per to keep them from the dust. There were also a clothes
brush, a brush and comb, and a jug and basin--the lat-ter con-tain-ing
dirty wa-ter which was reddened as if with blood. Last of all was a
little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, prob-ably those be-long-ing to
the other houses. When we had ex-amined this last find, Lord Godalm-ing
and Quin-cey Mor-ris tak-ing ac-cur-ate notes of the vari-ous ad-dresses of the
houses in the East and the South, took with them the keys in a great
bunch, and set out to des-troy the boxes in these places. The rest of us
are, with what pa-tience we can, wait-ing their re-turn--or the com-ing of
the Count.




CHAPTER XXIII

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_3 Octo-ber._--The time seemed ter-rible long whilst we were wait-ing for
the com-ing of Godalm-ing and Quin-cey Mor-ris. The Pro-fessor tried to keep
our minds act-ive by us-ing them all the time. I could see his be-ne-fi-cent
pur-pose, by the side glances which he threw from time to time at Harker.
The poor fel-low is over-whelmed in a misery that is ap-palling to see.
Last night he was a frank, happy-look-ing man, with strong, youth-ful
face, full of en-ergy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn,
hag-gard old man, whose white hair matches well with the hol-low burn-ing
eyes and grief-writ-ten lines of his face. His en-ergy is still in-tact; in
fact, he is like a liv-ing flame. This may yet be his sal-va-tion, for, if
all go well, it will tide him over the des-pair-ing period; he will then,
in a kind of way, wake again to the real-it-ies of life. Poor fel-low, I
thought my own trouble was bad enough, but his----! The Pro-fessor knows
this well enough, and is do-ing his best to keep his mind act-ive. What he
has been say-ing was, un-der the cir-cum-stances, of ab-sorb-ing in-terest. So
well as I can re-mem-ber, here it is:--

"I have stud-ied, over and over again since they came into my hands, all
the pa-pers re-lat-ing to this mon-ster; and the more I have stud-ied, the
greater seems the ne-ces-sity to ut-terly stamp him out. All through there
are signs of his ad-vance; not only of his power, but of his know-ledge of
it. As I learned from the re-searches of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth,
he was in life a most won-der-ful man. Sol-dier, states-man, and
al-chem-ist--which lat-ter was the highest de-vel-op-ment of the
sci-ence-know-ledge of his time. He had a mighty brain, a learn-ing bey-ond
com-pare, and a heart that knew no fear and no re-morse. He dared even to
at-tend the Scho-lo-mance, and there was no branch of know-ledge of his time
that he did not es-say. Well, in him the brain powers sur-vived the
phys-ical death; though it would seem that memory was not all com-plete.
In some fac-ulties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is
grow-ing, and some things that were child-ish at the first are now of
man's stature. He is ex-per-i-ment-ing, and do-ing it well; and if it had not
been that we have crossed his path he would be yet--he may be yet if we
fail--the father or fur-therer of a new or-der of be-ings, whose road must
lead through Death, not Life."

Harker groaned and said, "And this is all ar-rayed against my darling!
But how is he ex-per-i-ment-ing? The know-ledge may help us to de-feat him!"

"He has all along, since his com-ing, been try-ing his power, slowly but
surely; that big child-brain of his is work-ing. Well for us, it is, as
yet, a child-brain; for had he dared, at the first, to at-tempt cer-tain
things he would long ago have been bey-ond our power. However, he means
to suc-ceed, and a man who has cen-tur-ies be-fore him can af-ford to wait
and to go slow. _Festina len-te_ may well be his motto."

"I fail to un-der-stand," said Harker wear-ily. "Oh, do be more plain to
me! Per-haps grief and trouble are dulling my brain."

The Pro-fessor laid his hand ten-derly on his shoulder as he spoke:--

"Ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see how, of late, this
mon-ster has been creep-ing into know-ledge ex-per-i-ment-ally. How he has been
mak-ing use of the zoöphag-ous pa-tient to ef-fect his entry into friend
John's home; for your Vam-pire, though in all af-ter-wards he can come when
and how he will, must at the first make entry only when asked thereto by
an in-mate. But these are not his most im-port-ant ex-per-i-ments. Do we not
see how at the first all these so great boxes were moved by oth-ers. He
knew not then but that must be so. But all the time that so great
child-brain of his was grow-ing, and he began to con-sider whether he
might not him-self move the box. So he began to help; and then, when he
found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so he
pro-gress, and he scat-ter these graves of him; and none but he know where
they are hid-den. He may have in-tend to bury them deep in the ground. So
that he only use them in the night, or at such time as he can change his
form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his
hid-ing-place! But, my child, do not des-pair; this know-ledge come to him
just too late! Already all of his lairs but one be ster-il-ise as for him;
and be-fore the sun-set this shall be so. Then he have no place where he
can move and hide. I delayed this morn-ing that so we might be sure. Is
there not more at stake for us than for him? Then why we not be even
more care-ful than him? By my clock it is one hour and already, if all be
well, friend Ar-thur and Quin-cey are on their way to us. To-day is our
day, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are
five of us when those ab-sent ones re-turn."

Whilst he was speak-ing we were startled by a knock at the hall door, the
double post-man's knock of the tele-graph boy. We all moved out to the
hall with one im-pulse, and Van Helsing, hold-ing up his hand to us to
keep si-lence, stepped to the door and opened it. The boy handed in a
des-patch. The Pro-fessor closed the door again, and, after look-ing at the
dir-ec-tion, opened it and read aloud.

"Look out for D. He has just now, 12:45, come from Car-fax hur-riedly and
hastened to-wards the South. He seems to be go-ing the round and may want
to see you: Mina."

There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:--

"Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to him
quickly and said:--

"God will act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not re-joice
as yet; for what we wish for at the mo-ment may be our un-do-ings."

"I care for noth-ing now," he answered hotly, "ex-cept to wipe out this
brute from the face of cre-ation. I would sell my soul to do it!"

"Oh, hush, hush, my child!" said Van Helsing. "God does not pur-chase
souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may pur-chase, does not keep
faith. But God is mer-ci-ful and just, and knows your pain and your
de-vo-tion to that dear Madam Mina. Think you, how her pain would be
doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear any of us, we are
all de-voted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end. The time is
com-ing for ac-tion; to-day this Vam-pire is limit to the powers of man,
and till sun-set he may not change. It will take him time to ar-rive
here--see, it is twenty minutes past one--and there are yet some times
be-fore he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for
is that my Lord Ar-thur and Quin-cey ar-rive first."

About half an hour after we had re-ceived Mrs. Harker's tele-gram, there
came a quiet, res-ol-ute knock at the hall door. It was just an or-din-ary
knock, such as is given hourly by thou-sands of gen-tle-men, but it made
the Pro-fessor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other, and
to-gether moved out into the hall; we each held ready to use our vari-ous
arma-ments--the spir-itual in the left hand, the mor-tal in the right. Van
Helsing pulled back the latch, and, hold-ing the door half open, stood
back, hav-ing both hands ready for ac-tion. The glad-ness of our hearts
must have shown upon our faces when on the step, close to the door, we
saw Lord Godalm-ing and Quin-cey Mor-ris. They came quickly in and closed
the door be-hind them, the former say-ing, as they moved along the
hall:--

"It is all right. We found both places; six boxes in each and we
des-troyed them all!"

"Des-troyed?" asked the Pro-fessor.

"For him!" We were si-lent for a minute, and then Quin-cey said:--

"There's noth-ing to do but to wait here. If, how-ever, he doesn't turn up
by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leave Mrs. Harker
alone after sun-set."

"He will be here be-fore long now," said Van Helsing, who had been
con-sult-ing his pocket-book. "_Nota be-ne_, in Madam's tele-gram he went
south from Car-fax, that means he went to cross the river, and he could
only do so at slack of tide, which should be some-thing be-fore one
o'clock. That he went south has a mean-ing for us. He is as yet only
sus-pi-cious; and he went from Car-fax first to the place where he would
sus-pect in-ter-fer-ence least. You must have been at Ber-mond-sey only a
short time be-fore him. That he is not here already shows that he went to
Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would then have to be
car-ried over the river in some way. Be-lieve me, my friends, we shall not
have long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of at-tack, so that
we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no time now. Have all your
arms! Be ready!" He held up a warn-ing hand as he spoke, for we all could
hear a key softly in-ser-ted in the lock of the hall door.

I could not but ad-mire, even at such a mo-ment, the way in which a
dom-in-ant spirit as-ser-ted it-self. In all our hunt-ing parties and
ad-ven-tures in dif-fer-ent parts of the world, Quin-cey Mor-ris had al-ways
been the one to ar-range the plan of ac-tion, and Ar-thur and I had been
ac-cus-tomed to obey him im-pli-citly. Now, the old habit seemed to be
re-newed in-stinct-ively. With a swift glance around the room, he at once
laid out our plan of at-tack, and, without speak-ing a word, with a
ges-ture, placed us each in po-s-i-tion. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were
just be-hind the door, so that when it was opened the Pro-fessor could
guard it whilst we two stepped between the in-comer and the door.
Godalm-ing be-hind and Quin-cey in front stood just out of sight ready to
move in front of the win-dow. We waited in a sus-pense that made the
seconds pass with night-mare slow-ness. The slow, care-ful steps came along
the hall; the Count was evid-ently pre-pared for some sur-prise--at least
he feared it.

Sud-denly with a single bound he leaped into the room, win-ning a way past
us be-fore any of us could raise a hand to stay him. There was some-thing
so pan-ther-like in the move-ment--some-thing so un-hu-man, that it seemed
to sober us all from the shock of his com-ing. The first to act was
Harker, who, with a quick move-ment, threw him-self be-fore the door
lead-ing into the room in the front of the house. As the Count saw us, a
hor-rible sort of snarl passed over his face, show-ing the eye-teeth long
and poin-ted; but the evil smile as quickly passed into a cold stare of
lion-like dis-dain. His ex-pres-sion again changed as, with a single
im-pulse, we all ad-vanced upon him. It was a pity that we had not some
bet-ter or-gan-ised plan of at-tack, for even at the mo-ment I wondered what
we were to do. I did not my-self know whether our lethal weapons would
avail us any-thing. Harker evid-ently meant to try the mat-ter, for he had
ready his great Kukri knife and made a fierce and sud-den cut at him. The
blow was a power-ful one; only the diabol-ical quick-ness of the Count's
leap back saved him. A second less and the trenchant blade had shorne
through his heart. As it was, the point just cut the cloth of his coat,
mak-ing a wide gap whence a bundle of bank-notes and a stream of gold
fell out. The ex-pres-sion of the Count's face was so hellish, that for a
mo-ment I feared for Harker, though I saw him throw the ter-rible knife
aloft again for an-other stroke. In-stinct-ively I moved for-ward with a
pro-tect-ive im-pulse, hold-ing the Cru-ci-fix and Wafer in my left hand. I
felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was without sur-prise that I
saw the mon-ster cower back be-fore a sim-ilar move-ment made spon-tan-eously
by each one of us. It would be im-possible to de-scribe the ex-pres-sion of
hate and baffled ma-lig-nity--of an-ger and hellish rage--which came over
the Count's face. His waxen hue be-came green-ish-yel-low by the con-trast
of his burn-ing eyes, and the red scar on the fore-head showed on the
pal-lid skin like a pal-pit-at-ing wound. The next in-stant, with a sinu-ous
dive he swept un-der Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasp-ing
a hand-ful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw
him-self at the win-dow. Amid the crash and glit-ter of the fall-ing glass,
he tumbled into the flagged area be-low. Through the sound of the
shiv-er-ing glass I could hear the "ting" of the gold, as some of the
sov-er-eigns fell on the flag-ging.

We ran over and saw him spring un-hurt from the ground. He, rush-ing up
the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door.
There he turned and spoke to us:--

"You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a row, like
sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think
you have left me without a place to rest; but I have more. My re-venge is
just be-gun! I spread it over cen-tur-ies, and time is on my side. Your
girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and
oth-ers shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bid-ding and to be my
jack-als when I want to feed. Bah!" With a con-temp-tu-ous sneer, he passed
quickly through the door, and we heard the rusty bolt creak as he
fastened it be-hind him. A door bey-ond opened and shut. The first of us
to speak was the Pro-fessor, as, real-ising the dif-fi-culty of fol-low-ing
him through the stable, we moved to-ward the hall.

"We have learnt some-thing--much! Not-with-stand-ing his brave words, he
fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His
very tone be-tray him, or my ears de-ceive. Why take that money? You
fol-low quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and un-der-stand it so. For
me, I make sure that noth-ing here may be of use to him, if so that he
re-turn." As he spoke he put the money re-main-ing into his pocket; took
the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the
re-main-ing things into the open fire-place, where he set fire to them with
a match.

Godalm-ing and Mor-ris had rushed out into the yard, and Harker had
lowered him-self from the win-dow to fol-low the Count. He had, how-ever,
bolted the stable door; and by the time they had forced it open there
was no sign of him. Van Helsing and I tried to make in-quiry at the back
of the house; but the mews was deser-ted and no one had seen him de-part.

It was now late in the af-ter-noon, and sun-set was not far off. We had to
re-cog-nise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the
Pro-fessor when he said:--

"Let us go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor dear Madam Mina. All we can do
just now is done; and we can there, at least, pro-tect her. But we need
not des-pair. There is but one more earth-box, and we must try to find
it; when that is done all may yet be well." I could see that he spoke as
bravely as he could to com-fort Harker. The poor fel-low was quite broken
down; now and again he gave a low groan which he could not sup-press--he
was think-ing of his wife.

With sad hearts we came back to my house, where we found Mrs. Harker
wait-ing us, with an ap-pear-ance of cheer-ful-ness which did hon-our to her
bravery and un-selfish-ness. When she saw our faces, her own be-came as
pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she were
in secret prayer; and then she said cheer-fully:--

"I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke,
she took her hus-band's grey head in her hands and kissed it--"Lay your
poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will pro-tect
us if He so will it in His good in-tent." The poor fel-low groaned. There
was no place for words in his sub-lime misery.

We had a sort of per-func-tory sup-per to-gether, and I think it cheered us
all up some-what. It was, per-haps, the mere an-imal heat of food to hungry
people--for none of us had eaten any-thing since break-fast--or the sense
of com-pan-ion-ship may have helped us; but any-how we were all less
miser-able, and saw the mor-row as not al-to-gether without hope. True to
our prom-ise, we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed; and
al-though she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to
threaten her hus-band, and red at oth-ers when his de-vo-tion to her was
mani-fes-ted, she listened bravely and with calmness. When we came to the
part where Harker had rushed at the Count so reck-lessly, she clung to
her hus-band's arm, and held it tight as though her cling-ing could
pro-tect him from any harm that might come. She said noth-ing, how-ever,
till the nar-ra-tion was all done, and mat-ters had been brought right up
to the present time. Then without let-ting go her hus-band's hand she
stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could give any idea of the
scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good wo-man in all the ra-di-ant beauty
of her youth and an-im-a-tion, with the red scar on her fore-head, of which
she was con-scious, and which we saw with grind-ing of our
teeth--re-mem-ber-ing whence and how it came; her lov-ing kind-ness against
our grim hate; her tender faith against all our fears and doubt-ing; and
we, know-ing that so far as sym-bols went, she with all her good-ness and
pur-ity and faith, was out-cast from God.

"Jonathan," she said, and the word soun-ded like mu-sic on her lips it was
so full of love and ten-der-ness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my true,
true friends, I want you to bear some-thing in mind through all this
dread-ful time. I know that you must fight--that you must des-troy even as
you des-troyed the false Lucy so that the true Lucy might live here-after;
but it is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this
misery is the sad-dest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when
he, too, is des-troyed in his worser part that his bet-ter part may have
spir-itual im-mor-tal-ity. You must be pi-ti-ful to him, too, though it may
not hold your hands from his de-struc-tion."

As she spoke I could see her hus-band's face darken and draw to-gether, as
though the pas-sion in him were shriv-el-ling his be-ing to its core.
In-stinct-ively the clasp on his wife's hand grew closer, till his
knuckles looked white. She did not flinch from the pain which I knew she
must have suffered, but looked at him with eyes that were more ap-peal-ing
than ever. As she stopped speak-ing he leaped to his feet, al-most tear-ing
his hand from hers as he spoke:--

"May God give him into my hand just for long enough to des-troy that
earthly life of him which we are aim-ing at. If bey-ond it I could send
his soul for ever and ever to burn-ing hell I would do it!"

"Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of the good God. Don't say such things,
Jonathan, my hus-band; or you will crush me with fear and hor-ror. Just
think, my dear--I have been think-ing all this long, long day of it--that
... per-haps ... some day ... I, too, may need such pity; and that some
other like you--and with equal cause for an-ger--may deny it to me! Oh,
my hus-band! my hus-band, in-deed I would have spared you such a thought
had there been an-other way; but I pray that God may not have treas-ured
your wild words, ex-cept as the heart-broken wail of a very lov-ing and
sorely stricken man. Oh, God, let these poor white hairs go in evid-ence
of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom
so many sor-rows have come."

We men were all in tears now. There was no res-ist-ing them, and we wept
openly. She wept, too, to see that her sweeter coun-sels had pre-vailed.
Her hus-band flung him-self on his knees be-side her, and put-ting his arms
round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned
to us and we stole out of the room, leav-ing the two lov-ing hearts alone
with their God.

Be-fore they re-tired the Pro-fessor fixed up the room against any com-ing
of the Vam-pire, and as-sured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace.
She tried to school her-self to the be-lief, and, mani-festly for her
hus-band's sake, tried to seem con-tent. It was a brave struggle; and was,
I think and be-lieve, not without its re-ward. Van Helsing had placed at
hand a bell which either of them was to sound in case of any emer-gency.
When they had re-tired, Quin-cey, Godalm-ing, and I ar-ranged that we should
sit up, di-vid-ing the night between us, and watch over the safety of the
poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quin-cey, so the rest of us
shall be off to bed as soon as we can. Godalm-ing has already turned in,
for his is the second watch. Now that my work is done I, too, shall go
to bed.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_3-4 Octo-ber, close to mid-night._--I thought yes-ter-day would never end.
There was over me a yearn-ing for sleep, in some sort of blind be-lief
that to wake would be to find things changed, and that any change must
now be for the bet-ter. Be-fore we par-ted, we dis-cussed what our next step
was to be, but we could ar-rive at no res-ult. All we knew was that one
earth-box re-mained, and that the Count alone knew where it was. If he
chooses to lie hid-den, he may baffle us for years; and in the
mean-time!--the thought is too hor-rible, I dare not think of it even now.
This I know: that if ever there was a wo-man who was all per-fec-tion, that
one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thou-sand times more for her
sweet pity of last night, a pity that made my own hate of the mon-ster
seem despic-able. Surely God will not per-mit the world to be the poorer
by the loss of such a creature. This is hope to me. We are all drift-ing
reefwards now, and faith is our only an-chor. Thank God! Mina is
sleep-ing, and sleep-ing without dreams. I fear what her dreams might be
like, with such ter-rible memor-ies to ground them in. She has not been so
calm, within my see-ing, since the sun-set. Then, for a while, there came
over her face a re-pose which was like spring after the blasts of March.
I thought at the time that it was the soft-ness of the red sun-set on her
face, but some-how now I think it has a deeper mean-ing. I am not sleepy
my-self, though I am weary--weary to death. However, I must try to sleep;
for there is to-mor-row to think of, and there is no rest for me
un-til....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--I must have fallen asleep, for I was awaked by Mina, who was
sit-ting up in bed, with a startled look on her face. I could see eas-ily,
for we did not leave the room in dark-ness; she had placed a warn-ing hand
over my mouth, and now she whispered in my ear:--

"Hush! there is someone in the cor-ridor!" I got up softly, and cross-ing
the room, gently opened the door.

Just out-side, stretched on a mat-tress, lay Mr. Mor-ris, wide awake. He
raised a warn-ing hand for si-lence as he whispered to me:--

"Hush! go back to bed; it is all right. One of us will be here all
night. We don't mean to take any chances!"

His look and ges-ture for-bade dis-cus-sion, so I came back and told Mina.
She sighed and pos-it-ively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale
face as she put her arms round me and said softly:--

"Oh, thank God for good brave men!" With a sigh she sank back again to
sleep. I write this now as I am not sleepy, though I must try again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 Octo-ber, morn-ing._--Once again dur-ing the night I was wakened by
Mina. This time we had all had a good sleep, for the grey of the com-ing
dawn was mak-ing the win-dows into sharp ob-longs, and the gas flame was
like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me hur-riedly:--

"Go, call the Pro-fessor. I want to see him at once."

"Why?" I asked.

"I have an idea. I sup-pose it must have come in the night, and ma-tured
without my know-ing it. He must hyp-not-ise me be-fore the dawn, and then I
shall be able to speak. Go quick, dearest; the time is get-ting close." I
went to the door. Dr. Se-ward was rest-ing on the mat-tress, and, see-ing
me, he sprang to his feet.

"Is any-thing wrong?" he asked, in alarm.

"No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing at once."

"I will go," he said, and hur-ried into the Pro-fessor's room.

In two or three minutes later Van Helsing was in the room in his
dress-ing-gown, and Mr. Mor-ris and Lord Godalm-ing were with Dr. Se-ward at
the door ask-ing ques-tions. When the Pro-fessor saw Mina a smile--a
pos-it-ive smile ous-ted the anxi-ety of his face; he rubbed his hands as he
said:--

"Oh, my dear Madam Mina, this is in-deed a change. See! friend Jonathan,
we have got our dear Madam Mina, as of old, back to us to-day!" Then
turn-ing to her, he said, cheer-fully: "And what am I do for you? For at
this hour you do not want me for noth-ings."

"I want you to hyp-not-ise me!" she said. "Do it be-fore the dawn, for I
feel that then I can speak, and speak freely. Be quick, for the time is
short!" Without a word he mo-tioned her to sit up in bed.

Look-ing fix-edly at her, he com-menced to make passes in front of her,
from over the top of her head down-ward, with each hand in turn. Mina
gazed at him fix-edly for a few minutes, dur-ing which my own heart beat
like a trip ham-mer, for I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradu-ally
her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heav-ing of
her bosom could one know that she was alive. The Pro-fessor made a few
more passes and then stopped, and I could see that his fore-head was
covered with great beads of per-spir-a-tion. Mina opened her eyes; but she
did not seem the same wo-man. There was a far-away look in her eyes, and
her voice had a sad dream-i-ness which was new to me. Rais-ing his hand to
im-pose si-lence, the Pro-fessor mo-tioned to me to bring the oth-ers in.
They came on tip-toe, clos-ing the door be-hind them, and stood at the
foot of the bed, look-ing on. Mina ap-peared not to see them. The
still-ness was broken by Van Helsing's voice speak-ing in a low level tone
which would not break the cur-rent of her thoughts:--

"Where are you?" The an-swer came in a neut-ral way:--

"I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own." For sev-eral
minutes there was si-lence. Mina sat ri-gid, and the Pro-fessor stood
star-ing at her fix-edly; the rest of us hardly dared to breathe. The room
was grow-ing lighter; without tak-ing his eyes from Mina's face, Dr. Van
Helsing mo-tioned me to pull up the blind. I did so, and the day seemed
just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to dif-fuse
it-self through the room. On the in-stant the Pro-fessor spoke again:--

"Where are you now?" The an-swer came dream-ily, but with in-ten-tion; it
were as though she were in-ter-pret-ing some-thing. I have heard her use the
same tone when read-ing her short-hand notes.

"I do not know. It is all strange to me!"

"What do you see?"

"I can see noth-ing; it is all dark."

"What do you hear?" I could de-tect the strain in the Pro-fessor's pa-tient
voice.

"The lap-ping of wa-ter. It is gurg-ling by, and little waves leap. I can
hear them on the out-side."

"Then you are on a ship?" We all looked at each other, try-ing to glean
some-thing each from the other. We were afraid to think. The an-swer came
quick:--

"Oh, yes!"

"What else do you hear?"

"The sound of men stamp-ing over-head as they run about. There is the
creak-ing of a chain, and the loud tinkle as the check of the cap-stan
falls into the rachet."

"What are you do-ing?"

"I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into
a deep breath as of one sleep-ing, and the open eyes closed again.

By this time the sun had risen, and we were all in the full light of
day. Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands on Mina's shoulders, and laid her
head down softly on her pil-low. She lay like a sleep-ing child for a few
mo-ments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in won-der to see
us all around her. "Have I been talk-ing in my sleep?" was all she said.
She seemed, how-ever, to know the situ-ation without telling, though she
was eager to know what she had told. The Pro-fessor re-peated the
con-ver-sa-tion, and she said:--

"Then there is not a mo-ment to lose: it may not be yet too late!" Mr.
Mor-ris and Lord Godalm-ing star-ted for the door but the Pro-fessor's calm
voice called them back:--

"Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weigh-ing an-chor
whilst she spoke. There are many ships weigh-ing an-chor at the mo-ment in
your so great Port of Lon-don. Which of them is it that you seek? God be
thanked that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we
know not. We have been blind some-what; blind after the man-ner of men,
since when we can look back we see what we might have seen look-ing
for-ward if we had been able to see what we might have seen! Alas, but
that sen-tence is a puddle; is it not? We can know now what was in the
Count's mind, when he seize that money, though Jonathan's so fierce
knife put him in the danger that even he dread. He meant es-cape. Hear
me, ESCAPE! He saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men
fol-low-ing like dogs after a fox, this Lon-don was no place for him. He
have take his last earth-box on board a ship, and he leave the land. He
think to es-cape, but no! we fol-low him. Tally Ho! as friend Ar-thur would
say when he put on his red frock! Our old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and
we must fol-low with wile. I, too, am wily and I think his mind in a
little while. In mean-time we may rest and in peace, for there are wa-ters
between us which he do not want to pass, and which he could not if he
would--un-less the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or
slack tide. See, and the sun is just rose, and all day to sun-set is to
us. Let us take bath, and dress, and have break-fast which we all need,
and which we can eat com-fort-ably since he be not in the same land with
us." Mina looked at him ap-peal-ingly as she asked:--

"But why need we seek him fur-ther, when he is gone away from us?" He
took her hand and pat-ted it as he replied:--

"Ask me noth-ings as yet. When we have break-fast, then I an-swer all
ques-tions." He would say no more, and we sep-ar-ated to dress.

After break-fast Mina re-peated her ques-tion. He looked at her gravely for
a minute and then said sor-row-fully:--

"Be-cause my dear, dear Madam Mina, now more than ever must we find him
even if we have to fol-low him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as
she asked faintly:--

"Why?"

"Be-cause," he answered sol-emnly, "he can live for cen-tur-ies, and you are
but mor-tal wo-man. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark
upon your throat."

I was just in time to catch her as she fell for-ward in a faint.




CHAPTER XXIV

DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY, SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING


This to Jonathan Harker.

You are to stay with your dear Madam Mina. We shall go to make our
search--if I can call it so, for it is not search but know-ing, and we
seek con-firm-a-tion only. But do you stay and take care of her to-day.
This is your best and most holi-est of-fice. This day noth-ing can find him
here. Let me tell you that so you will know what we four know already,
for I have tell them. He, our en-emy, have gone away; he have gone back
to his Castle in Transylvania. I know it so well, as if a great hand of
fire wrote it on the wall. He have pre-pare for this in some way, and
that last earth-box was ready to ship some-wheres. For this he took the
money; for this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him be-fore the sun
go down. It was his last hope, save that he might hide in the tomb that
he think poor Miss Lucy, be-ing as he thought like him, keep open to him.
But there was not of time. When that fail he make straight for his last
re-source--his last earth-work I might say did I wish _double en-ten-te_.
He is clever, oh, so clever! he know that his game here was fin-ish; and
so he de-cide he go back home. He find ship go-ing by the route he came,
and he go in it. We go off now to find what ship, and whither bound;
when we have dis-cover that, we come back and tell you all. Then we will
com-fort you and poor dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be hope
when you think it over: that all is not lost. This very creature that we
pur-sue, he take hun-dreds of years to get so far as Lon-don; and yet in
one day, when we know of the dis-posal of him we drive him out. He is
fi-nite, though he is power-ful to do much harm and suf-fers not as we do.
But we are strong, each in our pur-pose; and we are all more strong
to-gether. Take heart afresh, dear hus-band of Madam Mina. This battle is
but be-gun, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high
to watch over His chil-dren. There-fore be of much com-fort till we re-turn.

VAN HELSING.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_4 Octo-ber._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's mes-sage in the
phono-graph, the poor girl brightened up con-sid-er-ably. Already the
cer-tainty that the Count is out of the coun-try has given her com-fort;
and com-fort is strength to her. For my own part, now that his hor-rible
danger is not face to face with us, it seems al-most im-possible to
be-lieve in it. Even my own ter-rible ex-per-i-ences in Castle Drac-ula seem
like a long-for-got-ten dream. Here in the crisp au-tumn air in the bright
sun-light----

Alas! how can I dis-be-lieve! In the midst of my thought my eye fell on
the red scar on my poor darling's white fore-head. Whilst that lasts,
there can be no dis-be-lief. And af-ter-wards the very memory of it will
keep faith crys-tal clear. Mina and I fear to be idle, so we have been
over all the di-ar-ies again and again. Some-how, al-though the real-ity
seems greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. There is
some-thing of a guid-ing pur-pose mani-fest through-out, which is com-fort-ing.
Mina says that per-haps we are the in-stru-ments of ul-ti-mate good. It may
be! I shall try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other
yet of the fu-ture. It is bet-ter to wait till we see the Pro-fessor and
the oth-ers after their in-vest-ig-a-tions.

The day is run-ning by more quickly than I ever thought a day could run
for me again. It is now three o'clock.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_5 Octo-ber, 5 p. m._--Our meet-ing for re-port. Present: Pro-fessor Van
Helsing, Lord Godalm-ing, Dr. Se-ward, Mr. Quin-cey Mor-ris, Jonathan
Harker, Mina Harker.

Dr. Van Helsing de-scribed what steps were taken dur-ing the day to
dis-cover on what boat and whither bound Count Drac-ula made his es-cape:--

"As I knew that he wanted to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that
he must go by the Danube mouth; or by some-where in the Black Sea, since
by that way he come. It was a dreary blank that was be-fore us. _Omne
ig-notum pro mag-ni-fico_; and so with heavy hearts we start to find what
ships leave for the Black Sea last night. He was in sail-ing ship, since
Madam Mina tell of sails be-ing set. These not so im-port-ant as to go in
your list of the ship-ping in the _Times_, and so we go, by sug-ges-tion of
Lord Godalm-ing, to your Lloyd's, where are note of all ships that sail,
how-ever so small. There we find that only one Black-Sea-bound ship go
out with the tide. She is the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_, and she sail from
Doolittle's Wharf for Varna, and thence on to other parts and up the
Danube. 'Soh!' said I, 'this is the ship whereon is the Count.' So off
we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we find a man in an of-fice of wood
so small that the man look big-ger than the of-fice. From him we in-quire
of the go-ings of the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_. He swear much, and he red face
and loud of voice, but he good fel-low all the same; and when Quin-cey
give him some-thing from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and
put it in a so small bag which he have hid deep in his cloth-ing, he
still bet-ter fel-low and humble ser-vant to us. He come with us, and ask
many men who are rough and hot; these be bet-ter fel-lows too when they
have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of
oth-ers which I com-pre-hend not, though I guess what they mean; but
nev-er-the-less they tell us all things which we want to know.

"They make known to us among them, how last af-ter-noon at about five
o'clock comes a man so hurry. A tall man, thin and pale, with high nose
and teeth so white, and eyes that seem to be burn-ing. That he be all in
black, ex-cept that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or the
time. That he scat-ter his money in mak-ing quick in-quiry as to what ship
sails for the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the of-fice and
then to the ship, where he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of
gang-plank, and ask that the cap-tain come to him. The cap-tain come, when
told that he will be pay well; and though he swear much at the first he
agree to term. Then the thin man go and some one tell him where horse
and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, him-self
driv-ing cart on which a great box; this he him-self lift down, though it
take sev-eral to put it on truck for the ship. He give much talk to
cap-tain as to how and where his box is to be place; but the cap-tain like
it not and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him that if he like he
can come and see where it shall be. But he say 'no'; that he come not
yet, for that he have much to do. Whereupon the cap-tain tell him that he
had bet-ter be quick--with blood--for that his ship will leave the
place--of blood--be-fore the turn of the tide--with blood. Then the thin
man smile and say that of course he must go when he think fit; but he
will be sur-prise if he go quite so soon. The cap-tain swear again,
poly-glot, and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he
will so far in-trude on his kind-ness as to come aboard be-fore the
sail-ing. Final the cap-tain, more red than ever, and in more tongues tell
him that he doesn't want no French-men--with bloom upon them and also
with blood--in his ship--with blood on her also. And so, after ask-ing
where there might be close at hand a ship where he might pur-chase ship
forms, he de-par-ted.

"No one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared,' as they said, for
they had some-thing else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon
be-came ap-par-ent to all that the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ would not sail as
was ex-pec-ted. A thin mist began to creep up from the river, and it grew,
and grew; till soon a dense fog en-vel-oped the ship and all around her.
The cap-tain swore poly-glot--very poly-glot--poly-glot with bloom and
blood; but he could do noth-ing. The wa-ter rose and rose; and he began to
fear that he would lose the tide al-to-gether. He was in no friendly mood,
when just at full tide, the thin man came up the gang-plank again and
asked to see where his box had been stowed. Then the cap-tain replied
that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and
blood--were in hell. But the thin man did not be of-fend, and went down
with the mate and saw where it was place, and came up and stood awhile
on deck in fog. He must have come off by him-self, for none no-tice him.
Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog be-gin to melt away, and
all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the lan-guage that was
of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the cap-tain's swears
ex-ceeded even his usual poly-glot, and was more than ever full of
pic-tur-esque, when on ques-tion-ing other mar-iners who were on move-ment up
and down on the river that hour, he found that few of them had seen any
of fog at all, ex-cept where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship
went out on the ebb tide; and was doubt-less by morn-ing far down the
river mouth. She was by then, when they told us, well out to sea.

"And so, my dear Madam Mina, it is that we have to rest for a time, for
our en-emy is on the sea, with the fog at his com-mand, on his way to the
Danube mouth. To sail a ship takes time, go she never so quick; and when
we start we go on land more quick, and we meet him there. Our best hope
is to come on him when in the box between sun-rise and sun-set; for then
he can make no struggle, and we may deal with him as we should. There
are days for us, in which we can make ready our plan. We know all about
where he go; for we have seen the owner of the ship, who have shown us
in-voices and all pa-pers that can be. The box we seek is to be landed in
Varna, and to be given to an agent, one Rist-ics who will there present
his cre-den-tials; and so our mer-chant friend will have done his part.
When he ask if there be any wrong, for that so, he can tele-graph and
have in-quiry made at Varna, we say 'no'; for what is to be done is not
for po-lice or of the cus-toms. It must be done by us alone and in our own
way."

When Dr. Van Helsing had done speak-ing, I asked him if he were cer-tain
that the Count had re-mained on board the ship. He replied: "We have the
best proof of that: your own evid-ence, when in the hyp-notic trance this
morn-ing." I asked him again if it were really ne-ces-sary that they should
pur-sue the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leav-ing me, and I know that
he would surely go if the oth-ers went. He answered in grow-ing pas-sion,
at first quietly. As he went on, how-ever, he grew more angry and more
force-ful, till in the end we could not but see wherein was at least some
of that per-sonal dom-in-ance which made him so long a mas-ter amongst
men:--

"Yes, it is ne-ces-sary--ne-ces-sary--ne-ces-sary! For your sake in the first,
and then for the sake of hu-man-ity. This mon-ster has done much harm
already, in the nar-row scope where he find him-self, and in the short
time when as yet he was only as a body grop-ing his so small meas-ure in
dark-ness and not know-ing. All this have I told these oth-ers; you, my
dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the phono-graph of my friend John, or
in that of your hus-band. I have told them how the meas-ure of leav-ing his
own bar-ren land--bar-ren of peoples--and com-ing to a new land where life
of man teems till they are like the mul-ti-tude of stand-ing corn, was the
work of cen-tur-ies. Were an-other of the Un-Dead, like him, to try to do
what he has done, per-haps not all the cen-tur-ies of the world that have
been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of
nature that are oc-cult and deep and strong must have worked to-gether in
some won-drous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for
all these cen-tur-ies, is full of strange-ness of the geo-lo-gic and chem-ical
world. There are deep cav-erns and fis-sures that reach none know whither.
There have been vol-ca-noes, some of whose open-ings still send out wa-ters
of strange prop-er-ties, and gases that kill or make to viv-ify. Doubt-less,
there is some-thing mag-netic or elec-tric in some of these com-bin-a-tions of
oc-cult forces which work for phys-ical life in strange way; and in
him-self were from the first some great qual-it-ies. In a hard and war-like
time he was cel-eb-rate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain,
more braver heart, than any man. In him some vi-tal prin-ciple have in
strange way found their ut-most; and as his body keep strong and grow and
thrive, so his brain grow too. All this without that diabolic aid which
is surely to him; for it have to yield to the powers that come from,
and are, sym-bolic of good. And now this is what he is to us. He have
in-fect you--oh, for-give me, my dear, that I must say such; but it is for
good of you that I speak. He in-fect you in such wise, that even if he do
no more, you have only to live--to live in your own old, sweet way; and
so in time, death, which is of man's com-mon lot and with God's sanc-tion,
shall make you like to him. This must not be! We have sworn to-gether
that it must not. Thus are we min-is-ters of God's own wish: that the
world, and men for whom His Son die, will not be given over to mon-sters,
whose very ex-ist-ence would de-fame Him. He have al-lowed us to re-deem one
soul already, and we go out as the old knights of the Cross to re-deem
more. Like them we shall travel to-wards the sun-rise; and like them, if
we fall, we fall in good cause." He paused and I said:--

"But will not the Count take his re-buff wisely? Since he has been driven
from Eng-land, will he not avoid it, as a ti-ger does the vil-lage from
which he has been hunted?"

"Aha!" he said, "your simile of the ti-ger good, for me, and I shall
ad-opt him. Your man-eater, as they of In-dia call the ti-ger who has once
tasted blood of the hu-man, care no more for the other prey, but prowl
un-ceas-ing till he get him. This that we hunt from our vil-lage is a
ti-ger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in him-self he
is not one to re-tire and stay afar. In his life, his liv-ing life, he go
over the Tur-key fron-tier and at-tack his en-emy on his own ground; he be
beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again.
Look at his per-sist-ence and en-dur-ance. With the child-brain that was to
him he have long since con-ceive the idea of com-ing to a great city. What
does he do? He find out the place of all the world most of prom-ise for
him. Then he de-lib-er-ately set him-self down to pre-pare for the task. He
find in pa-tience just how is his strength, and what are his powers. He
study new tongues. He learn new so-cial life; new en-vir-on-ment of old
ways, the politic, the law, the fin-ance, the sci-ence, the habit of a new
land and a new people who have come to be since he was. His glimpse that
he have had, whet his ap-pet-ite only and en-keen his de-sire. Nay, it help
him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at
the first in his sur-mises. He have done this alone; all alone! from a
ruin tomb in a for-got-ten land. What more may he not do when the greater
world of thought is open to him. He that can smile at death, as we know
him; who can flour-ish in the midst of dis-eases that kill off whole
peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from God, and not the Devil,
what a force for good might he not be in this old world of ours. But we
are pledged to set the world free. Our toil must be in si-lence, and our
ef-forts all in secret; for in this en-lightened age, when men be-lieve not
even what they see, the doubt-ing of wise men would be his greatest
strength. It would be at once his sheath and his ar-mour, and his weapons
to des-troy us, his en-emies, who are will-ing to peril even our own souls
for the safety of one we love--for the good of man-kind, and for the
hon-our and glory of God."

After a gen-eral dis-cus-sion it was de-term-ined that for to-night noth-ing
be def-in-itely settled; that we should all sleep on the facts, and try to
think out the proper con-clu-sions. To-mor-row, at break-fast, we are to
meet again, and, after mak-ing our con-clu-sions known to one an-other, we
shall de-cide on some def-in-ite cause of ac-tion.

       *       *       *       *       *

I feel a won-der-ful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some haunt-ing
pres-ence were re-moved from me. Per-haps ...

My sur-mise was not fin-ished, could not be; for I caught sight in the
mir-ror of the red mark upon my fore-head; and I knew that I was still
un-clean.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_5 Octo-ber._--We all rose early, and I think that sleep did much for
each and all of us. When we met at early break-fast there was more
gen-eral cheer-ful-ness than any of us had ever ex-pec-ted to ex-per-i-ence
again.

It is really won-der-ful how much re-si-li-ence there is in hu-man nature. Let
any ob-struct-ing cause, no mat-ter what, be re-moved in any way--even by
death--and we fly back to first prin-ciples of hope and en-joy-ment. More
than once as we sat around the table, my eyes opened in won-der whether
the whole of the past days had not been a dream. It was only when I
caught sight of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's fore-head that I was
brought back to real-ity. Even now, when I am gravely re-volving the
mat-ter, it is al-most im-possible to real-ise that the cause of all our
trouble is still ex-ist-ent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of her
trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when some-thing
re-calls it to her mind, that she thinks of her ter-rible scar. We are to
meet here in my study in half an hour and de-cide on our course of
ac-tion. I see only one im-me-di-ate dif-fi-culty, I know it by in-stinct
rather than reason: we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet I fear
that in some mys-ter-i-ous way poor Mrs. Harker's tongue is tied. I _know_
that she forms con-clu-sions of her own, and from all that has been I can
guess how bril-liant and how true they must be; but she will not, or
can-not, give them ut-ter-ance. I have men-tioned this to Van Helsing, and
he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I sup-pose it is some of
that hor-rid poison which has got into her veins be-gin-ning to work. The
Count had his own pur-poses when he gave her what Van Helsing called "the
Vam-pire's bap-tism of blood." Well, there may be a poison that dis-tils
it-self out of good things; in an age when the ex-ist-ence of pto-maines is
a mys-tery we should not won-der at any-thing! One thing I know: that if my
in-stinct be true re-gard-ing poor Mrs. Harker's si-lences, then there is a
ter-rible dif-fi-culty--an un-known danger--in the work be-fore us. The same
power that com-pels her si-lence may com-pel her speech. I dare not think
fur-ther; for so I should in my thoughts dis-hon-our a noble wo-man!

Van Helsing is com-ing to my study a little be-fore the oth-ers. I shall
try to open the sub-ject with him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--When the Pro-fessor came in, we talked over the state of
things. I could see that he had some-thing on his mind which he wanted to
say, but felt some hes-it-ancy about broach-ing the sub-ject. After beat-ing
about the bush a little, he said sud-denly:--

"Friend John, there is some-thing that you and I must talk of alone, just
at the first at any rate. Later, we may have to take the oth-ers into our
con-fid-ence"; then he stopped, so I waited; he went on:--

"Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina is chan-ging." A cold shiver ran
through me to find my worst fears thus en-dorsed. Van Helsing
con-tin-ued:--

"With the sad ex-per-i-ence of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned
be-fore things go too far. Our task is now in real-ity more dif-fi-cult than
ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst im-port-ance. I
can see the char-ac-ter-ist-ics of the vam-pire com-ing in her face. It is now
but very, very slight; but it is to be seen if we have eyes to no-tice
without to pre-judge. Her teeth are some sharper, and at times her eyes
are more hard. But these are not all, there is to her the si-lence now
of-ten; as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did not speak, even when she
wrote that which she wished to be known later. Now my fear is this. If
it be that she can, by our hyp-notic trance, tell what the Count see and
hear, is it not more true that he who have hyp-not-ise her first, and who
have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he
will, com-pel her mind to dis-close to him that which she know?" I nod-ded
ac-qui-es-cence; he went on:--

"Then, what we must do is to pre-vent this; we must keep her ig-nor-ant of
our in-tent, and so she can-not tell what she know not. This is a pain-ful
task! Oh, so pain-ful that it heart-break me to think of; but it must be.
When to-day we meet, I must tell her that for reason which we will not
to speak she must not more be of our coun-cil, but be simply guarded by
us." He wiped his fore-head, which had broken out in pro-fuse per-spir-a-tion
at the thought of the pain which he might have to in-flict upon the poor
soul already so tor-tured. I knew that it would be some sort of com-fort
to him if I told him that I also had come to the same con-clu-sion; for at
any rate it would take away the pain of doubt. I told him, and the
ef-fect was as I ex-pec-ted.

It is now close to the time of our gen-eral gath-er-ing. Van Helsing has
gone away to pre-pare for the meet-ing, and his pain-ful part of it. I
really be-lieve his pur-pose is to be able to pray alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--At the very out-set of our meet-ing a great per-sonal re-lief was
ex-per-i-enced by both Van Helsing and my-self. Mrs. Harker had sent a
mes-sage by her hus-band to say that she would not join us at present, as
she thought it bet-ter that we should be free to dis-cuss our move-ments
without her pres-ence to em-bar-rass us. The Pro-fessor and I looked at each
other for an in-stant, and some-how we both seemed re-lieved. For my own
part, I thought that if Mrs. Harker real-ised the danger her-self, it was
much pain as well as much danger aver-ted. Under the cir-cum-stances we
agreed, by a ques-tion-ing look and an-swer, with fin-ger on lip, to
pre-serve si-lence in our sus-pi-cions, un-til we should have been able to
con-fer alone again. We went at once into our Plan of Cam-paign. Van
Helsing roughly put the facts be-fore us first:--

"The _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ left the Thames yes-ter-day morn-ing. It will take
her at the quick-est speed she has ever made at least three weeks to
reach Varna; but we can travel over-land to the same place in three days.
Now, if we al-low for two days less for the ship's voy-age, ow-ing to such
weather in-flu-ences as we know that the Count can bring to bear; and if
we al-low a whole day and night for any delays which may oc-cur to us,
then we have a mar-gin of nearly two weeks. Thus, in or-der to be quite
safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall at any rate
be in Varna a day be-fore the ship ar-rives, and able to make such
pre-par-a-tions as may be ne-ces-sary. Of course we shall all go armed--armed
against evil things, spir-itual as well as phys-ical." Here Quin-cey Mor-ris
ad-ded:--

"I un-der-stand that the Count comes from a wolf coun-try, and it may be
that he shall get there be-fore us. I pro-pose that we add Winchesters to
our arm-a-ment. I have a kind of be-lief in a Winchester when there is any
trouble of that sort around. Do you re-mem-ber, Art, when we had the pack
after us at To-bolsk? What wouldn't we have given then for a re-peater
apiece!"

"Good!" said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be. Quin-cey's head is
level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, meta-phor be more
dis-hon-our to sci-ence than wolves be of danger to man. In the mean-time we
can do noth-ing here; and as I think that Varna is not fa-mil-iar to any of
us, why not go there more soon? It is as long to wait here as there.
To-night and to-mor-row we can get ready, and then, if all be well, we
four can set out on our jour-ney."

"We four?" said Harker in-ter-rog-at-ively, look-ing from one to an-other of
us.

"Of course!" answered the Pro-fessor quickly, "you must re-main to take
care of your so sweet wife!" Harker was si-lent for awhile and then said
in a hol-low voice:--

"Let us talk of that part of it in the morn-ing. I want to con-sult with
Mina." I thought that now was the time for Van Helsing to warn him not
to dis-close our plans to her; but he took no no-tice. I looked at him
sig-ni-fic-antly and coughed. For an-swer he put his fin-ger on his lips and
turned away.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_5 Octo-ber, af-ter-noon._--For some time after our meet-ing this morn-ing I
could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of
won-der which al-lows no room for act-ive thought. Mina's de-term-in-a-tion not
to take any part in the dis-cus-sion set me think-ing; and as I could not
ar-gue the mat-ter with her, I could only guess. I am as far as ever from
a solu-tion now. The way the oth-ers re-ceived it, too, puzzled me; the
last time we talked of the sub-ject we agreed that there was to be no
more con-ceal-ment of any-thing amongst us. Mina is sleep-ing now, calmly
and sweetly like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face beams
with hap-pi-ness. Thank God, there are such mo-ments still for her.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--How strange it all is. I sat watch-ing Mina's happy sleep, and
came as near to be-ing happy my-self as I sup-pose I shall ever be. As the
even-ing drew on, and the earth took its shad-ows from the sun sink-ing
lower, the si-lence of the room grew more and more sol-emn to me. All at
once Mina opened her eyes, and look-ing at me ten-derly, said:--

"Jonathan, I want you to prom-ise me some-thing on your word of hon-our. A
prom-ise made to me, but made holily in God's hear-ing, and not to be
broken though I should go down on my knees and im-plore you with bit-ter
tears. Quick, you must make it to me at once."

"Mina," I said, "a prom-ise like that, I can-not make at once. I may have
no right to make it."

"But, dear one," she said, with such spir-itual in-tens-ity that her eyes
were like pole stars, "it is I who wish it; and it is not for my-self.
You can ask Dr. Van Helsing if I am not right; if he dis-agrees you may
do as you will. Nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are ab-solved
from the prom-ise."

"I prom-ise!" I said, and for a mo-ment she looked su-premely happy; though
to me all hap-pi-ness for her was denied by the red scar on her fore-head.
She said:--

"Prom-ise me that you will not tell me any-thing of the plans formed for
the cam-paign against the Count. Not by word, or in-fer-ence, or
im-plic-a-tion; not at any time whilst this re-mains to me!" and she
sol-emnly poin-ted to the scar. I saw that she was in earn-est, and said
sol-emnly:--

"I prom-ise!" and as I said it I felt that from that in-stant a door had
been shut between us.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later, mid-night._--Mina has been bright and cheer-ful all the even-ing.
So much so that all the rest seemed to take cour-age, as if in-fec-ted
some-what with her gaiety; as a res-ult even I my-self felt as if the pall
of gloom which weighs us down were some-what lif-ted. We all re-tired
early. Mina is now sleep-ing like a little child; it is a won-der-ful thing
that her fac-ulty of sleep re-mains to her in the midst of her ter-rible
trouble. Thank God for it, for then at least she can for-get her care.
Per-haps her ex-ample may af-fect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall
try it. Oh! for a dream-less sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

_6 Octo-ber, morn-ing._--Another sur-prise. Mina woke me early, about the
same time as yes-ter-day, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought
that it was an-other oc-ca-sion for hyp-not-ism, and without ques-tion went
for the Pro-fessor. He had evid-ently ex-pec-ted some such call, for I found
him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could hear the
open-ing of the door of our room. He came at once; as he passed into the
room, he asked Mina if the oth-ers might come, too.

"No," she said quite simply, "it will not be ne-ces-sary. You can tell
them just as well. I must go with you on your jour-ney."

Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a mo-ment's pause he
asked:--

"But why?"

"You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer,
too."

"But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our sol-em-nest
duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more li-able than
any of us from--from cir-cum-stances--things that have been." He paused,
em-bar-rassed.

As she replied, she raised her fin-ger and poin-ted to her fore-head:--

"I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you now, whilst the sun is
com-ing up; I may not be able again. I know that when the Count wills me
I must go. I know that if he tells me to come in secret, I must come by
wile; by any device to hood-wink--even Jonathan." God saw the look that
she turned on me as she spoke, and if there be in-deed a Re-cord-ing An-gel
that look is noted to her ever-last-ing hon-our. I could only clasp her
hand. I could not speak; my emo-tion was too great for even the re-lief of
tears. She went on:--

"You men are brave and strong. You are strong in your num-bers, for you
can defy that which would break down the hu-man en-dur-ance of one who had
to guard alone. Besides, I may be of ser-vice, since you can hyp-not-ise me
and so learn that which even I my-self do not know." Dr. Van Helsing said
very gravely:--

"Madam Mina, you are, as al-ways, most wise. You shall with us come; and
to-gether we shall do that which we go forth to achieve." When he had
spoken, Mina's long spell of si-lence made me look at her. She had fallen
back on her pil-low asleep; she did not even wake when I had pulled up
the blind and let in the sun-light which flooded the room. Van Helsing
mo-tioned to me to come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within
a minute Lord Godalm-ing, Dr. Se-ward, and Mr. Mor-ris were with us also.
He told them what Mina had said, and went on:--

"In the morn-ing we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with a
new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony
to tell us so much as she has done; but it is most right, and we are
warned in time. There must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be
ready to act the in-stant when that ship ar-rives."

"What shall we do ex-actly?" asked Mr. Mor-ris lac-on-ic-ally. The Pro-fessor
paused be-fore reply-ing:--

"We shall at the first board that ship; then, when we have iden-ti-fied
the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. This we shall
fasten, for when it is there none can emerge; so at least says the
su-per-sti-tion. And to su-per-sti-tion must we trust at the first; it was
man's faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. Then,
when we get the op-por-tun-ity that we seek, when none are near to see, we
shall open the box, and--and all will be well."

"I shall not wait for any op-por-tun-ity," said Mor-ris. "When I see the box
I shall open it and des-troy the mon-ster, though there were a thou-sand
men look-ing on, and if I am to be wiped out for it the next mo-ment!" I
grasped his hand in-stinct-ively and found it as firm as a piece of steel.
I think he un-der-stood my look; I hope he did.

"Good boy," said Dr. Van Helsing. "Brave boy. Quin-cey is all man. God
bless him for it. My child, be-lieve me none of us shall lag be-hind or
pause from any fear. I do but say what we may do--what we must do. But,
in-deed, in-deed we can-not say what we shall do. There are so many things
which may hap-pen, and their ways and their ends are so vari-ous that
un-til the mo-ment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in all ways; and
when the time for the end has come, our ef-fort shall not be lack. Now
let us to-day put all our af-fairs in or-der. Let all things which touch
on oth-ers dear to us, and who on us de-pend, be com-plete; for none of us
can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own
af-fairs are reg-u-late; and as I have noth-ing else to do, I shall go make
ar-range-ments for the travel. I shall have all tick-ets and so forth for
our jour-ney."

There was noth-ing fur-ther to be said, and we par-ted. I shall now settle
up all my af-fairs of earth, and be ready for whatever may come....

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all com-plete. Mina if she
sur-vive is my sole heir. If it should not be so, then the oth-ers who
have been so good to us shall have re-mainder.

It is now draw-ing to-wards the sun-set; Mina's un-eas-i-ness calls my
at-ten-tion to it. I am sure that there is some-thing on her mind which the
time of ex-act sun-set will re-veal. These oc-ca-sions are be-com-ing har-row-ing
times for us all, for each sun-rise and sun-set opens up some new
danger--some new pain, which, how-ever, may in God's will be means to a
good end. I write all these things in the di-ary since my darling must
not hear them now; but if it may be that she can see them again, they
shall be ready.

She is call-ing to me.




CHAPTER XXV

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_11 Octo-ber, Even-ing._--Jonathan Harker has asked me to note this, as he
says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an ex-act re-cord kept.

I think that none of us were sur-prised when we were asked to see Mrs.
Harker a little be-fore the time of sun-set. We have of late come to
un-der-stand that sun-rise and sun-set are to her times of pe-cu-liar free-dom;
when her old self can be mani-fest without any con-trolling force sub-du-ing
or re-strain-ing her, or in-cit-ing her to ac-tion. This mood or con-di-tion
be-gins some half hour or more be-fore ac-tual sun-rise or sun-set, and lasts
till either the sun is high, or whilst the clouds are still aglow with
the rays stream-ing above the ho-ri-zon. At first there is a sort of
neg-at-ive con-di-tion, as if some tie were loosened, and then the ab-so-lute
free-dom quickly fol-lows; when, how-ever, the free-dom ceases the
change-back or re-lapse comes quickly, pre-ceded only by a spell of
warn-ing si-lence.

To-night, when we met, she was some-what con-strained, and bore all the
signs of an in-ternal struggle. I put it down my-self to her mak-ing a
vi-ol-ent ef-fort at the earli-est in-stant she could do so. A very few
minutes, how-ever, gave her com-plete con-trol of her-self; then, mo-tion-ing
her hus-band to sit be-side her on the sofa where she was half re-clin-ing,
she made the rest of us bring chairs up close. Tak-ing her hus-band's hand
in hers began:--

"We are all here to-gether in free-dom, for per-haps the last time! I know,
dear; I know that you will al-ways be with me to the end." This was to
her hus-band whose hand had, as we could see, tightened upon hers. "In
the morn-ing we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be in
store for any of us. You are go-ing to be so good to me as to take me
with you. I know that all that brave earn-est men can do for a poor weak
wo-man, whose soul per-haps is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate
at stake--you will do. But you must re-mem-ber that I am not as you are.
There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may des-troy me; which
must des-troy me, un-less some re-lief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you
know as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I know there
is one way out for me, you must not and I must not take it!" She looked
ap-peal-ingly to us all in turn, be-gin-ning and end-ing with her hus-band.

"What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in a hoarse voice. "What is that
way, which we must not--may not--take?"

"That I may die now, either by my own hand or that of an-other, be-fore
the greater evil is en-tirely wrought. I know, and you know, that were I
once dead you could and would set free my im-mor-tal spirit, even as you
did my poor Lucy's. Were death, or the fear of death, the only thing
that stood in the way I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the
friends who love me. But death is not all. I can-not be-lieve that to die
in such a case, when there is hope be-fore us and a bit-ter task to be
done, is God's will. There-fore, I, on my part, give up here the
cer-tainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark where may be the
black-est things that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all
si-lent, for we knew in-stinct-ively that this was only a pre-lude. The
faces of the oth-ers were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; per-haps he
guessed bet-ter than any of us what was com-ing. She con-tin-ued:--

"This is what I can give into the hotch-pot." I could not but note the
quaint legal phrase which she used in such a place, and with all
ser-i-ous-ness. "What will each of you give? Your lives I know," she went
on quickly, "that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God's, and you
can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked
again ques-tion-ingly, but this time avoided her hus-band's face. Quin-cey
seemed to un-der-stand; he nod-ded, and her face lit up. "Then I shall tell
you plainly what I want, for there must be no doubt-ful mat-ter in this
con-nec-tion between us now. You must prom-ise me, one and all--even you,
my be-loved hus-band--that, should the time come, you will kill me."

"What is that time?" The voice was Quin-cey's, but it was low and
strained.

"When you shall be con-vinced that I am so changed that it is bet-ter that
I die that I may live. When I am thus dead in the flesh, then you will,
without a mo-ment's delay, drive a stake through me and cut off my head;
or do whatever else may be want-ing to give me rest!"

Quin-cey was the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down be-fore her
and tak-ing her hand in his said sol-emnly:--

"I'm only a rough fel-low, who hasn't, per-haps, lived as a man should to
win such a dis-tinc-tion, but I swear to you by all that I hold sac-red and
dear that, should the time ever come, I shall not flinch from the duty
that you have set us. And I prom-ise you, too, that I shall make all
cer-tain, for if I am only doubt-ful I shall take it that the time has
come!"

"My true friend!" was all she could say amid her fast-fall-ing tears, as,
bend-ing over, she kissed his hand.

"I swear the same, my dear Madam Mina!" said Van Helsing.

"And I!" said Lord Godalm-ing, each of them in turn kneel-ing to her to
take the oath. I fol-lowed, my-self. Then her hus-band turned to her
wan-eyed and with a green-ish pal-lor which sub-dued the snowy white-ness of
his hair, and asked:--

"And must I, too, make such a prom-ise, oh, my wife?"

"You too, my dearest," she said, with in-fin-ite yearn-ing of pity in her
voice and eyes. "You must not shrink. You are nearest and dearest and
all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all
time. Think, dear, that there have been times when brave men have killed
their wives and their wo-men-kind, to keep them from fall-ing into the
hands of the en-emy. Their hands did not fal-ter any the more be-cause
those that they loved im-plored them to slay them. It is men's duty
to-wards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! And oh, my
dear, if it is to be that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at
the hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, I have not
for-got-ten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who loved"--she stopped
with a fly-ing blush, and changed her phrase--"to him who had best right
to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make
it a happy memory of my hus-band's life that it was his lov-ing hand which
set me free from the aw-ful thrall upon me."

"Again I swear!" came the Pro-fessor's res-on-ant voice. Mrs. Harker
smiled, pos-it-ively smiled, as with a sigh of re-lief she leaned back and
said:--

"And now one word of warn-ing, a warn-ing which you must never for-get:
this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and un-ex-pec-tedly, and in
such case you must lose no time in us-ing your op-por-tun-ity. At such a
time I my-self might be--nay! if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued
with your en-emy against you."

"One more re-quest;" she be-came very sol-emn as she said this, "it is not
vi-tal and ne-ces-sary like the other, but I want you to do one thing for
me, if you will." We all ac-qui-esced, but no one spoke; there was no need
to speak:--

"I want you to read the Burial Ser-vice." She was in-ter-rup-ted by a deep
groan from her hus-band; tak-ing his hand in hers, she held it over her
heart, and con-tin-ued: "You must read it over me some day. Whatever may
be the is-sue of all this fear-ful state of things, it will be a sweet
thought to all or some of us. You, my dearest, will I hope read it, for
then it will be in your voice in my memory for ever--come what may!"

"But oh, my dear one," he pleaded, "death is afar off from you."

"Nay," she said, hold-ing up a warn-ing hand. "I am deeper in death at
this mo-ment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!"

"Oh, my wife, must I read it?" he said, be-fore he began.

"It would com-fort me, my hus-band!" was all she said; and he began to
read when she had got the book ready.

"How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its
solem-nity, its gloom, its sad-ness, its hor-ror; and, withal, its
sweet-ness. Even a scep-tic, who can see noth-ing but a trav-esty of bit-ter
truth in any-thing holy or emo-tional, would have been melted to the heart
had he seen that little group of lov-ing and de-voted friends kneel-ing
round that stricken and sor-row-ing lady; or heard the tender pas-sion of
her hus-band's voice, as in tones so broken with emo-tion that of-ten he
had to pause, he read the simple and beau-ti-ful ser-vice from the Burial
of the Dead. I--I can-not go on--words--and--v-voice--f-fail m-me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She was right in her in-stinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may
here-after seem even to us who felt its po-tent in-flu-ence at the time, it
com-for-ted us much; and the si-lence, which showed Mrs. Harker's com-ing
re-lapse from her free-dom of soul, did not seem so full of des-pair to any
of us as we had dreaded.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_15 Octo-ber, Varna._--We left Char-ing Cross on the morn-ing of the 12th,
got to Paris the same night, and took the places se-cured for us in the
Ori-ent Ex-press. We trav-elled night and day, ar-riv-ing here at about five
o'clock. Lord Godalm-ing went to the Con-su-late to see if any tele-gram had
ar-rived for him, whilst the rest of us came on to this hotel--"the
Odes-sus." The jour-ney may have had in-cid-ents; I was, how-ever, too eager
to get on, to care for them. Until the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ comes into
port there will be no in-terest for me in any-thing in the wide world.
Thank God! Mina is well, and looks to be get-ting stronger; her col-our is
com-ing back. She sleeps a great deal; through-out the jour-ney she slept
nearly all the time. Be-fore sun-rise and sun-set, how-ever, she is very
wake-ful and alert; and it has be-come a habit for Van Helsing to
hyp-not-ise her at such times. At first, some ef-fort was needed, and he
had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as if by
habit, and scarcely any ac-tion is needed. He seems to have power at
these par-tic-u-lar mo-ments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. He
al-ways asks her what she can see and hear. She an-swers to the first:--

"Noth-ing; all is dark." And to the second:--

"I can hear the waves lap-ping against the ship, and the wa-ter rush-ing
by. Can-vas and cord-age strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is
high--I can hear it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam."
It is evid-ent that the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ is still at sea, hasten-ing on
her way to Varna. Lord Godalm-ing has just re-turned. He had four
tele-grams, one each day since we star-ted, and all to the same ef-fect:
that the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ had not been re-por-ted to Lloyd's from
any-where. He had ar-ranged be-fore leav-ing Lon-don that his agent should
send him every day a tele-gram say-ing if the ship had been re-por-ted. He
was to have a mes-sage even if she were not re-por-ted, so that he might be
sure that there was a watch be-ing kept at the other end of the wire.

We had din-ner and went to bed early. To-mor-row we are to see the
Vice-Con-sul, and to ar-range, if we can, about get-ting on board the ship
as soon as she ar-rives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to get
on the boat between sun-rise and sun-set. The Count, even if he takes the
form of a bat, can-not cross the run-ning wa-ter of his own vo-li-tion, and
so can-not leave the ship. As he dare not change to man's form without
sus-pi-cion--which he evid-ently wishes to avoid--he must re-main in the
box. If, then, we can come on board after sun-rise, he is at our mercy;
for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy,
be-fore he wakes. What mercy he shall get from us will not count for
much. We think that we shall not have much trouble with of-fi-cials or the
sea-men. Thank God! this is the coun-try where bribery can do any-thing,
and we are well sup-plied with money. We have only to make sure that the
ship can-not come into port between sun-set and sun-rise without our be-ing
warned, and we shall be safe. Judge Money-bag will settle this case, I
think!

       *       *       *       *       *

_16 Octo-ber._--Mina's re-port still the same: lap-ping waves and rush-ing
wa-ter, dark-ness and fa-vour-ing winds. We are evid-ently in good time, and
when we hear of the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ we shall be ready. As she must
pass the Dard-anelles we are sure to have some re-port.

       *       *       *       *       *

_17 Octo-ber._--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to wel-come
the Count on his re-turn from his tour. Godalm-ing told the ship-pers that
he fan-cied that the box sent aboard might con-tain some-thing stolen from
a friend of his, and got a half con-sent that he might open it at his own
risk. The owner gave him a pa-per telling the Cap-tain to give him every
fa-cil-ity in do-ing whatever he chose on board the ship, and also a
sim-ilar au-thor-isa-tion to his agent at Varna. We have seen the agent, who
was much im-pressed with Godalm-ing's kindly man-ner to him, and we are all
sat-is-fied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We
have already ar-ranged what to do in case we get the box open. If the
Count is there, Van Helsing and Se-ward will cut off his head at once and
drive a stake through his heart. Mor-ris and Godalm-ing and I shall
pre-vent in-ter-fer-ence, even if we have to use the arms which we shall
have ready. The Pro-fessor says that if we can so treat the Count's body,
it will soon after fall into dust. In such case there would be no
evid-ence against us, in case any sus-pi-cion of murder were aroused. But
even if it were not, we should stand or fall by our act, and per-haps
some day this very script may be evid-ence to come between some of us and
a rope. For my-self, I should take the chance only too thank-fully if it
were to come. We mean to leave no stone un-turned to carry out our
in-tent. We have ar-ranged with cer-tain of-fi-cials that the in-stant the
_Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ is seen, we are to be in-formed by a spe-cial
mes-sen-ger.

       *       *       *       *       *

_24 Octo-ber._--A whole week of wait-ing. Daily tele-grams to Godalm-ing,
but only the same story: "Not yet re-por-ted." Mina's morn-ing and even-ing
hyp-notic an-swer is un-var-ied: lap-ping waves, rush-ing wa-ter, and creak-ing
masts.

_Tele-gram, Octo-ber 24th._

_Ru-fus Smith, Lloyd's, Lon-don, to Lord Godalm-ing, care of H. B. M.
Vice-Con-sul, Varna._

"_Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ re-por-ted this morn-ing from Dard-anelles."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_25 Octo-ber._--How I miss my phono-graph! To write di-ary with a pen is
irk-some to me; but Van Helsing says I must. We were all wild with
ex-cite-ment yes-ter-day when Godalm-ing got his tele-gram from Lloyd's. I
know now what men feel in battle when the call to ac-tion is heard. Mrs.
Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emo-tion. After
all, it is not strange that she did not; for we took spe-cial care not to
let her know any-thing about it, and we all tried not to show any
ex-cite-ment when we were in her pres-ence. In old days she would, I am
sure, have no-ticed, no mat-ter how we might have tried to con-ceal it; but
in this way she is greatly changed dur-ing the past three weeks. The
leth-argy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is
get-ting back some of her col-our, Van Helsing and I are not sat-is-fied. We
talk of her of-ten; we have not, how-ever, said a word to the oth-ers. It
would break poor Harker's heart--cer-tainly his nerve--if he knew that we
had even a sus-pi-cion on the sub-ject. Van Helsing ex-am-ines, he tells me,
her teeth very care-fully, whilst she is in the hyp-notic con-di-tion, for
he says that so long as they do not be-gin to sharpen there is no act-ive
danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would be
ne-ces-sary to take steps!... We both know what those steps would have to
be, though we do not men-tion our thoughts to each other. We should
neither of us shrink from the task--aw-ful though it be to con-tem-plate.
"Euthanasia" is an ex-cel-lent and a com-fort-ing word! I am grate-ful to
who-ever in-ven-ted it.

It is only about 24 hours' sail from the Dard-anelles to here, at the
rate the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ has come from Lon-don. She should there-fore
ar-rive some time in the morn-ing; but as she can-not pos-sibly get in
be-fore then, we are all about to re-tire early. We shall get up at one
o'clock, so as to be ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

_25 Octo-ber, Noon_.--No news yet of the ship's ar-rival. Mrs. Harker's
hyp-notic re-port this morn-ing was the same as usual, so it is pos-sible
that we may get news at any mo-ment. We men are all in a fever of
ex-cite-ment, ex-cept Harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and
an hour ago I found him whet-ting the edge of the great Ghoo-rka knife
which he now al-ways car-ries with him. It will be a bad lookout for the
Count if the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by
that stern, ice-cold hand!

Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About
noon she got into a sort of leth-argy which we did not like; al-though we
kept si-lence to the oth-ers, we were neither of us happy about it. She
had been rest-less all the morn-ing, so that we were at first glad to know
that she was sleep-ing. When, how-ever, her hus-band men-tioned cas-u-ally
that she was sleep-ing so soundly that he could not wake her, we went to
her room to see for ourselves. She was breath-ing nat-ur-ally and looked so
well and peace-ful that we agreed that the sleep was bet-ter for her than
any-thing else. Poor girl, she has so much to for-get that it is no won-der
that sleep, if it brings ob-li-vion to her, does her good.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Our opin-ion was jus-ti-fied, for when after a re-fresh-ing sleep
of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and bet-ter than she had
been for days. At sun-set she made the usual hyp-notic re-port. Wherever he
may be in the Black Sea, the Count is hur-ry-ing to his des-tin-a-tion. To
his doom, I trust!

       *       *       *       *       *

_26 Octo-ber._--Another day and no tid-ings of the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_.
She ought to be here by now. That she is still jour-ney-ing _some-where_ is
ap-par-ent, for Mrs. Harker's hyp-notic re-port at sun-rise was still the
same. It is pos-sible that the ves-sel may be ly-ing by, at times, for fog;
some of the steam-ers which came in last even-ing re-por-ted patches of fog
both to north and south of the port. We must con-tinue our watch-ing, as
the ship may now be sig-nalled any mo-ment.

       *       *       *       *       *

_27 Octo-ber, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for.
Mrs. Harker re-por-ted last night and this morn-ing as usual: "lap-ping
waves and rush-ing wa-ter," though she ad-ded that "the waves were very
faint." The tele-grams from Lon-don have been the same: "no fur-ther
re-port." Van Helsing is ter-ribly anxious, and told me just now that he
fears the Count is es-cap-ing us. He ad-ded sig-ni-fic-antly:--

"I did not like that leth-argy of Madam Mina's. Souls and memor-ies can do
strange things dur-ing trance." I was about to ask him more, but Harker
just then came in, and he held up a warn-ing hand. We must try to-night
at sun-set to make her speak more fully when in her hyp-notic state.

       *       *       *       *       *

     _28 Octo-ber._--Tele-gram. _Ru-fus Smith, Lon-don, to Lord Godalm-ing,
     care H. B. M. Vice Con-sul, Varna._

     "_Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_ re-por-ted en-ter-ing Gal-atz at one o'clock
     to-day."


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_28 Octo-ber._--When the tele-gram came an-noun-cing the ar-rival in Gal-atz I
do not think it was such a shock to any of us as might have been
ex-pec-ted. True, we did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would
come; but I think we all ex-pec-ted that some-thing strange would hap-pen.
The delay of ar-rival at Varna made us in-di-vidu-ally sat-is-fied that things
would not be just as we had ex-pec-ted; we only waited to learn where the
change would oc-cur. None the less, how-ever, was it a sur-prise. I sup-pose
that nature works on such a hope-ful basis that we be-lieve against
ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know
that they will be. Tran-scend-ent-al-ism is a beacon to the an-gels, even if
it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an odd ex-per-i-ence and we all
took it dif-fer-ently. Van Helsing raised his hand over his head for a
mo-ment, as though in re-mon-strance with the Almighty; but he said not a
word, and in a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. Lord
Godalm-ing grew very pale, and sat breath-ing heav-ily. I was my-self half
stunned and looked in won-der at one after an-other. Quin-cey Mor-ris
tightened his belt with that quick move-ment which I knew so well; in our
old wan-der-ing days it meant "ac-tion." Mrs. Harker grew ghastly white, so
that the scar on her fore-head seemed to burn, but she fol-ded her hands
meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--ac-tu-ally smiled--the
dark, bit-ter smile of one who is without hope; but at the same time his
ac-tion be-lied his words, for his hands in-stinct-ively sought the hilt of
the great Kukri knife and res-ted there. "When does the next train start
for Gal-atz?" said Van Helsing to us gen-er-ally.

"At 6:30 to-mor-row morn-ing!" We all star-ted, for the an-swer came from
Mrs. Harker.

"How on earth do you know?" said Art.

"You for-get--or per-haps you do not know, though Jonathan does and so
does Dr. Van Helsing--that I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I
al-ways used to make up the time-tables, so as to be help-ful to my
hus-band. I found it so use-ful some-times, that I al-ways make a study of
the time-tables now. I knew that if any-thing were to take us to Castle
Drac-ula we should go by Gal-atz, or at any rate through Bucharest, so I
learned the times very care-fully. Un-hap-pily there are not many to learn,
as the only train to-mor-row leaves as I say."

"Won-der-ful wo-man!" mur-mured the Pro-fessor.

"Can't we get a spe-cial?" asked Lord Godalm-ing. Van Helsing shook his
head: "I fear not. This land is very dif-fer-ent from yours or mine; even
if we did have a spe-cial, it would prob-ably not ar-rive as soon as our
reg-u-lar train. Moreover, we have some-thing to pre-pare. We must think.
Now let us or-gan-ize. You, friend Ar-thur, go to the train and get the
tick-ets and ar-range that all be ready for us to go in the morn-ing. Do
you, friend Jonathan, go to the agent of the ship and get from him
let-ters to the agent in Gal-atz, with au-thor-ity to make search the ship
just as it was here. Mor-ris Quin-cey, you see the Vice-Con-sul, and get
his aid with his fel-low in Gal-atz and all he can do to make our way
smooth, so that no times be lost when over the Danube. John will stay
with Madam Mina and me, and we shall con-sult. For so if time be long you
may be delayed; and it will not mat-ter when the sun set, since I am here
with Madam to make re-port."

"And I," said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like her old self than she
had been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, and
shall think and write for you as I used to do. So-mething is shift-ing
from me in some strange way, and I feel freer than I have been of late!"
The three younger men looked hap-pier at the mo-ment as they seemed to
real-ise the sig-ni-fic-ance of her words; but Van Helsing and I, turn-ing to
each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said noth-ing at the
time, how-ever.

When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs.
Harker to look up the copy of the di-ar-ies and find him the part of
Harker's journal at the Castle. She went away to get it; when the door
was shut upon her he said to me:--

"We mean the same! speak out!"

"There is some change. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may
de-ceive us."

"Quite so. Do you know why I asked her to get the ma-nu-script?"

"No!" said I, "un-less it was to get an op-por-tun-ity of see-ing me alone."

"You are in part right, friend John, but only in part. I want to tell
you some-thing. And oh, my friend, I am tak-ing a great--a ter-rible--risk;
but I be-lieve it is right. In the mo-ment when Madam Mina said those
words that ar-rest both our un-der-stand-ing, an in-spir-a-tion came to me. In
the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her
mind; or more like he took her to see him in his earth-box in the ship
with wa-ter rush-ing, just as it go free at rise and set of sun. He learn
then that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with
eyes to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box.
Now he make his most ef-fort to es-cape us. At present he want her not.

"He is sure with his so great know-ledge that she will come at his call;
but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his own power, that
so she come not to him. Ah! there I have hope that our man-brains that
have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will
come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for cen-tur-ies,
that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and
there-fore small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to her of her trance!
She know it not; and it would over-whelm her and make des-pair just when
we want all her hope, all her cour-age; when most we want all her great
brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet wo-man and have
a spe-cial power which the Count give her, and which he may not take away
al-to-gether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall
learn. Oh, John, my friend, we are in aw-ful straits. I fear, as I never
feared be-fore. We can only trust the good God. Si-lence! here she comes!"

I thought that the Pro-fessor was go-ing to break down and have hys-ter-ics,
just as he had when Lucy died, but with a great ef-fort he con-trolled
him-self and was at per-fect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into
the room, bright and happy-look-ing and, in the do-ing of work, seem-ingly
for-get-ful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a num-ber of sheets
of type-writ-ing to Van Helsing. He looked over them gravely, his face
bright-en-ing up as he read. Then hold-ing the pages between his fin-ger and
thumb he said:--

"Friend John, to you with so much of ex-per-i-ence already--and you, too,
dear Madam Mina, that are young--here is a les-son: do not fear ever to
think. A half-thought has been buzz-ing of-ten in my brain, but I fear to
let him loose his wings. Here now, with more know-ledge, I go back to
where that half-thought come from and I find that he be no half-thought
at all; that be a whole thought, though so young that he is not yet
strong to use his little wings. Nay, like the "Ugly Duck" of my friend
Hans Ander-sen, he be no duck-thought at all, but a big swan-thought that
sail nobly on big wings, when the time come for him to try them. See I
read here what Jonathan have writ-ten:--

"That other of his race who, in a later age, again and again, brought
his forces over The Great River into Tur-key Land; who, when he was
beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had to come
alone from the bloody field where his troops were be-ing slaughtered,
since he knew that he alone could ul-ti-mately tri-umph."

"What does this tell us? Not much? no! The Count's child-thought see
noth-ing; there-fore he speak so free. Your man-thought see noth-ing; my
man-thought see noth-ing, till just now. No! But there comes an-other word
from some one who speak without thought be-cause she, too, know not what
it mean--what it _might_ mean. Just as there are ele-ments which rest,
yet when in nature's course they move on their way and they touch--then
pouf! and there comes a flash of light, heaven wide, that blind and kill
and des-troy some; but that show up all earth be-low for leagues and
leagues. Is it not so? Well, I shall ex-plain. To be-gin, have you ever
study the philo-sophy of crime? 'Yes' and 'No.' You, John, yes; for it is
a study of in-san-ity. You, no, Madam Mina; for crime touch you not--not
but once. Still, your mind works true, and ar-gues not _a par-tic-u-lari ad
uni-ver-sale_. There is this pe-cu-li-ar-ity in crim-in-als. It is so con-stant,
in all coun-tries and at all times, that even po-lice, who know not much
from philo-sophy, come to know it em-pir-ic-ally, that _it is_. That is to
be em-piric. The crim-inal al-ways work at one crime--that is the true
crim-inal who seems pre-des-tin-ate to crime, and who will of none other.
This crim-inal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cun-ning and
re-source-ful; but he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of
child-brain in much. Now this crim-inal of ours is pre-des-tin-ate to crime
also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is of the child to do what he
have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little an-imal learn not
by prin-ciple, but em-pir-ic-ally; and when he learn to do, then there is to
him the ground to start from to do more. '_Dos pou sto_,' said
Archimedes. 'Give me a ful-crum, and I shall move the world!' To do once,
is the ful-crum whereby child-brain be-come man-brain; and un-til he have
the pur-pose to do more, he con-tinue to do the same again every time,
just as he have done be-fore! Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are
opened, and that to you the light-ning flash show all the leagues," for
Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and her eyes sparkled. He went on:--

"Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of sci-ence what you see with
those so bright eyes." He took her hand and held it whilst she spoke.
His fin-ger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought in-stinct-ively and
un-con-sciously, as she spoke:--

"The Count is a crim-inal and of crim-inal type. Nordau and Lom-broso would
so clas-sify him, and _quâ_ crim-inal he is of im-per-fectly formed mind.
Thus, in a dif-fi-culty he has to seek re-source in habit. His past is a
clue, and the one page of it that we know--and that from his own
lips--tells that once be-fore, when in what Mr. Mor-ris would call a
'tight place,' he went back to his own coun-try from the land he had
tried to in-vade, and thence, without los-ing pur-pose, pre-pared him-self
for a new ef-fort. He came again bet-ter equipped for his work; and won.
So he came to Lon-don to in-vade a new land. He was beaten, and when all
hope of suc-cess was lost, and his ex-ist-ence in danger, he fled back over
the sea to his home; just as formerly he had fled back over the Danube
from Tur-key Land."

"Good, good! oh, you so clever lady!" said Van Helsing,
en-thu-si-ast-ic-ally, as he stooped and kissed her hand. A mo-ment later he
said to me, as calmly as though we had been hav-ing a sick-room
con-sulta-tion:--

"Seventy-two only; and in all this ex-cite-ment. I have hope." Turn-ing to
her again, he said with keen ex-pect-a-tion:--

"But go on. Go on! there is more to tell if you will. Be not afraid;
John and I know. I do in any case, and shall tell you if you are right.
Speak, without fear!"

"I will try to; but you will for-give me if I seem egot-ist-ical."

"Nay! fear not, you must be egot-ist, for it is of you that we think."

"Then, as he is crim-inal he is selfish; and as his in-tel-lect is small
and his ac-tion is based on selfish-ness, he con-fines him-self to one
pur-pose. That pur-pose is re-morse-less. As he fled back over the Danube,
leav-ing his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is in-tent on be-ing
safe, care-less of all. So his own selfish-ness frees my soul some-what
from the ter-rible power which he ac-quired over me on that dread-ful
night. I felt it! Oh, I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! My soul
is freer than it has been since that aw-ful hour; and all that haunts me
is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used my know-ledge for
his ends." The Pro-fessor stood up:--

"He has so used your mind; and by it he has left us here in Varna,
whilst the ship that car-ried him rushed through en-vel-op-ing fog up to
Gal-atz, where, doubt-less, he had made pre-par-a-tion for es-cap-ing from us.
But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be that, as ever is in
God's Provid-ence, the very thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for
his selfish good, turns out to be his chiefest harm. The hunter is taken
in his own snare, as the great Psalm-ist says. For now that he think he
is free from every trace of us all, and that he has es-caped us with so
many hours to him, then his selfish child-brain will whis-per him to
sleep. He think, too, that as he cut him-self off from know-ing your mind,
there can be no know-ledge of him to you; there is where he fail! That
ter-rible bap-tism of blood which he give you makes you free to go to him
in spirit, as you have as yet done in your times of free-dom, when the
sun rise and set. At such times you go by my vo-li-tion and not by his;
and this power to good of you and oth-ers, as you have won from your
suf-fer-ing at his hands. This is now all the more pre-cious that he know
it not, and to guard him-self have even cut him-self off from his
know-ledge of our where. We, how-ever, are not selfish, and we be-lieve
that God is with us through all this black-ness, and these many dark
hours. We shall fol-low him; and we shall not flinch; even if we peril
ourselves that we be-come like him. Friend John, this has been a great
hour; and it have done much to ad-vance us on our way. You must be scribe
and write him all down, so that when the oth-ers re-turn from their work
you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do."

And so I have writ-ten it whilst we wait their re-turn, and Mrs. Harker
has writ-ten with her type-writer all since she brought the MS. to us.




CHAPTER XXVI

DR. SEWARD'S DIARY


_29 Octo-ber._--This is writ-ten in the train from Varna to Gal-atz. Last
night we all as-sembled a little be-fore the time of sun-set. Each of us
had done his work as well as he could; so far as thought, and en-deav-our,
and op-por-tun-ity go, we are pre-pared for the whole of our jour-ney, and
for our work when we get to Gal-atz. When the usual time came round Mrs.
Harker pre-pared her-self for her hyp-notic ef-fort; and after a longer and
more ser-i-ous ef-fort on the part of Van Helsing than has been usu-ally
ne-ces-sary, she sank into the trance. Usu-ally she speaks on a hint; but
this time the Pro-fessor had to ask her ques-tions, and to ask them pretty
res-ol-utely, be-fore we could learn any-thing; at last her an-swer came:--

"I can see noth-ing; we are still; there are no waves lap-ping, but only a
steady swirl of wa-ter softly run-ning against the hawser. I can hear
men's voices call-ing, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in
the row-locks. A gun is fired some-where; the echo of it seems far away.
There is tramp-ing of feet over-head, and ropes and chains are dragged
along. What is this? There is a gleam of light; I can feel the air
blow-ing upon me."

Here she stopped. She had risen, as if im-puls-ively, from where she lay
on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms up-wards, as if lift-ing a
weight. Van Helsing and I looked at each other with un-der-stand-ing.
Quin-cey raised his eye-brows slightly and looked at her in-tently, whilst
Harker's hand in-stinct-ively closed round the hilt of his Kukri. There
was a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could speak was
passing; but we felt that it was use-less to say any-thing. Sud-denly she
sat up, and, as she opened her eyes, said sweetly:--

"Would none of you like a cup of tea? You must all be so tired!" We
could only make her happy, and so ac-qui-esced. She bustled off to get
tea; when she had gone Van Helsing said:--

"You see, my friends. _He_ is close to land: he has left his
earth-chest. But he has yet to get on shore. In the night he may lie
hid-den some-where; but if he be not car-ried on shore, or if the ship do
not touch it, he can-not achieve the land. In such case he can, if it be
in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did
at Whitby. But if the day come be-fore he get on shore, then, un-less he
be car-ried he can-not es-cape. And if he be car-ried, then the cus-toms men
may dis-cover what the box con-tain. Thus, in fine, if he es-cape not on
shore to-night, or be-fore dawn, there will be the whole day lost to him.
We may then ar-rive in time; for if he es-cape not at night we shall come
on him in day-time, boxed up and at our mercy; for he dare not be his
true self, awake and vis-ible, lest he be dis-covered."

There was no more to be said, so we waited in pa-tience un-til the dawn;
at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker.

Early this morn-ing we listened, with breath-less anxi-ety, for her
re-sponse in her trance. The hyp-notic stage was even longer in com-ing
than be-fore; and when it came the time re-main-ing un-til full sun-rise was
so short that we began to des-pair. Van Helsing seemed to throw his whole
soul into the ef-fort; at last, in obed-i-ence to his will she made
reply:--

"All is dark. I hear lap-ping wa-ter, level with me, and some creak-ing as
of wood on wood." She paused, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till
to-night.

And so it is that we are trav-el-ling to-wards Gal-atz in an agony of
ex-pect-a-tion. We are due to ar-rive between two and three in the morn-ing;
but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we can-not
pos-sibly get in till well after sun-up. Thus we shall have two more
hyp-notic mes-sages from Mrs. Harker; either or both may pos-sibly throw
more light on what is hap-pen-ing.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Sun-set has come and gone. For-tunately it came at a time when
there was no dis-trac-tion; for had it oc-curred whilst we were at a
sta-tion, we might not have se-cured the ne-ces-sary calm and isol-a-tion.
Mrs. Harker yiel-ded to the hyp-notic in-flu-ence even less read-ily than
this morn-ing. I am in fear that her power of read-ing the Count's
sen-sa-tions may die away, just when we want it most. It seems to me that
her ima-gin-a-tion is be-gin-ning to work. Whilst she has been in the trance
hitherto she has con-fined her-self to the simplest of facts. If this goes
on it may ul-ti-mately mis-lead us. If I thought that the Count's power
over her would die away equally with her power of know-ledge it would be
a happy thought; but I am afraid that it may not be so. When she did
speak, her words were en-ig-mat-ical:--

"So-mething is go-ing out; I can feel it pass me like a cold wind. I can
hear, far off, con-fused sounds--as of men talk-ing in strange tongues,
fierce-fall-ing wa-ter, and the howl-ing of wolves." She stopped and a
shud-der ran through her, in-creas-ing in in-tens-ity for a few seconds,
till, at the end, she shook as though in a palsy. She said no more, even
in an-swer to the Pro-fessor's im-per-at-ive ques-tion-ing. When she woke from
the trance, she was cold, and ex-hausted, and lan-guid; but her mind was
all alert. She could not re-mem-ber any-thing, but asked what she had said;
when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time and in
si-lence.

       *       *       *       *       *

_30 Octo-ber, 7 a. m._--We are near Gal-atz now, and I may not have time
to write later. Sun-rise this morn-ing was anxiously looked for by us all.
Know-ing of the in-creas-ing dif-fi-culty of pro-cur-ing the hyp-notic trance,
Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They pro-duced no
ef-fect, how-ever, un-til the reg-u-lar time, when she yiel-ded with a still
greater dif-fi-culty, only a minute be-fore the sun rose. The Pro-fessor
lost no time in his ques-tion-ing; her an-swer came with equal quick-ness:--

"All is dark. I hear wa-ter swirl-ing by, level with my ears, and the
creak-ing of wood on wood. Cattle low far off. There is an-other sound, a
queer one like----" She stopped and grew white, and whiter still.

"Go on; go on! Speak, I com-mand you!" said Van Helsing in an ag-on-ised
voice. At the same time there was des-pair in his eyes, for the risen sun
was red-den-ing even Mrs. Harker's pale face. She opened her eyes, and we
all star-ted as she said, sweetly and seem-ingly with the ut-most
un-con-cern:--

"Oh, Pro-fessor, why ask me to do what you know I can't? I don't re-mem-ber
any-thing." Then, see-ing the look of amazement on our faces, she said,
turn-ing from one to the other with a troubled look:--

"What have I said? What have I done? I know noth-ing, only that I was
ly-ing here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I com-mand you!'
It seemed so funny to hear you or-der me about, as if I were a bad
child!"

"Oh, Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of
how I love and hon-our you, when a word for your good, spoken more
earn-est than ever, can seem so strange be-cause it is to or-der her whom I
am proud to obey!"

The whistles are sound-ing; we are near-ing Gal-atz. We are on fire with
anxi-ety and eager-ness.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 Octo-ber._--Mr. Mor-ris took me to the hotel where our rooms had been
ordered by tele-graph, he be-ing the one who could best be spared, since
he does not speak any for-eign lan-guage. The forces were dis-trib-uted
much as they had been at Varna, ex-cept that Lord Godalm-ing went to the
Vice-Con-sul, as his rank might serve as an im-me-di-ate guar-an-tee of some
sort to the of-fi-cial, we be-ing in ex-treme hurry. Jonathan and the two
doc-tors went to the ship-ping agent to learn par-tic-u-lars of the ar-rival
of the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Lord Godalm-ing has re-turned. The Con-sul is away, and the
Vice-Con-sul sick; so the routine work has been at-ten-ded to by a clerk.
He was very ob-li-ging, and offered to do any-thing in his power.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_30 Octo-ber._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Se-ward, and I called
on Messrs. Mack-en-zie & Steinkoff, the agents of the Lon-don firm of
Hap-good. They had re-ceived a wire from Lon-don, in an-swer to Lord
Godalm-ing's tele-graphed re-quest, ask-ing us to show them any ci-vil-ity in
their power. They were more than kind and cour-teous, and took us at once
on board the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_, which lay at an-chor out in the river
har-bour. There we saw the Cap-tain, Donel-son by name, who told us of his
voy-age. He said that in all his life he had never had so fa-vour-able a
run.

"Man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we ex-peckit that we should
have to pay for it wi' some rare piece o' ill luck, so as to keep up the
av-er-age. It's no canny to run frae Lon-don to the Black Sea wi' a wind
ah-int ye, as though the Deil him-self were blawin' on yer sail for his
ain pur-pose. An' a' the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh
a ship, or a port, or a head-land, a fog fell on us and trav-elled wi' us,
till when after it had lif-ted and we looked out, the deil a thing could
we see. We ran by Gibral-tar wi'oot bein' able to sig-nal; an' till we
came to the Dard-anelles and had to wait to get our per-mit to pass, we
never were within hail o' aught. At first I in-clined to slack off sail
and beat about till the fog was lif-ted; but whiles, I thocht that if the
Deil was minded to get us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to do it
whether we would or no. If we had a quick voy-age it would be no to our
mis-credit wi' the own-ers, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who
had served his ain pur-pose wad be de-cently grate-ful to us for no
hinderin' him." This mix-ture of sim-pli-city and cun-ning, of su-per-sti-tion
and com-mer-cial reas-on-ing, aroused Van Helsing, who said:--

"Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and
he know when he meet his match!" The skip-per was not dis-pleased with the
com-pli-ment, and went on:--

"When we got past the Bos-phorus the men began to grumble; some o' them,
the Rou-mani-ans, came and asked me to heave over-board a big box which had
been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just be-fore we had star-ted
frae Lon-don. I had seen them speer at the fel-low, and put out their twa
fin-gers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. Man! but the
su-per-stee-tion of for-eign-ers is pair-fectly rideec-u-lous! I sent them aboot
their busi-ness pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I
felt a wee bit as they did anent some-thing, though I wouldn't say it was
agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the fog didn't let up for
five days I joost let the wind carry us; for if the Deil wanted to get
some-wheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well,
we'd keep a sharp lookout any-how. Sure en-euch, we had a fair way and
deep wa-ter all the time; and two days ago, when the mornin' sun came
through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river op-pos-ite Gal-atz.
The Rou-mani-ans were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the
box and fling it in the river. I had to argy wi' them aboot it wi' a
hand-spike; an' when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' his head in
his hand, I had con-vinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the
prop-erty and the trust of my own-ers were bet-ter in my hands than in the
river Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to
fling in, and as it was marked Gal-atz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it
lie till we dis-charged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We
didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to re-main the nicht at an-chor;
but in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour be-fore sun-up, a man came
aboard wi' an or-der, writ-ten to him from Eng-land, to re-ceive a box
marked for one Count Drac-ula. Sure en-euch the mat-ter was one ready to
his hand. He had his pa-pers a' reet, an' glad I was to be rid o' the
dam' thing, for I was be-gin-nin' masel' to feel un-easy at it. If the Deil
did have any lug-gage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither
than that same!"

"What was the name of the man who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing with
re-strained eager-ness.

"I'll be tel-lin' ye quick!" he answered, and, step-ping down to his
cabin, pro-duced a re-ceipt signed "Im-manuel Hildesheim." Bur-gen-strasse
16 was the ad-dress. We found out that this was all the Cap-tain knew; so
with thanks we came away.

We found Hildesheim in his of-fice, a Hebrew of rather the Adelphi
Theatre type, with a nose like a sheep, and a fez. His ar-gu-ments were
poin-ted with specie--we do-ing the punc-tu-ation--and with a little
bar-gain-ing he told us what he knew. This turned out to be simple but
im-port-ant. He had re-ceived a let-ter from Mr. de Ville of Lon-don, telling
him to re-ceive, if pos-sible be-fore sun-rise so as to avoid cus-toms, a box
which would ar-rive at Gal-atz in the _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_. This he was to
give in charge to a cer-tain Pet-rof Sk-in-sky, who dealt with the Slovaks
who traded down the river to the port. He had been paid for his work by
an Eng-lish bank note, which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube
In-ter-na-tional Bank. When Sk-in-sky had come to him, he had taken him to
the ship and handed over the box, so as to save porter-age. That was all
he knew.

We then sought for Sk-in-sky, but were un-able to find him. One of his
neigh-bours, who did not seem to bear him any af-fec-tion, said that he had
gone away two days be-fore, no one knew whither. This was cor-rob-or-ated by
his land-lord, who had re-ceived by mes-sen-ger the key of the house
to-gether with the rent due, in Eng-lish money. This had been between ten
and el-even o'clock last night. We were at a stand-still again.

Whilst we were talk-ing one came run-ning and breath-lessly gasped out that
the body of Sk-in-sky had been found in-side the wall of the church-yard of
St. Peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if by some wild
an-imal. Those we had been speak-ing with ran off to see the hor-ror, the
wo-men cry-ing out "This is the work of a Slovak!" We hur-ried away lest we
should have been in some way drawn into the af-fair, and so de-tained.

As we came home we could ar-rive at no def-in-ite con-clu-sion. We were all
con-vinced that the box was on its way, by wa-ter, to some-where; but where
that might be we would have to dis-cover. With heavy hearts we came home
to the hotel to Mina.

When we met to-gether, the first thing was to con-sult as to tak-ing Mina
again into our con-fid-ence. Th-ings are get-ting des-per-ate, and it is at
least a chance, though a haz-ard-ous one. As a pre-lim-in-ary step, I was
re-leased from my prom-ise to her.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_30 Octo-ber, even-ing._--They were so tired and worn out and dis-pir-ited
that there was noth-ing to be done till they had some rest; so I asked
them all to lie down for half an hour whilst I should enter everything
up to the mo-ment. I feel so grate-ful to the man who in-ven-ted the
"Trav-el-ler's" type-writer, and to Mr. Mor-ris for get-ting this one for
me. I should have felt quite; astray do-ing the work if I had to write
with a pen....

It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have suffered,
what must he be suf-fer-ing now. He lies on the sofa hardly seem-ing to
breathe, and his whole body ap-pears in col-lapse. His brows are knit; his
face is drawn with pain. Poor fel-low, maybe he is think-ing, and I can
see his face all wrinkled up with the con-cen-tra-tion of his thoughts. Oh!
if I could only help at all.... I shall do what I can.

I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and he has got me all the pa-pers that I
have not yet seen.... Whilst they are rest-ing, I shall go over all
care-fully, and per-haps I may ar-rive at some con-clu-sion. I shall try to
fol-low the Pro-fessor's ex-ample, and think without pre-ju-dice on the facts
be-fore me....

       *       *       *       *       *

I do be-lieve that un-der God's provid-ence I have made a dis-cov-ery. I
shall get the maps and look over them....

       *       *       *       *       *

I am more than ever sure that I am right. My new con-clu-sion is ready, so
I shall get our party to-gether and read it. They can judge it; it is
well to be ac-cur-ate, and every minute is pre-cious.


_Mina Harker's Memor-andum._

(Entered in her Journal.)

_Ground of in-quiry._--Count Drac-ula's prob-lem is to get back to his own
place.

(_a_) He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evid-ent; for had he
power to move him-self as he wished he could go either as man, or wolf,
or bat, or in some other way. He evid-ently fears dis-cov-ery or
in-ter-fer-ence, in the state of help-less-ness in which he must be--con-fined
as he is between dawn and sun-set in his wooden box.

(_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a pro-cess of ex-clu-sions may help
us. By road, by rail, by wa-ter?

1. _By Road._--There are end-less dif-fi-culties, es-pe-cially in leav-ing the
city.

(_x_) There are people; and people are curi-ous, and in-vest-ig-ate. A hint,
a sur-mise, a doubt as to what might be in the box, would des-troy him.

(_y_) There are, or there may be, cus-toms and oc-troi of-ficers to pass.

(_z_) His pur-suers might fol-low. This is his highest fear; and in or-der
to pre-vent his be-ing be-trayed he has re-pelled, so far as he can, even
his vic-tim--me!

2. _By Rail._--There is no one in charge of the box. It would have to
take its chance of be-ing delayed; and delay would be fatal, with en-emies
on the track. True, he might es-cape at night; but what would he be, if
left in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? This is not
what he in-tends; and he does not mean to risk it.

3. _By Water._--Here is the safest way, in one re-spect, but with most
danger in an-other. On the wa-ter he is power-less ex-cept at night; even
then he can only sum-mon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were
he wrecked, the liv-ing wa-ter would en-gulf him, help-less; and he would
in-deed be lost. He could have the ves-sel drive to land; but if it were
un-friendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his po-s-i-tion would
still be des-per-ate.

We know from the re-cord that he was on the wa-ter; so what we have to do
is to as-cer-tain _what_ wa-ter.

The first thing is to real-ise ex-actly what he has done as yet; we may,
then, get a light on what his later task is to be.

_Firstly._--We must dif-fer-en-ti-ate between what he did in Lon-don as part
of his gen-eral plan of ac-tion, when he was pressed for mo-ments and had
to ar-range as best he could.

_Se-condly_ we must see, as well as we can sur-mise it from the facts we
know of, what he has done here.

As to the first, he evid-ently in-ten-ded to ar-rive at Gal-atz, and sent
in-voice to Varna to de-ceive us lest we should as-cer-tain his means of
exit from Eng-land; his im-me-di-ate and sole pur-pose then was to es-cape.
The proof of this, is the let-ter of in-struc-tions sent to Im-manuel
Hildesheim to clear and take away the box _be-fore sun-rise_. There is
also the in-struc-tion to Pet-rof Sk-in-sky. These we must only guess at; but
there must have been some let-ter or mes-sage, since Sk-in-sky came to
Hildesheim.

That, so far, his plans were suc-cess-ful we know. The _Cz-ar-ina Cath-er-ine_
made a phe-nom-en-ally quick jour-ney--so much so that Cap-tain Donel-son's
sus-pi-cions were aroused; but his su-per-sti-tion united with his can-ni-ness
played the Count's game for him, and he ran with his fa-vour-ing wind
through fogs and all till he brought up blind-fold at Gal-atz. That the
Count's ar-range-ments were well made, has been proved. Hildesheim cleared
the box, took it off, and gave it to Sk-in-sky. Sk-in-sky took it--and here
we lose the trail. We only know that the box is some-where on the wa-ter,
mov-ing along. The cus-toms and the oc-troi, if there be any, have been
avoided.

Now we come to what the Count must have done after his ar-rival--_on
land_, at Gal-atz.

The box was given to Sk-in-sky be-fore sun-rise. At sun-rise the Count could
ap-pear in his own form. Here, we ask why Sk-in-sky was chosen at all to
aid in the work? In my hus-band's di-ary, Sk-in-sky is men-tioned as deal-ing
with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's
re-mark, that the murder was the work of a Slovak, showed the gen-eral
feel-ing against his class. The Count wanted isol-a-tion.

My sur-mise is, this: that in Lon-don the Count de-cided to get back to his
castle by wa-ter, as the most safe and secret way. He was brought from
the castle by Szgany, and prob-ably they de-livered their cargo to Slovaks
who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were shipped for Lon-don.
Thus the Count had know-ledge of the per-sons who could ar-range this
ser-vice. When the box was on land, be-fore sun-rise or after sun-set, he
came out from his box, met Sk-in-sky and in-struc-ted him what to do as to
ar-ran-ging the car-riage of the box up some river. When this was done, and
he knew that all was in train, he blot-ted out his traces, as he thought,
by mur-der-ing his agent.

I have ex-amined the map and find that the river most suit-able for the
Slovaks to have as-cen-ded is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in
the typescript that in my trance I heard cows low and wa-ter swirl-ing
level with my ears and the creak-ing of wood. The Count in his box, then,
was on a river in an open boat--pro-pelled prob-ably either by oars or
poles, for the banks are near and it is work-ing against stream. There
would be no such sound if float-ing down stream.

Of course it may not be either the Sereth or the Pruth, but we may
pos-sibly in-vest-ig-ate fur-ther. Now of these two, the Pruth is the more
eas-ily nav-ig-ated, but the Sereth is, at Fundu, joined by the Bis-tritza
which runs up round the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is mani-festly as
close to Drac-ula's castle as can be got by wa-ter.


_Mina Harker's Journal--con-tin-ued._

When I had done read-ing, Jonathan took me in his arms and kissed me. The
oth-ers kept shak-ing me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said:--

"Our dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where
we were blinded. Now we are on the track once again, and this time we
may suc-ceed. Our en-emy is at his most help-less; and if we can come on
him by day, on the wa-ter, our task will be over. He has a start, but he
is power-less to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry
him may sus-pect; for them to sus-pect would be to prompt them to throw
him in the stream where he per-ish. This he knows, and will not. Now men,
to our Coun-cil of War; for, here and now, we must plan what each and all
shall do."

"I shall get a steam launch and fol-low him," said Lord Godalm-ing.

"And I, horses to fol-low on the bank lest by chance he land," said Mr.
Mor-ris.

"Good!" said the Pro-fessor, "both good. But neither must go alone. There
must be force to over-come force if need be; the Slovak is strong and
rough, and he car-ries rude arms." All the men smiled, for amongst them
they car-ried a small ar-senal. Said Mr. Mor-ris:--

"I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and
there may be wolves. The Count, if you re-mem-ber, took some other
pre-cau-tions; he made some re-quis-i-tions on oth-ers that Mrs. Harker could
not quite hear or un-der-stand. We must be ready at all points." Dr.
Se-ward said:--

"I think I had bet-ter go with Quin-cey. We have been ac-cus-tomed to hunt
to-gether, and we two, well armed, will be a match for whatever may come
along. You must not be alone, Art. It may be ne-ces-sary to fight the
Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don't sup-pose these fel-lows carry
guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no chances, this time; we
shall, not rest un-til the Count's head and body have been sep-ar-ated, and
we are sure that he can-not re-in-carn-ate." He looked at Jonathan as he
spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could see that the poor dear was
torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to be with me; but then the
boat ser-vice would, most likely, be the one which would des-troy the ...
the ... the ... Vam-pire. (Why did I hes-it-ate to write the word?) He was
si-lent awhile, and dur-ing his si-lence Dr. Van Helsing spoke:--

"Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice reas-ons. First, be-cause you
are young and brave and can fight, and all en-er-gies may be needed at the
last; and again that it is your right to des-troy him--that--which has
wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she
will be my care, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so quick to run as
once; and I am not used to ride so long or to pur-sue as need be, or to
fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of other ser-vice; I can fight in
other way. And I can die, if need be, as well as younger men. Now let
me say that what I would is this: while you, my Lord Godalm-ing and
friend Jonathan go in your so swift little steam-boat up the river, and
whilst John and Quin-cey guard the bank where per-chance he might be
landed, I will take Madam Mina right into the heart of the en-emy's
coun-try. Whilst the old fox is tied in his box, float-ing on the run-ning
stream whence he can-not es-cape to land--where he dares not raise the lid
of his coffin-box lest his Slovak car-ri-ers should in fear leave him to
per-ish--we shall go in the track where Jonathan went,--from Bis-tritz
over the Borgo, and find our way to the Castle of Drac-ula. Here, Madam
Mina's hyp-notic power will surely help, and we shall find our way--all
dark and un-known oth-er-wise--after the first sun-rise when we are near
that fate-ful place. There is much to be done, and other places to be
made sanc-tify, so that that nest of vi-pers be ob-lit-er-ated." Here
Jonathan in-ter-rup-ted him hotly:--

"Do you mean to say, Pro-fessor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina,
in her sad case and tain-ted as she is with that devil's ill-ness, right
into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or
Hell!" He be-came al-most speech-less for a minute, and then went on:--

"Do you know what the place is? Have you seen that aw-ful den of hellish
in-famy--with the very moon-light alive with grisly shapes, and every
speck of dust that whirls in the wind a de-vour-ing mon-ster in em-bryo?
Have you felt the Vam-pire's lips upon your throat?" Here he turned to
me, and as his eyes lit on my fore-head he threw up his arms with a cry:
"Oh, my God, what have we done to have this ter-ror upon us!" and he sank
down on the sofa in a col-lapse of misery. The Pro-fessor's voice, as he
spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to vi-brate in the air, calmed
us all:--

"Oh, my friend, it is be-cause I would save Madam Mina from that aw-ful
place that I would go. God for-bid that I should take her into that
place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not
see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with their own eyes what
is to be done be-fore that place can be purify. Re-mem-ber that we are in
ter-rible straits. If the Count es-cape us this time--and he is strong and
subtle and cun-ning--he may choose to sleep him for a cen-tury, and then
in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him to keep him
com-pany, and would be as those oth-ers that you, Jonathan, saw. You have
told us of their gloat-ing lips; you heard their rib-ald laugh as they
clutched the mov-ing bag that the Count threw to them. You shud-der; and
well may it be. For-give me that I make you so much pain, but it is
ne-ces-sary. My friend, is it not a dire need for the which I am giv-ing,
pos-sibly my life? If it were that any one went into that place to stay,
it is I who would have to go to keep them com-pany."

"Do as you will," said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, "we
are in the hands of God!"

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the way that these brave men worked.
How can wo-men help lov-ing men when they are so earn-est, and so true, and
so brave! And, too, it made me think of the won-der-ful power of money!
What can it not do when it is prop-erly ap-plied; and what might it do
when basely used. I felt so thank-ful that Lord Godalm-ing is rich, and
that both he and Mr. Mor-ris, who also has plenty of money, are will-ing
to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little ex-ped-i-tion could
not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within
an-other hour. It is not three hours since it was ar-ranged what part each
of us was to do; and now Lord Godalm-ing and Jonathan have a lovely steam
launch, with steam up ready to start at a mo-ment's no-tice. Dr. Se-ward
and Mr. Mor-ris have half a dozen good horses, well ap-poin-ted. We have
all the maps and ap-pli-ances of vari-ous kinds that can be had. Pro-fessor
Van Helsing and I are to leave by the 11:40 train to-night for Ver-esti,
where we are to get a car-riage to drive to the Borgo Pass. We are
bring-ing a good deal of ready money, as we are to buy a car-riage and
horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have no one whom we can trust
in the mat-ter. The Pro-fessor knows some-thing of a great many lan-guages,
so we shall get on all right. We have all got arms, even for me a
large-bore re-volver; Jonathan would not be happy un-less I was armed like
the rest. Alas! I can-not carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on my
fore-head for-bids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing com-forts me by telling me
that I am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is get-ting
colder every hour, and there are snow-flur-ries which come and go as
warn-ings.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--It took all my cour-age to say good-bye to my darling. We may
never meet again. Cour-age, Mina! the Pro-fessor is look-ing at you keenly;
his look is a warn-ing. There must be no tears now--un-less it may be that
God will let them fall in glad-ness.


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_Octo-ber 30. Night._--I am writ-ing this in the light from the fur-nace
door of the steam launch: Lord Godalm-ing is fir-ing up. He is an
ex-per-i-enced hand at the work, as he has had for years a launch of his
own on the Thames, and an-other on the Nor-folk Broads. Regard-ing our
plans, we fi-nally de-cided that Mina's guess was cor-rect, and that if any
wa-ter-way was chosen for the Count's es-cape back to his Castle, the
Sereth and then the Bis-tritza at its junc-tion, would be the one. We took
it, that some-where about the 47th de-gree, north lat-it-ude, would be the
place chosen for the cross-ing the coun-try between the river and the
Carpath-i-ans. We have no fear in run-ning at good speed up the river at
night; there is plenty of wa-ter, and the banks are wide enough apart to
make steam-ing, even in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalm-ing tells me to
sleep for a while, as it is enough for the present for one to be on
watch. But I can-not sleep--how can I with the ter-rible danger hanging
over my darling, and her go-ing out into that aw-ful place.... My only
com-fort is that we are in the hands of God. Only for that faith it would
be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the trouble. Mr.
Mor-ris and Dr. Se-ward were off on their long ride be-fore we star-ted;
they are to keep up the right bank, far enough off to get on higher
lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the fol-low-ing
of its curves. They have, for the first stages, two men to ride and lead
their spare horses--four in all, so as not to ex-cite curi-os-ity. When
they dis-miss the men, which shall be shortly, they shall them-selves look
after the horses. It may be ne-ces-sary for us to join forces; if so they
can mount our whole party. One of the saddles has a mov-able horn, and
can be eas-ily ad-ap-ted for Mina, if re-quired.

It is a wild ad-ven-ture we are on. Here, as we are rush-ing along through
the dark-ness, with the cold from the river seem-ing to rise up and strike
us; with all the mys-ter-i-ous voices of the night around us, it all comes
home. We seem to be drift-ing into un-known places and un-known ways; into
a whole world of dark and dread-ful things. Godalm-ing is shut-ting the
fur-nace door....

       *       *       *       *       *

_31 Octo-ber._--Still hur-ry-ing along. The day has come, and Godalm-ing is
sleep-ing. I am on watch. The morn-ing is bit-terly cold; the fur-nace heat
is grate-ful, though we have heavy fur coats. As yet we have passed only
a few open boats, but none of them had on board any box or pack-age of
any-thing like the size of the one we seek. The men were scared every
time we turned our elec-tric lamp on them, and fell on their knees and
prayed.

       *       *       *       *       *

_1 Novem-ber, even-ing._--No news all day; we have found noth-ing of the
kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bis-tritza; and if we are wrong
in our sur-mise our chance is gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big
and little. Early this morn-ing, one crew took us for a Govern-ment boat,
and treated us ac-cord-ingly. We saw in this a way of smooth-ing mat-ters,
so at Fundu, where the Bis-tritza runs into the Sereth, we got a
Rou-manian flag which we now fly con-spicu-ously. With every boat which we
have over-hauled since then this trick has suc-ceeded; we have had every
de-fer-ence shown to us, and not once any ob-jec-tion to whatever we chose
to ask or do. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them,
go-ing at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This
was be-fore they came to Fundu, so they could not tell us whether the
boat turned into the Bis-tritza or con-tin-ued on up the Sereth. At Fundu
we could not hear of any such boat, so she must have passed there in the
night. I am feel-ing very sleepy; the cold is per-haps be-gin-ning to tell
upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalm-ing in-sists that he
shall keep the first watch. God bless him for all his good-ness to poor
dear Mina and me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 Novem-ber, morn-ing._--It is broad day-light. That good fel-low would not
wake me. He says it would have been a sin to, for I slept peace-fully and
was for-get-ting my trouble. It seems bru-tally selfish to me to have slept
so long, and let him watch all night; but he was quite right. I am a new
man this morn-ing; and, as I sit here and watch him sleep-ing, I can do
all that is ne-ces-sary both as to mind-ing the en-gine, steer-ing, and
keep-ing watch. I can feel that my strength and en-ergy are com-ing back to
me. I won-der where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to
Ver-esti about noon on Wed-nes-day. It would take them some time to get the
car-riage and horses; so if they had star-ted and trav-elled hard, they
would be about now at the Borgo Pass. God guide and help them! I am
afraid to think what may hap-pen. If we could only go faster! but we
can-not; the en-gines are throb-bing and do-ing their ut-most. I won-der how
Dr. Se-ward and Mr. Mor-ris are get-ting on. There seem to be end-less
streams run-ning down the moun-tains into this river, but as none of them
are very large--at present, at all events, though they are ter-rible
doubt-less in winter and when the snow melts--the horse-men may not have
met much ob-struc-tion. I hope that be-fore we get to Strasba we may see
them; for if by that time we have not over-taken the Count, it may be
ne-ces-sary to take coun-sel to-gether what to do next.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_2 Novem-ber._--Three days on the road. No news, and no time to write it
if there had been, for every mo-ment is pre-cious. We have had only the
rest need-ful for the horses; but we are both bear-ing it won-der-fully.
Those ad-ven-tur-ous days of ours are turn-ing up use-ful. We must push on;
we shall never feel happy till we get the launch in sight again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_3 Novem-ber._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the
Bis-tritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs of snow com-ing; and
if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case we must get a sledge and
go on, Rus-sian fash-ion.

       *       *       *       *       *

_4 Novem-ber._--To-day we heard of the launch hav-ing been de-tained by an
ac-ci-dent when try-ing to force a way up the rap-ids. The Slovak boats get
up all right, by aid of a rope and steer-ing with know-ledge. Some went up
only a few hours be-fore. Godalm-ing is an am-a-teur fit-ter him-self, and
evid-ently it was he who put the launch in trim again. Fin-ally, they got
up the rap-ids all right, with local help, and are off on the chase
afresh. I fear that the boat is not any bet-ter for the ac-ci-dent; the
peas-antry tell us that after she got upon smooth wa-ter again, she kept
stop-ping every now and again so long as she was in sight. We must push
on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_31 Octo-ber._--Ar-rived at Ver-esti at noon. The Pro-fessor tells me that
this morn-ing at dawn he could hardly hyp-not-ise me at all, and that all I
could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buy-ing a car-riage and
horses. He says that he will later on try to buy ad-di-tional horses, so
that we may be able to change them on the way. We have some-thing more
than 70 miles be-fore us. The coun-try is lovely, and most in-ter-est-ing; if
only we were un-der dif-fer-ent con-di-tions, how de-light-ful it would be to
see it all. If Jonathan and I were driv-ing through it alone what a
pleas-ure it would be. To stop and see people, and learn some-thing of
their life, and to fill our minds and memor-ies with all the col-our and
pic-tur-esque-ness of the whole wild, beau-ti-ful coun-try and the quaint
people! But, alas!--

       *       *       *       *       *

_Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has re-turned. He has got the car-riage and
horses; we are to have some din-ner, and to start in an hour. The
land-lady is put-ting us up a huge bas-ket of pro-vi-sions; it seems enough
for a com-pany of sol-diers. The Pro-fessor en-cour-ages her, and whis-pers to
me that it may be a week be-fore we can get any good food again. He has
been shop-ping too, and has sent home such a won-der-ful lot of fur coats
and wraps, and all sorts of warm things. There will not be any chance of
our be-ing cold.

       *       *       *       *       *

We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may hap-pen to us. We are
truly in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him,
with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will watch over
my be-loved hus-band; that whatever may hap-pen, Jonathan may know that I
loved him and hon-oured him more than I can say, and that my latest and
truest thought will be al-ways for him.




CHAPTER XXVII

MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL


_1 Novem-ber._--All day long we have trav-elled, and at a good speed. The
horses seem to know that they are be-ing kindly treated, for they go
will-ingly their full stage at best speed. We have now had so many
changes and find the same thing so con-stantly that we are en-cour-aged to
think that the jour-ney will be an easy one. Dr. Van Helsing is lac-onic;
he tells the farm-ers that he is hur-ry-ing to Bis-tritz, and pays them well
to make the ex-change of horses. We get hot soup, or cof-fee, or tea; and
off we go. It is a lovely coun-try; full of beau-ties of all ima-gin-able
kinds, and the people are brave, and strong, and simple, and seem full
of nice qual-it-ies. They are _very, very_ su-per-sti-tious. In the first
house where we stopped, when the wo-man who served us saw the scar on my
fore-head, she crossed her-self and put out two fin-gers to-wards me, to
keep off the evil eye. I be-lieve they went to the trouble of put-ting an
ex-tra amount of gar-lic into our food; and I can't abide gar-lic. Ever
since then I have taken care not to take off my hat or veil, and so have
es-caped their sus-pi-cions. We are trav-el-ling fast, and as we have no
driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scan-dal; but I daresay
that fear of the evil eye will fol-low hard be-hind us all the way. The
Pro-fessor seems tire-less; all day he would not take any rest, though he
made me sleep for a long spell. At sun-set time he hyp-not-ised me, and he
says that I answered as usual "dark-ness, lap-ping wa-ter and creak-ing
wood"; so our en-emy is still on the river. I am afraid to think of
Jonathan, but some-how I have now no fear for him, or for my-self. I write
this whilst we wait in a farm-house for the horses to be got ready. Dr.
Van Helsing is sleep-ing, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and
grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a con-queror's; even in his sleep
he is in-stinct with res-ol-u-tion. When we have well star-ted I must make
him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him that we have days be-fore us,
and we must not break down when most of all his strength will be
needed.... All is ready; we are off shortly.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 Novem-ber, morn-ing._--I was suc-cess-ful, and we took turns driv-ing all
night; now the day is on us, bright though cold. There is a strange
heav-i-ness in the air--I say heav-i-ness for want of a bet-ter word; I mean
that it op-presses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep
us com-fort-able. At dawn Van Helsing hyp-not-ised me; he says I answered
"dark-ness, creak-ing wood and roar-ing wa-ter," so the river is chan-ging as
they as-cend. I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of
danger--more than need be; but we are in God's hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

_2 Novem-ber, night._--All day long driv-ing. The coun-try gets wilder as
we go, and the great spurs of the Carpath-i-ans, which at Ver-esti seemed
so far from us and so low on the ho-ri-zon, now seem to gather round us
and tower in front. We both seem in good spir-its; I think we make an
ef-fort each to cheer the other; in the do-ing so we cheer ourselves. Dr.
Van Helsing says that by morn-ing we shall reach the Borgo Pass. The
houses are very few here now, and the Pro-fessor says that the last horse
we got will have to go on with us, as we may not be able to change. He
got two in ad-di-tion to the two we changed, so that now we have a rude
four-in-hand. The dear horses are pa-tient and good, and they give us no
trouble. We are not wor-ried with other trav-el-lers, and so even I can
drive. We shall get to the Pass in day-light; we do not want to ar-rive
be-fore. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what
will to-mor-row bring to us? We go to seek the place where my poor
darling suffered so much. God grant that we may be guided aright, and
that He will deign to watch over my hus-band and those dear to us both,
and who are in such deadly peril. As for me, I am not worthy in His
sight. Alas! I am un-clean to His eyes, and shall be un-til He may deign
to let me stand forth in His sight as one of those who have not in-curred
His wrath.


_Memor-andum by Abra-ham Van Helsing._

_4 Novem-ber._--This to my old and true friend John Se-ward, M.D., of
Purfleet, Lon-don, in case I may not see him. It may ex-plain. It is
morn-ing, and I write by a fire which all the night I have kept
alive--Madam Mina aid-ing me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey
heavy sky is full of snow, which when it falls will settle for all
winter as the ground is harden-ing to re-ceive it. It seems to have
af-fected Madam Mina; she has been so heavy of head all day that she was
not like her-self. She sleeps, and sleeps, and sleeps! She who is usual
so alert, have done lit-er-ally noth-ing all the day; she even have lost
her ap-pet-ite. She make no entry into her little di-ary, she who write so
faith-ful at every pause. So-mething whis-per to me that all is not well.
However, to-night she is more _vif_. Her long sleep all day have re-fresh
and re-store her, for now she is all sweet and bright as ever. At sun-set
I try to hyp-not-ise her, but alas! with no ef-fect; the power has grown
less and less with each day, and to-night it fail me al-to-gether. Well,
God's will be done--whatever it may be, and whith-er-so-ever it may lead!

Now to the his-tor-ical, for as Madam Mina write not in her ste-no-graphy, I
must, in my cum-brous old fash-ion, that so each day of us may not go
un-re-cor-ded.

We got to the Borgo Pass just after sun-rise yes-ter-day morn-ing. When I
saw the signs of the dawn I got ready for the hyp-not-ism. We stopped our
car-riage, and got down so that there might be no dis-turb-ance. I made a
couch with furs, and Madam Mina, ly-ing down, yield her-self as usual, but
more slow and more short time than ever, to the hyp-notic sleep. As
be-fore, came the an-swer: "dark-ness and the swirl-ing of wa-ter." Then she
woke, bright and ra-di-ant and we go on our way and soon reach the Pass.
At this time and place, she be-come all on fire with zeal; some new
guid-ing power be in her mani-fes-ted, for she point to a road and say:--

"This is the way."

"How know you it?" I ask.

"Of course I know it," she an-swer, and with a pause, add: "Have not my
Jonathan trav-elled it and wrote of his travel?"

At first I think some-what strange, but soon I see that there be only one
such by-road. It is used but little, and very dif-fer-ent from the coach
road from the Bukov-ina to Bis-tritz, which is more wide and hard, and
more of use.

So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not al-ways were we
sure that they were roads at all, for they be neg-lect and light snow
have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and
they go on so pa-tient. By-and-by we find all the things which Jonathan
have note in that won-der-ful di-ary of him. Then we go on for long, long
hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and
she suc-ceed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, I feel my-self to
sus-pi-cious grow, and at-tempt to wake her. But she sleep on, and I may
not wake her though I try. I do not wish to try too hard lest I harm
her; for I know that she have suf-fer much, and sleep at times be
all-in-all to her. I think I drowse my-self, for all of sud-den I feel
guilt, as though I have done some-thing; I find my-self bolt up, with the
reins in my hand, and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I
look down and find Madam Mina still sleep. It is now not far off sun-set
time, and over the snow the light of the sun flow in big yel-low flood,
so that we throw great long shadow on where the moun-tain rise so steep.
For we are go-ing up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though
it were the end of the world.

Then I arouse Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and
then I try to put her to hyp-notic sleep. But she sleep not, be-ing as
though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once I find her and
my-self in dark; so I look round, and find that the sun have gone down.
Madam Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. She is now quite awake,
and look so well as I never saw her since that night at Car-fax when we
first enter the Count's house. I am amaze, and not at ease then; but she
is so bright and tender and thought-ful for me that I for-get all fear. I
light a fire, for we have brought sup-ply of wood with us, and she
pre-pare food while I undo the horses and set them, tethered in shel-ter,
to feed. Then when I re-turn to the fire she have my sup-per ready. I go
to help her; but she smile, and tell me that she have eat already--that
she was so hungry that she would not wait. I like it not, and I have
grave doubts; but I fear to af-fright her, and so I am si-lent of it. She
help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie be-side the
fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently I for-get all
of watch-ing; and when I sud-den re-mem-ber that I watch, I find her ly-ing
quiet, but awake, and look-ing at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice
more the same oc-cur, and I get much sleep till be-fore morn-ing. When I
wake I try to hyp-not-ise her; but alas! though she shut her eyes
obed-i-ent, she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then
sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not wake. I have
to lift her up, and place her sleep-ing in the car-riage when I have
har-nessed the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep, and she look
in her sleep more healthy and more red-der than be-fore. And I like it
not. And I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of all things--even
to think but I must go on my way. The stake we play for is life and
death, or more than these, and we must not flinch.

       *       *       *       *       *

_5 Novem-ber, morn-ing._--Let me be ac-cur-ate in everything, for though you
and I have seen some strange things to-gether, you may at the first think
that I, Van Helsing, am mad--that the many hor-rors and the so long
strain on nerves has at the last turn my brain.

All yes-ter-day we travel, ever get-ting closer to the moun-tains, and
mov-ing into a more and more wild and desert land. There are great,
frown-ing pre-cip-ices and much fall-ing wa-ter, and Nature seem to have held
some-time her car-ni-val. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I
did have hun-ger and ap-peased it, I could not waken her--even for food. I
began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tain-ted as
she is with that Vam-pire bap-tism. "Well," said I to my-self, "if it be
that she sleep all the day, it shall also be that I do not sleep at
night." As we travel on the rough road, for a road of an an-cient and
im-per-fect kind there was, I held down my head and slept. Again I waked
with a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam Mina still
sleep-ing, and the sun low down. But all was in-deed changed; the frown-ing
moun-tains seemed fur-ther away, and we were near the top of a
steep-rising hill, on sum-mit of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell
of in his di-ary. At once I ex-ul-ted and feared; for now, for good or ill,
the end was near.

I woke Madam Mina, and again tried to hyp-not-ise her; but alas!
un-avail-ing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for
even after down-sun the heav-ens re-flec-ted the gone sun on the snow, and
all was for a time in a great twi-light--I took out the horses and fed
them in what shel-ter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make
Madam Mina, now awake and more charm-ing than ever, sit com-fort-able amid
her rugs. I got ready food: but she would not eat, simply say-ing that
she had not hun-ger. I did not press her, know-ing her un-avail-ing-ness. But
I my-self eat, for I must needs now be strong for all. Then, with the
fear on me of what might be, I drew a ring so big for her com-fort, round
where Madam Mina sat; and over the ring I passed some of the wafer, and
I broke it fine so that all was well guarded. She sat still all the
time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the
snow was not more pale; and no word she said. But when I drew near, she
clung to me, and I could know that the poor soul shook her from head to
feet with a tremor that was pain to feel. I said to her presently, when
she had grown more quiet:--

"Will you not come over to the fire?" for I wished to make a test of
what she could. She rose obed-i-ent, but when she have made a step she
stopped, and stood as one stricken.

"Why not go on?" I asked. She shook her head, and, com-ing back, sat
down in her place. Then, look-ing at me with open eyes, as of one waked
from sleep, she said simply:--

"I can-not!" and re-mained si-lent. I re-joiced, for I knew that what she
could not, none of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be
danger to her body, yet her soul was safe!

Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their teth-ers till I
came to them and quieted them. When they did feel my hands on them, they
whin-nied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and were quiet for a
time. Many times through the night did I come to them, till it ar-rive to
the cold hour when all nature is at low-est; and every time my com-ing was
with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was
about step-ping forth to re-plen-ish it, for now the snow came in fly-ing
sweeps and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark there was a light of
some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seemed as though the
snow-flur-ries and the wreaths of mist took shape as of wo-men with
trail-ing gar-ments. All was in dead, grim si-lence only that the horses
whin-nied and cowered, as if in ter-ror of the worst. I began to
fear--hor-rible fears; but then came to me the sense of safety in that
ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that my ima-gin-ings were of
the night, and the gloom, and the un-rest that I have gone through, and
all the ter-rible anxi-ety. It was as though my memor-ies of all Jonathan's
hor-rid ex-per-i-ence were be-fool-ing me; for the snow flakes and the mist
began to wheel and circle round, till I could get as though a shad-owy
glimpse of those wo-men that would have kissed him. And then the horses
cowered lower and lower, and moaned in ter-ror as men do in pain. Even
the mad-ness of fright was not to them, so that they could break away. I
feared for my dear Madam Mina when these weird fig-ures drew near and
circled round. I looked at her, but she sat calm, and smiled at me; when
I would have stepped to the fire to re-plen-ish it, she caught me and held
me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low
it was:--

"No! No! Do not go without. Here you are safe!" I turned to her, and
look-ing in her eyes, said:--

"But you? It is for you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low
and un-real, and said:--

"Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all the world from them
than I am," and as I wondered at the mean-ing of her words, a puff of
wind made the flame leap up, and I see the red scar on her fore-head.
Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the
wheel-ing fig-ures of mist and snow came closer, but keep-ing ever without
the Holy circle. Then they began to ma-ter-i-al-ise till--if God have not
take away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes--there were be-fore me
in ac-tual flesh the same three wo-men that Jonathan saw in the room, when
they would have kissed his throat. I knew the sway-ing round forms, the
bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy col-our, the vo-lup-tu-ous
lips. They smiled ever at poor dear Madam Mina; and as their laugh came
through the si-lence of the night, they twined their arms and poin-ted to
her, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were
of the in-tol-er-able sweet-ness of the wa-ter-glasses:--

"Come, sis-ter. Come to us. Come! Come!" In fear I turned to my poor
Madam Mina, and my heart with glad-ness leapt like flame; for oh! the
ter-ror in her sweet eyes, the re-pul-sion, the hor-ror, told a story to my
heart that was all of hope. God be thanked she was not, yet, of them. I
seized some of the fire-wood which was by me, and hold-ing out some of the
Wafer, ad-vanced on them to-wards the fire. They drew back be-fore me, and
laughed their low hor-rid laugh. I fed the fire, and feared them not; for
I knew that we were safe within our pro-tec-tions. They could not
ap-proach, me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she re-mained within
the ring, which she could not leave no more than they could enter. The
horses had ceased to moan, and lay still on the ground; the snow fell on
them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that there was for the poor
beasts no more of ter-ror.

And so we re-mained till the red of the dawn to fall through the
snow-gloom. I was des-ol-ate and afraid, and full of woe and ter-ror; but
when that beau-ti-ful sun began to climb the ho-ri-zon life was to me again.
At the first com-ing of the dawn the hor-rid fig-ures melted in the
whirl-ing mist and snow; the wreaths of trans-par-ent gloom moved away
to-wards the castle, and were lost.

In-stinct-ively, with the dawn com-ing, I turned to Madam Mina, in-tend-ing
to hyp-not-ise her; but she lay in a deep and sud-den sleep, from which I
could not wake her. I tried to hyp-not-ise through her sleep, but she made
no re-sponse, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have
made my fire and have seen the horses, they are all dead. To-day I have
much to do here, and I keep wait-ing till the sun is up high; for there
may be places where I must go, where that sun-light, though snow and mist
ob-scure it, will be to me a safety.

I will strengthen me with break-fast, and then I will to my ter-rible
work. Madam Mina still sleeps; and, God be thanked! she is calm in her
sleep....


_Jonathan Harker's Journal._

_4 Novem-ber, even-ing._--The ac-ci-dent to the launch has been a ter-rible
thing for us. Only for it we should have over-taken the boat long ago;
and by now my dear Mina would have been free. I fear to think of her,
off on the wolds near that hor-rid place. We have got horses, and we
fol-low on the track. I note this whilst Godalm-ing is get-ting ready. We
have our arms. The Szgany must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only
Mor-ris and Se-ward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more
Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you.


_Dr. Se-ward's Di-ary._

_5 Novem-ber._--With the dawn we saw the body of Szgany be-fore us dash-ing
away from the river with their leiter-wagon. They sur-roun-ded it in a
cluster, and hur-ried along as though be-set. The snow is fall-ing lightly
and there is a strange ex-cite-ment in the air. It may be our own
feel-ings, but the de-pres-sion is strange. Far off I hear the howl-ing of
wolves; the snow brings them down from the moun-tains, and there are
dangers to all of us, and from all sides. The horses are nearly ready,
and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who,
or where, or what, or when, or how it may be....


_Dr. Van Helsing's Memor-andum._

_5 Novem-ber, af-ter-noon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy
at all events, though the prov-ing it has been dread-ful. When I left
Madam Mina sleep-ing within the Holy circle, I took my way to the castle.
The black-smith ham-mer which I took in the car-riage from Ver-esti was
use-ful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty
hinges, lest some ill-in-tent or ill-chance should close them, so that
be-ing entered I might not get out. Jonathan's bit-ter ex-per-i-ence served
me here. By memory of his di-ary I found my way to the old chapel, for I
knew that here my work lay. The air was op-press-ive; it seemed as if
there was some sul-phur-ous fume, which at times made me dizzy. Either
there was a roar-ing in my ears or I heard afar off the howl of wolves.
Then I be-thought me of my dear Madam Mina, and I was in ter-rible plight.
The di-lemma had me between his horns.

Her, I had not dare to take into this place, but left safe from the
Vam-pire in that Holy circle; and yet even there would be the wolf! I
re-solve me that my work lay here, and that as to the wolves we must
sub-mit, if it were God's will. At any rate it was only death and
free-dom bey-ond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for my-self the
choice had been easy, the maw of the wolf were bet-ter to rest in than
the grave of the Vam-pire! So I make my choice to go on with my work.

I knew that there were at least three graves to find--graves that are
in-habit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. She lay in her
Vam-pire sleep, so full of life and vo-lup-tu-ous beauty that I shud-der as
though I have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old time, when
such things were, many a man who set forth to do such a task as mine,
found at the last his heart fail him, and then his nerve. So he delay,
and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fas-cin-a-tion of the
wan-ton Un-Dead have hyp-not-ise him; and he re-main on and on, till sun-set
come, and the Vam-pire sleep be over. Then the beau-ti-ful eyes of the fair
wo-man open and look love, and the vo-lup-tu-ous mouth present to a
kiss--and man is weak. And there re-main one more vic-tim in the Vam-pire
fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!...

There is some fas-cin-a-tion, surely, when I am moved by the mere pres-ence
of such an one, even ly-ing as she lay in a tomb fret-ted with age and
heavy with the dust of cen-tur-ies, though there be that hor-rid odour such
as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing,
with all my pur-pose and with my motive for hate--I was moved to a
yearn-ing for delay which seemed to para-lyse my fac-ulties and to clog my
very soul. It may have been that the need of nat-ural sleep, and the
strange op-pres-sion of the air were be-gin-ning to over-come me. Cer-tain it
was that I was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of one who yields
to a sweet fas-cin-a-tion, when there came through the snow-stilled air a
long, low wail, so full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound
of a clarion. For it was the voice of my dear Madam Mina that I heard.

Then I braced my-self again to my hor-rid task, and found by wrench-ing
away tomb-tops one other of the sis-ters, the other dark one. I dared not
pause to look on her as I had on her sis-ter, lest once more I should
be-gin to be en-thrall; but I go on search-ing un-til, presently, I find in
a high great tomb as if made to one much be-loved that other fair sis-ter
which, like Jonathan I had seen to gather her-self out of the atoms of
the mist. She was so fair to look on, so ra-di-antly beau-ti-ful, so
ex-quis-itely vo-lup-tu-ous, that the very in-stinct of man in me, which calls
some of my sex to love and to pro-tect one of hers, made my head whirl
with new emo-tion. But God be thanked, that soul-wail of my dear Madam
Mina had not died out of my ears; and, be-fore the spell could be wrought
fur-ther upon me, I had nerved my-self to my wild work. By this time I had
searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as I could tell; and as
there had been only three of these Un-Dead phantoms around us in the
night, I took it that there were no more of act-ive Un-Dead ex-ist-ent.
There was one great tomb more lordly than all the rest; huge it was, and
nobly pro-por-tioned. On it was but one word

                                DRACULA.

This then was the Un-Dead home of the King-Vam-pire, to whom so many more
were due. Its empti-ness spoke elo-quent to make cer-tain what I knew.
Be-fore I began to re-store these wo-men to their dead selves through my
aw-ful work, I laid in Drac-ula's tomb some of the Wafer, and so ban-ished
him from it, Un-Dead, for ever.

Then began my ter-rible task, and I dreaded it. Had it been but one, it
had been easy, com-par-at-ive. But three! To be-gin twice more after I had
been through a deed of hor-ror; for if it was ter-rible with the sweet
Miss Lucy, what would it not be with these strange ones who had sur-vived
through cen-tur-ies, and who had been strengthened by the passing of the
years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives....

Oh, my friend John, but it was butcher work; had I not been nerved by
thoughts of other dead, and of the liv-ing over whom hung such a pall of
fear, I could not have gone on. I tremble and tremble even yet, though
till all was over, God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen
the re-pose in the first place, and the glad-ness that stole over it just
ere the fi-nal dis-sol-u-tion came, as real-isa-tion that the soul had been
won, I could not have gone fur-ther with my butchery. I could not have
en-dured the hor-rid screech-ing as the stake drove home; the plunging of
writh-ing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have fled in ter-ror and
left my work un-done. But it is over! And the poor souls, I can pity them
now and weep, as I think of them pla-cid each in her full sleep of death
for a short mo-ment ere fad-ing. For, friend John, hardly had my knife
severed the head of each, be-fore the whole body began to melt away and
crumble in to its nat-ive dust, as though the death that should have come
cen-tur-ies agone had at last as-sert him-self and say at once and loud "I
am here!"

Be-fore I left the castle I so fixed its en-trances that never more can
the Count enter there Un-Dead.

When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from her
sleep, and, see-ing, me, cried out in pain that I had en-dured too much.

"Come!" she said, "come away from this aw-ful place! Let us go to meet my
hus-band who is, I know, com-ing to-wards us." She was look-ing thin and
pale and weak; but her eyes were pure and glowed with fer-vour. I was
glad to see her pale-ness and her ill-ness, for my mind was full of the
fresh hor-ror of that ruddy vam-pire sleep.

And so with trust and hope, and yet full of fear, we go east-ward to meet
our friends--and _him_--whom Madam Mina tell me that she _know_ are
com-ing to meet us.


_Mina Harker's Journal._

_6 Novem-ber._--It was late in the af-ter-noon when the Pro-fessor and I
took our way to-wards the east whence I knew Jonathan was com-ing. We did
not go fast, though the way was steeply down-hill, for we had to take
heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the pos-sib-il-ity of be-ing
left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to take some of our
pro-vi-sions, too, for we were in a per-fect des-ol-a-tion, and, so far as we
could see through the snow-fall, there was not even the sign of
hab-it-a-tion. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the heavy
walk-ing and sat down to rest. Then we looked back and saw where the
clear line of Drac-ula's castle cut the sky; for we were so deep un-der
the hill whereon it was set that the angle of per-spect-ive of the
Carpath-ian moun-tains was far be-low it. We saw it in all its grandeur,
perched a thou-sand feet on the sum-mit of a sheer pre-cip-ice, and with
seem-ingly a great gap between it and the steep of the ad-ja-cent moun-tain
on any side. There was some-thing wild and un-canny about the place. We
could hear the dis-tant howl-ing of wolves. They were far off, but the
sound, even though com-ing muffled through the dead-en-ing snow-fall, was
full of ter-ror. I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing was search-ing about
that he was try-ing to seek some stra-tegic point, where we would be less
ex-posed in case of at-tack. The rough road-way still led down-wards; we
could trace it through the drif-ted snow.

In a little while the Pro-fessor sig-nalled to me, so I got up and joined
him. He had found a won-der-ful spot, a sort of nat-ural hol-low in a rock,
with an en-trance like a door-way between two boulders. He took me by the
hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be in shel-ter; and
if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one." He brought in our
furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some pro-vi-sions and
forced them upon me. But I could not eat; to even try to do so was
re-puls-ive to me, and, much as I would have liked to please him, I could
not bring my-self to the at-tempt. He looked very sad, but did not
re-proach me. Tak-ing his field-glasses from the case, he stood on the top
of the rock, and began to search the ho-ri-zon. Sud-denly he called out:--

"Look! Madam Mina, look! look!" I sprang up and stood be-side him on the
rock; he handed me his glasses and poin-ted. The snow was now fall-ing
more heav-ily, and swirled about fiercely, for a high wind was be-gin-ning
to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the
snow flur-ries and I could see a long way round. From the height where we
were it was pos-sible to see a great dis-tance; and far off, bey-ond the
white waste of snow, I could see the river ly-ing like a black rib-bon in
kinks and curls as it wound its way. Straight in front of us and not far
off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not no-ticed be-fore--came a
group of moun-ted men hur-ry-ing along. In the midst of them was a cart, a
long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side, like a dog's tail
wag-ging, with each stern in-equal-ity of the road. Out-lined against the
snow as they were, I could see from the men's clothes that they were
peas-ants or gypsies of some kind.

On the cart was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I saw it, for I
felt that the end was com-ing. The even-ing was now draw-ing close, and
well I knew that at sun-set the Th-ing, which was till then im-prisoned
there, would take new free-dom and could in any of many forms elude all
pur-suit. In fear I turned to the Pro-fessor; to my con-sterna-tion,
how-ever, he was not there. An in-stant later, I saw him be-low me. Round
the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shel-ter in last
night. When he had com-pleted it he stood be-side me again, say-ing:--

"At least you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the glasses from
me, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space be-low us.
"See," he said, "they come quickly; they are flog-ging the horses, and
gal-lop-ing as hard as they can." He paused and went on in a hol-low
voice:--

"They are ra-cing for the sun-set. We may be too late. God's will be
done!" Down came an-other blind-ing rush of driv-ing snow, and the whole
land-scape was blot-ted out. It soon passed, how-ever, and once more his
glasses were fixed on the plain. Then came a sud-den cry:--

"Look! Look! Look! See, two horse-men fol-low fast, com-ing up from the
south. It must be Quin-cey and John. Take the glass. Look be-fore the snow
blots it all out!" I took it and looked. The two men might be Dr. Se-ward
and Mr. Mor-ris. I knew at all events that neither of them was Jonathan.
At the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off; look-ing around
I saw on the north side of the com-ing party two other men, rid-ing at
break-neck speed. One of them I knew was Jonathan, and the other I took,
of course, to be Lord Godalm-ing. They, too, were pur-su-ing the party with
the cart. When I told the Pro-fessor he shouted in glee like a school-boy,
and, after look-ing in-tently till a snow fall made sight im-possible, he
laid his Winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the
open-ing of our shel-ter. "They are all con-ver-ging," he said. "When the
time comes we shall have gypsies on all sides." I got out my re-volver
ready to hand, for whilst we were speak-ing the howl-ing of wolves came
louder and closer. When the snow storm abated a mo-ment we looked again.
It was strange to see the snow fall-ing in such heavy flakes close to us,
and bey-ond, the sun shin-ing more and more brightly as it sank down
to-wards the far moun-tain tops. Sweep-ing the glass all around us I could
see here and there dots mov-ing singly and in twos and threes and lar-ger
num-bers--the wolves were gath-er-ing for their prey.

Every in-stant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in
fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us in
circ-ling ed-dies. At times we could not see an arm's length be-fore us;
but at oth-ers, as the hol-low-sound-ing wind swept by us, it seemed to
clear the air-space around us so that we could see afar off. We had of
late been so ac-cus-tomed to watch for sun-rise and sun-set, that we knew
with fair ac-cur-acy when it would be; and we knew that be-fore long the
sun would set. It was hard to be-lieve that by our watches it was less
than an hour that we waited in that rocky shel-ter be-fore the vari-ous
bod-ies began to con-verge close upon us. The wind came now with fiercer
and more bit-ter sweeps, and more stead-ily from the north. It seem-ingly
had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only oc-ca-sional bursts,
the snow fell. We could dis-tin-guish clearly the in-di-vidu-als of each
party, the pur-sued and the pur-suers. Strangely enough those pur-sued did
not seem to real-ise, or at least to care, that they were pur-sued; they
seemed, how-ever, to hasten with re-doubled speed as the sun dropped lower
and lower on the moun-tain tops.

Closer and closer they drew. The Pro-fessor and I crouched down be-hind
our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see that he was de-term-ined
that they should not pass. One and all were quite un-aware of our
pres-ence.

All at once two voices shouted out to: "Halt!" One was my Jonathan's,
raised in a high key of pas-sion; the other Mr. Mor-ris' strong res-ol-ute
tone of quiet com-mand. The gypsies may not have known the lan-guage, but
there was no mis-tak-ing the tone, in whatever tongue the words were
spoken. In-stinct-ively they reined in, and at the in-stant Lord Godalm-ing
and Jonathan dashed up at one side and Dr. Se-ward and Mr. Mor-ris on the
other. The leader of the gypsies, a splen-did-look-ing fel-low who sat his
horse like a cen-taur, waved them back, and in a fierce voice gave to his
com-pan-ions some word to pro-ceed. They lashed the horses which sprang
for-ward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an
un-mis-tak-able way com-manded them to stop. At the same mo-ment Dr. Van
Helsing and I rose be-hind the rock and poin-ted our weapons at them.
See-ing that they were sur-roun-ded the men tightened their reins and drew
up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the
gypsy party drew what weapon he car-ried, knife or pis-tol, and held
him-self in read-i-ness to at-tack. Is-sue was joined in an in-stant.

The leader, with a quick move-ment of his rein, threw his horse out in
front, and point-ing first to the sun--now close down on the hill
tops--and then to the castle, said some-thing which I did not un-der-stand.
For an-swer, all four men of our party threw them-selves from their horses
and dashed to-wards the cart. I should have felt ter-rible fear at see-ing
Jonathan in such danger, but that the ar-dour of battle must have been
upon me as well as the rest of them; I felt no fear, but only a wild,
sur-ging de-sire to do some-thing. See-ing the quick move-ment of our
parties, the leader of the gypsies gave a com-mand; his men in-stantly
formed round the cart in a sort of un-dis-cip-lined en-deav-our, each one
shoul-der-ing and push-ing the other in his eager-ness to carry out the
or-der.

In the midst of this I could see that Jonathan on one side of the ring
of men, and Quin-cey on the other, were for-cing a way to the cart; it was
evid-ent that they were bent on fin-ish-ing their task be-fore the sun
should set. Noth-ing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. Neither the
lev-elled weapons nor the flash-ing knives of the gypsies in front, nor
the howl-ing of the wolves be-hind, ap-peared to even at-tract their
at-ten-tion. Jonathan's im-petu-os-ity, and the mani-fest single-ness of his
pur-pose, seemed to over-awe those in front of him; in-stinct-ively they
cowered, aside and let him pass. In an in-stant he had jumped upon the
cart, and, with a strength which seemed in-cred-ible, raised the great
box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. In the mean-time, Mr.
Mor-ris had had to use force to pass through his side of the ring of
Szgany. All the time I had been breath-lessly watch-ing Jonathan I had,
with the tail of my eye, seen him press-ing des-per-ately for-ward, and had
seen the knives of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and
they cut at him. He had par-ried with his great bowie knife, and at first
I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang
be-side Jonathan, who had by now jumped from the cart, I could see that
with his left hand he was clutch-ing at his side, and that the blood was
spurt-ing through his fin-gers. He did not delay not-with-stand-ing this, for
as Jonathan, with des-per-ate en-ergy, at-tacked one end of the chest,
at-tempt-ing to prize off the lid with his great Kukri knife, he at-tacked
the other frantic-ally with his bowie. Under the ef-forts of both men the
lid began to yield; the nails drew with a quick screech-ing sound, and
the top of the box was thrown back.

By this time the gypsies, see-ing them-selves covered by the Winchesters,
and at the mercy of Lord Godalm-ing and Dr. Se-ward, had given in and made
no res-ist-ance. The sun was al-most down on the moun-tain tops, and the
shad-ows of the whole group fell long upon the snow. I saw the Count
ly-ing within the box upon the earth, some of which the rude fall-ing from
the cart had scattered over him. He was deathly pale, just like a waxen
im-age, and the red eyes glared with the hor-rible vin-dict-ive look which I
knew too well.

As I looked, the eyes saw the sink-ing sun, and the look of hate in them
turned to tri-umph.

But, on the in-stant, came the sweep and flash of Jonathan's great knife.
I shrieked as I saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the same
mo-ment Mr. Mor-ris's bowie knife plunged into the heart.

It was like a mir-acle; but be-fore our very eyes, and al-most in the
draw-ing of a breath, the whole body crumble into dust and passed from
our sight.

I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that mo-ment of fi-nal
dis-sol-u-tion, there was in the face a look of peace, such as I never
could have ima-gined might have res-ted there.

The Castle of Drac-ula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone
of its broken bat-tle-ments was ar-tic-u-lated against the light of the
set-ting sun.

The gypsies, tak-ing us as in some way the cause of the ex-traordin-ary
dis-ap-pear-ance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as
if for their lives. Those who were un-moun-ted jumped upon the
leiter-wagon and shouted to the horse-men not to desert them. The wolves,
which had with-drawn to a safe dis-tance, fol-lowed in their wake, leav-ing
us alone.

Mr. Mor-ris, who had sunk to the ground, leaned on his el-bow, hold-ing his
hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his fin-gers. I
flew to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the
two doc-tors. Jonathan knelt be-hind him and the wounded man laid back his
head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble ef-fort, my hand
in that of his own which was un-stained. He must have seen the an-guish of
my heart in my face, for he smiled at me and said:--

"I am only too happy to have been of any ser-vice! Oh, God!" he cried
sud-denly, strug-gling up to a sit-ting pos-ture and point-ing to me, "It was
worth for this to die! Look! look!"

The sun was now right down upon the moun-tain top, and the red gleams
fell upon my face, so that it was bathed in rosy light. With one im-pulse
the men sank on their knees and a deep and earn-est "Amen" broke from all
as their eyes fol-lowed the point-ing of his fin-ger. The dy-ing man
spoke:--

"Now God be thanked that all has not been in vain! See! the snow is not
more stain-less than her fore-head! The curse has passed away!"

And, to our bit-ter grief, with a smile and in si-lence, he died, a
gal-lant gen-tle-man.




                                  NOTE


Seven years ago we all went through the flames; and the hap-pi-ness of
some of us since then is, we think, well worth the pain we en-dured. It
is an ad-ded joy to Mina and to me that our boy's birth-day is the same
day as that on which Quin-cey Mor-ris died. His mother holds, I know, the
secret be-lief that some of our brave friend's spirit has passed into
him. His bundle of names links all our little band of men to-gether; but
we call him Quin-cey.

In the sum-mer of this year we made a jour-ney to Transylvania, and went
over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and
ter-rible memor-ies. It was al-most im-possible to be-lieve that the things
which we had seen with our own eyes and heard with our own ears were
liv-ing truths. Every trace of all that had been was blot-ted out. The
castle stood as be-fore, reared high above a waste of des-ol-a-tion.

When we got home we were talk-ing of the old time--which we could all
look back on without des-pair, for Godalm-ing and Se-ward are both hap-pily
mar-ried. I took the pa-pers from the safe where they had been ever since
our re-turn so long ago. We were struck with the fact, that in all the
mass of ma-ter-ial of which the re-cord is com-posed, there is hardly one
au-then-tic doc-u-ment; noth-ing but a mass of type-writ-ing, ex-cept the later
note-books of Mina and Se-ward and my-self, and Van Helsing's memor-andum.
We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to ac-cept these as
proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, with
our boy on his knee:--

"We want no proofs; we ask none to be-lieve us! This boy will some day
know what a brave and gal-lant wo-man his mother is. Already he knows her
sweet-ness and lov-ing care; later on he will un-der-stand how some men so
loved her, that they did dare much for her sake."

JONATHAN HARKER.
