I. A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA


I.

To Sh-er-lock Holmes she is al-ways _the_ wo-man. I have sel-dom heard him
men-tion her un-der any other name. In his eyes she ec-lipses and
pre-dom-in-ates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt any emo-tion
akin to love for Irene Adler. All emo-tions, and that one par-tic-u-larly,
were ab-hor-rent to his cold, pre-cise but ad-mir-ably bal-anced mind. He
was, I take it, the most per-fect reas-on-ing and ob-serving ma-chine that
the world has seen, but as a lover he would have placed him-self in a
false po-s-i-tion. He never spoke of the softer pas-sions, save with a gibe
and a sneer. They were ad-mir-able things for the ob-server—ex-cel-lent for
draw-ing the veil from men’s motives and ac-tions. But for the trained
reasoner to ad-mit such in-tru-sions into his own del-ic-ate and finely
ad-jus-ted tem-pera-ment was to in-tro-duce a dis-tract-ing factor which might
throw a doubt upon all his men-tal res-ults. Grit in a sens-it-ive
in-stru-ment, or a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, would not
be more dis-turb-ing than a strong emo-tion in a nature such as his. And
yet there was but one wo-man to him, and that wo-man was the late Irene
Adler, of du-bi-ous and ques-tion-able memory.

I had seen little of Holmes lately. My mar-riage had drif-ted us away
from each other. My own com-plete hap-pi-ness, and the home-centred
in-terests which rise up around the man who first finds him-self mas-ter
of his own es-tab-lish-ment, were suf-fi-cient to ab-sorb all my at-ten-tion,
while Holmes, who loathed every form of so-ci-ety with his whole Bo-hemian
soul, re-mained in our lodgings in Baker Street, bur-ied among his old
books, and al-tern-at-ing from week to week between co-caine and am-bi-tion,
the drowsi-ness of the drug, and the fierce en-ergy of his own keen
nature. He was still, as ever, deeply at-trac-ted by the study of crime,
and oc-cu-pied his im-mense fac-ulties and ex-traordin-ary powers of
ob-ser-va-tion in fol-low-ing out those clues, and clear-ing up those
mys-ter-ies which had been aban-doned as hope-less by the of-fi-cial po-lice.
From time to time I heard some vague ac-count of his do-ings: of his
sum-mons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his clear-ing up
of the sin-gu-lar tragedy of the Atkin-son broth-ers at Trin-co-malee, and
fi-nally of the mis-sion which he had ac-com-plished so del-ic-ately and
suc-cess-fully for the reign-ing fam-ily of Hol-land. Bey-ond these signs of
his activ-ity, how-ever, which I merely shared with all the read-ers of
the daily press, I knew little of my former friend and com-pan-ion.

One night—it was on the twen-ti-eth of March, 1888—I was re-turn-ing from a
jour-ney to a pa-tient (for I had now re-turned to civil prac-tice), when
my way led me through Baker Street. As I passed the well-re-membered
door, which must al-ways be as-so-ci-ated in my mind with my woo-ing, and
with the dark in-cid-ents of the Study in Scar-let, I was seized with a
keen de-sire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was em-ploy-ing his
ex-traordin-ary powers. His rooms were bril-liantly lit, and, even as I
looked up, I saw his tall, spare fig-ure pass twice in a dark sil-hou-ette
against the blind. He was pa-cing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his
head sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped be-hind him. To me, who
knew his every mood and habit, his at-ti-tude and man-ner told their own
story. He was at work again. He had risen out of his drug-cre-ated
dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new prob-lem. I rang the bell
and was shown up to the cham-ber which had formerly been in part my own.

His man-ner was not ef-fus-ive. It sel-dom was; but he was glad, I think,
to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he waved
me to an arm-chair, threw across his case of ci-gars, and in-dic-ated a
spirit case and a gas-o-gene in the corner. Then he stood be-fore the fire
and looked me over in his sin-gu-lar in-tro-spect-ive fash-ion.

“Wed-lock suits you,” he re-marked. “I think, Wat-son, that you have put
on seven and a half pounds since I saw you.”

“Seven!” I answered.

“Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, I
fancy, Wat-son. And in prac-tice again, I ob-serve. You did not tell me
that you in-ten-ded to go into har-ness.”

“Then, how do you know?”

“I see it, I de-duce it. How do I know that you have been get-ting
your-self very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and care-less
ser-vant girl?”

“My dear Holmes,” said I, “this is too much. You would cer-tainly have
been burned, had you lived a few cen-tur-ies ago. It is true that I had a
coun-try walk on Thursday and came home in a dread-ful mess, but as I
have changed my clothes I can’t ima-gine how you de-duce it. As to Mary
Jane, she is in-cor-ri-gible, and my wife has given her no-tice, but there,
again, I fail to see how you work it out.”

He chuckled to him-self and rubbed his long, nervous hands to-gether.

“It is sim-pli-city it-self,” said he; “my eyes tell me that on the in-side
of your left shoe, just where the fire-light strikes it, the leather is
scored by six al-most par-al-lel cuts. Ob-vi-ously they have been caused by
someone who has very care-lessly scraped round the edges of the sole in
or-der to re-move crus-ted mud from it. Hence, you see, my double
de-duc-tion that you had been out in vile weather, and that you had a
par-tic-u-larly ma-lig-nant boot-slit-ting spe-ci-men of the Lon-don slavey. As
to your prac-tice, if a gen-tle-man walks into my rooms smelling of
iod-o-form, with a black mark of ni-trate of sil-ver upon his right
fore-finger, and a bulge on the right side of his top-hat to show where
he has secreted his steth-o-scope, I must be dull, in-deed, if I do not
pro-nounce him to be an act-ive mem-ber of the med-ical pro-fes-sion.”

I could not help laugh-ing at the ease with which he ex-plained his
pro-cess of de-duc-tion. “When I hear you give your reas-ons,” I re-marked,
“the thing al-ways ap-pears to me to be so ri-dicu-lously simple that I
could eas-ily do it my-self, though at each suc-cess-ive in-stance of your
reas-on-ing I am baffled un-til you ex-plain your pro-cess. And yet I
be-lieve that my eyes are as good as yours.”

“Quite so,” he answered, light-ing a ci-gar-ette, and throw-ing him-self
down into an arm-chair. “You see, but you do not ob-serve. The
dis-tinc-tion is clear. For ex-ample, you have fre-quently seen the steps
which lead up from the hall to this room.”

“Fre-quently.”

“How of-ten?”

“Well, some hun-dreds of times.”

“Then how many are there?”

“How many? I don’t know.”

“Quite so! You have not ob-served. And yet you have seen. That is just
my point. Now, I know that there are sev-en-teen steps, be-cause I have
both seen and ob-served. By the way, since you are in-ter-ested in these
little prob-lems, and since you are good enough to chron-icle one or two
of my tri-fling ex-per-i-ences, you may be in-ter-ested in this.” He threw
over a sheet of thick, pink-tin-ted note-pa-per which had been ly-ing open
upon the table. “It came by the last post,” said he. “Read it aloud.”

The note was un-dated, and without either sig-na-ture or ad-dress.

“There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight o’clock,” it
said, “a gen-tle-man who de-sires to con-sult you upon a mat-ter of the very
deep-est mo-ment. Your re-cent ser-vices to one of the royal houses of
Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trus-ted with
mat-ters which are of an im-port-ance which can hardly be ex-ag-ger-ated.
This ac-count of you we have from all quar-ters re-ceived. Be in your
cham-ber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your vis-itor
wear a mask.”

“This is in-deed a mys-tery,” I re-marked. “What do you ima-gine that it
means?”

“I have no data yet. It is a cap-ital mis-take to the-or-ise be-fore one has
data. In-sens-ibly one be-gins to twist facts to suit the-or-ies, in-stead of
the-or-ies to suit facts. But the note it-self. What do you de-duce from
it?”

I care-fully ex-amined the writ-ing, and the pa-per upon which it was
writ-ten.

“The man who wrote it was pre-sum-ably well to do,” I re-marked,
en-deav-our-ing to im-it-ate my com-pan-ion’s pro-cesses. “Such pa-per could not
be bought un-der half a crown a packet. It is pe-cu-li-arly strong and
stiff.”

“Pe-culiar—that is the very word,” said Holmes. “It is not an Eng-lish
pa-per at all. Hold it up to the light.”

I did so, and saw a large “E” with a small “g,” a “P,” and a large “G”
with a small “t” woven into the tex-ture of the pa-per.

“What do you make of that?” asked Holmes.

“The name of the maker, no doubt; or his mono-gram, rather.”

“Not at all. The ‘G’ with the small ‘t’ stands for ‘Gesell-schaft,’
which is the Ger-man for ‘Com-pany.’ It is a cus-tom-ary con-trac-tion like
our ‘Co.’ ‘P,’ of course, stands for ‘Papier.’ Now for the ‘Eg.’ Let us
glance at our Contin-ental Gaz-etteer.” He took down a heavy brown volume
from his shelves. “Eglow, Eglon-itz—here we are, Egria. It is in a
Ger-man-speak-ing coun-try—in Bo-hemia, not far from Carls-bad. ‘Re-mark-able
as be-ing the scene of the death of Wal-len-stein, and for its nu-mer-ous
glass-factor-ies and pa-per-mills.’ Ha, ha, my boy, what do you make of
that?” His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue tri-umphant cloud
from his ci-gar-ette.

“The pa-per was made in Bo-hemia,” I said.

“Pre-cisely. And the man who wrote the note is a Ger-man. Do you note the
pe-cu-liar con-struc-tion of the sen-tence—‘This ac-count of you we have from
all quar-ters re-ceived.’ A French-man or Rus-sian could not have writ-ten
that. It is the Ger-man who is so un-cour-teous to his verbs. It only
re-mains, there-fore, to dis-cover what is wanted by this Ger-man who
writes upon Bo-hemian pa-per and prefers wear-ing a mask to show-ing his
face. And here he comes, if I am not mis-taken, to re-solve all our
doubts.”

As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses’ hoofs and grat-ing
wheels against the curb, fol-lowed by a sharp pull at the bell. Holmes
whistled.

“A pair, by the sound,” said he. “Yes,” he con-tin-ued, glan-cing out of
the win-dow. “A nice little brougham and a pair of beau-ties. A hun-dred
and fifty guineas apiece. There’s money in this case, Wat-son, if there
is noth-ing else.”

“I think that I had bet-ter go, Holmes.”

“Not a bit, Doc-tor. Stay where you are. I am lost without my Boswell.
And this prom-ises to be in-ter-est-ing. It would be a pity to miss it.”

“But your cli-ent—”

“Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he comes.
Sit down in that arm-chair, Doc-tor, and give us your best at-ten-tion.”

A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and in the
pas-sage, paused im-me-di-ately out-side the door. Then there was a loud and
au-thor-it-at-ive tap.

“Come in!” said Holmes.

A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six inches
in height, with the chest and limbs of a Her-cules. His dress was rich
with a rich-ness which would, in Eng-land, be looked upon as akin to bad
taste. Heavy bands of as-trakhan were slashed across the sleeves and
fronts of his double-breasted coat, while the deep blue cloak which was
thrown over his shoulders was lined with flame-col-oured silk and
se-cured at the neck with a brooch which con-sisted of a single flam-ing
beryl. Boots which ex-ten-ded halfway up his calves, and which were
trimmed at the tops with rich brown fur, com-pleted the im-pres-sion of
bar-baric op-u-lence which was sug-ges-ted by his whole ap-pear-ance. He
car-ried a broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore across the up-per
part of his face, ex-tend-ing down past the cheekbones, a black viz-ard
mask, which he had ap-par-ently ad-jus-ted that very mo-ment, for his hand
was still raised to it as he entered. From the lower part of the face
he ap-peared to be a man of strong char-ac-ter, with a thick, hanging lip,
and a long, straight chin sug-gest-ive of res-ol-u-tion pushed to the length
of ob-stin-acy.

“You had my note?” he asked with a deep harsh voice and a strongly
marked Ger-man ac-cent. “I told you that I would call.” He looked from
one to the other of us, as if un-cer-tain which to ad-dress.

“Pray take a seat,” said Holmes. “This is my friend and col-league, Dr.
Wat-son, who is oc-ca-sion-ally good enough to help me in my cases. Whom
have I the hon-our to ad-dress?”

“You may ad-dress me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bo-hemian no-ble-man. I
un-der-stand that this gen-tle-man, your friend, is a man of hon-our and
dis-cre-tion, whom I may trust with a mat-ter of the most ex-treme
im-port-ance. If not, I should much prefer to com-mu-nic-ate with you
alone.”

I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back into
my chair. “It is both, or none,” said he. “You may say be-fore this
gen-tle-man any-thing which you may say to me.”

The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. “Then I must be-gin,” said he,
“by bind-ing you both to ab-so-lute secrecy for two years; at the end of
that time the mat-ter will be of no im-port-ance. At present it is not too
much to say that it is of such weight it may have an in-flu-ence upon
European his-tory.”

“I prom-ise,” said Holmes.

“And I.”

“You will ex-cuse this mask,” con-tin-ued our strange vis-itor. “The au-gust
per-son who em-ploys me wishes his agent to be un-known to you, and I may
con-fess at once that the title by which I have just called my-self is
not ex-actly my own.”

“I was aware of it,” said Holmes dryly.

“The cir-cum-stances are of great del-ic-acy, and every pre-cau-tion has to
be taken to quench what might grow to be an im-mense scan-dal and
ser-i-ously com-prom-ise one of the reign-ing fam-il-ies of Europe. To speak
plainly, the mat-ter im-plic-ates the great House of Orm-stein, hered-it-ary
kings of Bo-hemia.”

“I was also aware of that,” mur-mured Holmes, set-tling him-self down in
his arm-chair and clos-ing his eyes.

Our vis-itor glanced with some ap-par-ent sur-prise at the lan-guid,
loun-ging fig-ure of the man who had been no doubt de-pic-ted to him as the
most in-cis-ive reasoner and most en-er-getic agent in Europe. Holmes
slowly re-opened his eyes and looked im-pa-tiently at his gi-gantic cli-ent.

“If your Majesty would con-des-cend to state your case,” he re-marked, “I
should be bet-ter able to ad-vise you.”

The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in
un-con-trol-lable agit-a-tion. Then, with a ges-ture of des-per-a-tion, he tore
the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. “You are right,”
he cried; “I am the King. Why should I at-tempt to con-ceal it?”

“Why, in-deed?” mur-mured Holmes. “Your Majesty had not spoken be-fore I
was aware that I was ad-dress-ing Wil-helm Gott-s-reich Si-gis-mond von
Orm-stein, Grand Duke of Cas-sel-Fel-stein, and hered-it-ary King of
Bo-hemia.”

“But you can un-der-stand,” said our strange vis-itor, sit-ting down once
more and passing his hand over his high white fore-head, “you can
un-der-stand that I am not ac-cus-tomed to do-ing such busi-ness in my own
per-son. Yet the mat-ter was so del-ic-ate that I could not con-fide it to
an agent without put-ting my-self in his power. I have come _in-cog-nito_
from Prague for the pur-pose of con-sult-ing you.”

“Then, pray con-sult,” said Holmes, shut-ting his eyes once more.

“The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, dur-ing a lengthy
visit to Warsaw, I made the ac-quaint-ance of the well-known ad-ven-turess,
Irene Adler. The name is no doubt fa-mil-iar to you.”

“Kindly look her up in my in-dex, Doc-tor,” mur-mured Holmes without
open-ing his eyes. For many years he had ad-op-ted a sys-tem of dock-et-ing
all para-graphs con-cern-ing men and things, so that it was dif-fi-cult to
name a sub-ject or a per-son on which he could not at once fur-nish
in-form-a-tion. In this case I found her bio-graphy sand-wiched in between
that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-com-mander who had writ-ten a
mono-graph upon the deep-sea fishes.

“Let me see!” said Holmes. “Hum! Born in New Jer-sey in the year 1858.
Con-tralto—hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Im-per-ial Opera of Warsaw—yes!
Re-tired from op-er-atic stage—ha! Liv-ing in Lon-don—quite so! Your
Majesty, as I un-der-stand, be-came en-tangled with this young per-son,
wrote her some com-prom-ising let-ters, and is now de-sirous of get-ting
those let-ters back.”

“Pre-cisely so. But how—”

“Was there a secret mar-riage?”

“None.”

“No legal pa-pers or cer-ti-fic-ates?”

“None.”

“Then I fail to fol-low your Majesty. If this young per-son should
pro-duce her let-ters for black-mail-ing or other pur-poses, how is she to
prove their au-then-ti-city?”

“There is the writ-ing.”

“Pooh, pooh! For-gery.”

“My private note-pa-per.”

“Stolen.”

“My own seal.”

“Imit-ated.”

“My pho-to-graph.”

“Bought.”

“We were both in the pho-to-graph.”

“Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has in-deed com-mit-ted an
in-dis-cre-tion.”

“I was mad—in-sane.”

“You have com-prom-ised your-self ser-i-ously.”

“I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thirty now.”

“It must be re-covered.”

“We have tried and failed.”

“Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought.”

“She will not sell.”

“Stolen, then.”

“Five at-tempts have been made. Twice burg-lars in my pay ran-sacked her
house. Once we di-ver-ted her lug-gage when she trav-elled. Twice she has
been way-laid. There has been no res-ult.”

“No sign of it?”

“Ab-so-lutely none.”

Holmes laughed. “It is quite a pretty little prob-lem,” said he.

“But a very ser-i-ous one to me,” re-turned the King re-proach-fully.

“Very, in-deed. And what does she pro-pose to do with the pho-to-graph?”

“To ruin me.”

“But how?”

“I am about to be mar-ried.”

“So I have heard.”

“To Clotilde Loth-man von Saxe-Men-in-gen, second daugh-ter of the King of
Scand-inavia. You may know the strict prin-ciples of her fam-ily. She is
her-self the very soul of del-ic-acy. A shadow of a doubt as to my con-duct
would bring the mat-ter to an end.”

“And Irene Adler?”

“Threatens to send them the pho-to-graph. And she will do it. I know that
she will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul of steel. She
has the face of the most beau-ti-ful of wo-men, and the mind of the most
res-ol-ute of men. Rather than I should marry an-other wo-man, there are no
lengths to which she would not go—none.”

“You are sure that she has not sent it yet?”

“I am sure.”

“And why?”

“Be-cause she has said that she would send it on the day when the
be-trothal was pub-licly pro-claimed. That will be next Monday.”

“Oh, then we have three days yet,” said Holmes with a yawn. “That is
very for-tu-nate, as I have one or two mat-ters of im-port-ance to look into
just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in Lon-don for the
present?”

“Cer-tainly. You will find me at the Langham un-der the name of the Count
Von Kramm.”

“Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we pro-gress.”

“Pray do so. I shall be all anxi-ety.”

“Then, as to money?”

“You have _carte blanche_.”

“Ab-so-lutely?”

“I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my king-dom to
have that pho-to-graph.”

“And for present ex-penses?”

The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from un-der his cloak and laid
it on the table.

“There are three hun-dred pounds in gold and seven hun-dred in notes,” he
said.

Holmes scribbled a re-ceipt upon a sheet of his note-book and handed it
to him.

“And Ma-demois-elle’s ad-dress?” he asked.

“Is Bri-ony Lodge, Ser-pent-ine Av-enue, St. John’s Wood.”

Holmes took a note of it. “One other ques-tion,” said he. “Was the
pho-to-graph a cab-inet?”

“It was.”

“Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon have
some good news for you. And good-night, Wat-son,” he ad-ded, as the
wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. “If you will be
good enough to call to-mor-row af-ter-noon at three o’clock I should like
to chat this little mat-ter over with you.”


II.

At three o’clock pre-cisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had not
yet re-turned. The land-lady in-formed me that he had left the house
shortly after eight o’clock in the morn-ing. I sat down be-side the fire,
how-ever, with the in-ten-tion of await-ing him, how-ever long he might be.
I was already deeply in-ter-ested in his in-quiry, for, though it was
sur-roun-ded by none of the grim and strange fea-tures which were
as-so-ci-ated with the two crimes which I have already re-cor-ded, still,
the nature of the case and the ex-al-ted sta-tion of his cli-ent gave it a
char-ac-ter of its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of the
in-vest-ig-a-tion which my friend had on hand, there was some-thing in his
mas-terly grasp of a situ-ation, and his keen, in-cis-ive reas-on-ing, which
made it a pleas-ure to me to study his sys-tem of work, and to fol-low the
quick, subtle meth-ods by which he dis-en-tangled the most in-ex-tric-able
mys-ter-ies. So ac-cus-tomed was I to his in-vari-able suc-cess that the very
pos-sib-il-ity of his fail-ing had ceased to enter into my head.

It was close upon four be-fore the door opened, and a drunken-look-ing
groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an in-flamed face and
dis-rep-ut-able clothes, walked into the room. Ac-cus-tomed as I was to my
friend’s amaz-ing powers in the use of dis-guises, I had to look three
times be-fore I was cer-tain that it was in-deed he. With a nod he
van-ished into the bed-room, whence he emerged in five minutes
tweed-suited and re-spect-able, as of old. Put-ting his hands into his
pock-ets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and laughed
heart-ily for some minutes.

“Well, really!” he cried, and then he choked and laughed again un-til he
was ob-liged to lie back, limp and help-less, in the chair.

“What is it?”

“It’s quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I em-ployed
my morn-ing, or what I ended by do-ing.”

“I can’t ima-gine. I sup-pose that you have been watch-ing the habits, and
per-haps the house, of Miss Irene Adler.”

“Quite so; but the se-quel was rather un-usual. I will tell you, how-ever.
I left the house a little after eight o’clock this morn-ing in the
char-ac-ter of a groom out of work. There is a won-der-ful sym-pathy and
free-ma-sonry among horsey men. Be one of them, and you will know all
that there is to know. I soon found Bri-ony Lodge. It is a _bi-jou_
villa, with a garden at the back, but built out in front right up to
the road, two stor-ies. Chubb lock to the door. Large sit-ting-room on
the right side, well fur-nished, with long win-dows al-most to the floor,
and those pre-pos-ter-ous Eng-lish win-dow fasten-ers which a child could
open. Be-hind there was noth-ing re-mark-able, save that the pas-sage win-dow
could be reached from the top of the coach-house. I walked round it and
ex-amined it closely from every point of view, but without not-ing
any-thing else of in-terest.

“I then lounged down the street and found, as I ex-pec-ted, that there
was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden. I lent
the ost-lers a hand in rub-bing down their horses, and re-ceived in
ex-change two-pence, a glass of half-and-half, two fills of shag to-bacco,
and as much in-form-a-tion as I could de-sire about Miss Adler, to say
noth-ing of half a dozen other people in the neigh-bour-hood in whom I was
not in the least in-ter-ested, but whose bio-graph-ies I was com-pelled to
listen to.”

“And what of Irene Adler?” I asked.

“Oh, she has turned all the men’s heads down in that part. She is the
dain-ti-est thing un-der a bon-net on this planet. So say the
Ser-pent-ine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at con-certs, drives
out at five every day, and re-turns at seven sharp for din-ner. Sel-dom
goes out at other times, ex-cept when she sings. Has only one male
vis-itor, but a good deal of him. He is dark, hand-some, and dash-ing,
never calls less than once a day, and of-ten twice. He is a Mr. God-frey
Nor-ton, of the In-ner Temple. See the ad-vant-ages of a cab-man as a
con-fid-ant. They had driven him home a dozen times from Ser-pent-ine-mews,
and knew all about him. When I had listened to all they had to tell, I
began to walk up and down near Bri-ony Lodge once more, and to think
over my plan of cam-paign.

“This God-frey Nor-ton was evid-ently an im-port-ant factor in the mat-ter.
He was a law-yer. That soun-ded omin-ous. What was the re-la-tion between
them, and what the ob-ject of his re-peated vis-its? Was she his cli-ent,
his friend, or his mis-tress? If the former, she had prob-ably
trans-ferred the pho-to-graph to his keep-ing. If the lat-ter, it was less
likely. On the is-sue of this ques-tion de-pended whether I should
con-tinue my work at Bri-ony Lodge, or turn my at-ten-tion to the
gen-tle-man’s cham-bers in the Temple. It was a del-ic-ate point, and it
widened the field of my in-quiry. I fear that I bore you with these
de-tails, but I have to let you see my little dif-fi-culties, if you are
to un-der-stand the situ-ation.”

“I am fol-low-ing you closely,” I answered.

“I was still bal-an-cing the mat-ter in my mind when a hansom cab drove up
to Bri-ony Lodge, and a gen-tle-man sprang out. He was a re-mark-ably
hand-some man, dark, aquil-ine, and mous-tached—evid-ently the man of whom
I had heard. He ap-peared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the cab-man
to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door with the air of
a man who was thor-oughly at home.

“He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpses of
him in the win-dows of the sit-ting-room, pa-cing up and down, talk-ing
ex-citedly, and wav-ing his arms. Of her I could see noth-ing. Presently
he emerged, look-ing even more flur-ried than be-fore. As he stepped up to
the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket and looked at it
earn-estly, ‘Drive like the devil,’ he shouted, ‘first to Gross &
Han-key’s in Re-gent Street, and then to the Church of St. Mon-ica in the
Edge-ware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twenty minutes!’

“Away they went, and I was just won-der-ing whether I should not do well
to fol-low them when up the lane came a neat little landau, the coach-man
with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie un-der his ear, while all
the tags of his har-ness were stick-ing out of the buckles. It hadn’t
pulled up be-fore she shot out of the hall door and into it. I only
caught a glimpse of her at the mo-ment, but she was a lovely wo-man, with
a face that a man might die for.

“‘The Church of St. Mon-ica, John,’ she cried, ‘and half a sov-er-eign if
you reach it in twenty minutes.’

“This was quite too good to lose, Wat-son. I was just bal-an-cing whether
I should run for it, or whether I should perch be-hind her landau when a
cab came through the street. The driver looked twice at such a shabby
fare, but I jumped in be-fore he could ob-ject. ‘The Church of St.
Mon-ica,’ said I, ‘and half a sov-er-eign if you reach it in twenty
minutes.’ It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and of course it was
clear enough what was in the wind.

“My cabby drove fast. I don’t think I ever drove faster, but the oth-ers
were there be-fore us. The cab and the landau with their steam-ing horses
were in front of the door when I ar-rived. I paid the man and hur-ried
into the church. There was not a soul there save the two whom I had
fol-lowed and a sur-pliced cler-gy-man, who seemed to be ex-pos-tu-lat-ing with
them. They were all three stand-ing in a knot in front of the al-tar. I
lounged up the side aisle like any other idler who has dropped into a
church. Sud-denly, to my sur-prise, the three at the al-tar faced round to
me, and God-frey Nor-ton came run-ning as hard as he could to-wards me.

“‘Thank God,’ he cried. ‘You’ll do. Come! Come!’

“‘What then?’ I asked.

“‘Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won’t be legal.’

“I was half-dragged up to the al-tar, and be-fore I knew where I was I
found my-self mum-bling re-sponses which were whispered in my ear, and
vouch-ing for things of which I knew noth-ing, and gen-er-ally as-sist-ing in
the se-cure ty-ing up of Irene Adler, spin-ster, to God-frey Nor-ton,
bach-elor. It was all done in an in-stant, and there was the gen-tle-man
thank-ing me on the one side and the lady on the other, while the
cler-gy-man beamed on me in front. It was the most pre-pos-ter-ous po-s-i-tion
in which I ever found my-self in my life, and it was the thought of it
that star-ted me laugh-ing just now. It seems that there had been some
in-form-al-ity about their li-cense, that the cler-gy-man ab-so-lutely re-fused
to marry them without a wit-ness of some sort, and that my lucky
ap-pear-ance saved the bride-groom from hav-ing to sally out into the
streets in search of a best man. The bride gave me a sov-er-eign, and I
mean to wear it on my watch chain in memory of the oc-ca-sion.”

“This is a very un-ex-pec-ted turn of af-fairs,” said I; “and what then?”

“Well, I found my plans very ser-i-ously men-aced. It looked as if the
pair might take an im-me-di-ate de-par-ture, and so ne-ces-sit-ate very prompt
and en-er-getic meas-ures on my part. At the church door, how-ever, they
sep-ar-ated, he driv-ing back to the Temple, and she to her own house. ‘I
shall drive out in the park at five as usual,’ she said as she left
him. I heard no more. They drove away in dif-fer-ent dir-ec-tions, and I
went off to make my own ar-range-ments.”

“Which are?”

“Some cold beef and a glass of beer,” he answered, ringing the bell. “I
have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier still
this even-ing. By the way, Doc-tor, I shall want your co-op-er-a-tion.”

“I shall be de-lighted.”

“You don’t mind break-ing the law?”

“Not in the least.”

“Nor run-ning a chance of ar-rest?”

“Not in a good cause.”

“Oh, the cause is ex-cel-lent!”

“Then I am your man.”

“I was sure that I might rely on you.”

“But what is it you wish?”

“When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear to you.
Now,” he said as he turned hun-grily on the simple fare that our
land-lady had provided, “I must dis-cuss it while I eat, for I have not
much time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the scene
of ac-tion. Miss Irene, or Ma-dame, rather, re-turns from her drive at
seven. We must be at Bri-ony Lodge to meet her.”

“And what then?”

“You must leave that to me. I have already ar-ranged what is to oc-cur.
There is only one point on which I must in-sist. You must not in-ter-fere,
come what may. You un-der-stand?”

“I am to be neut-ral?”

“To do noth-ing whatever. There will prob-ably be some small
un-pleas-ant-ness. Do not join in it. It will end in my be-ing con-veyed
into the house. Four or five minutes af-ter-wards the sit-ting-room win-dow
will open. You are to sta-tion your-self close to that open win-dow.”

“Yes.”

“You are to watch me, for I will be vis-ible to you.”

“Yes.”

“And when I raise my hand—so—you will throw into the room what I give
you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire. You
quite fol-low me?”

“Entirely.”

“It is noth-ing very for-mid-able,” he said, tak-ing a long ci-gar-shaped
roll from his pocket. “It is an or-din-ary plumber’s smoke-rocket, fit-ted
with a cap at either end to make it self-light-ing. Your task is
con-fined to that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be taken up
by quite a num-ber of people. You may then walk to the end of the
street, and I will re-join you in ten minutes. I hope that I have made
my-self clear?”

“I am to re-main neut-ral, to get near the win-dow, to watch you, and at
the sig-nal to throw in this ob-ject, then to raise the cry of fire, and
to wait you at the corner of the street.”

“Pre-cisely.”

“Then you may en-tirely rely on me.”

“That is ex-cel-lent. I think, per-haps, it is al-most time that I pre-pare
for the new role I have to play.”

He dis-ap-peared into his bed-room and re-turned in a few minutes in the
char-ac-ter of an ami-able and simple-minded Non-con-form-ist cler-gy-man. His
broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, his sym-path-etic
smile, and gen-eral look of peer-ing and be-ne-vol-ent curi-os-ity were such
as Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled. It was not merely that
Holmes changed his cos-tume. His ex-pres-sion, his man-ner, his very soul
seemed to vary with every fresh part that he as-sumed. The stage lost a
fine actor, even as sci-ence lost an acute reasoner, when he be-came a
spe-cial-ist in crime.

It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still
wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in Ser-pent-ine
Av-enue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just be-ing lighted as
we paced up and down in front of Bri-ony Lodge, wait-ing for the com-ing
of its oc-cu-pant. The house was just such as I had pic-tured it from
Sh-er-lock Holmes’ suc-cinct de-scrip-tion, but the loc-al-ity ap-peared to be
less private than I ex-pec-ted. On the con-trary, for a small street in a
quiet neigh-bour-hood, it was re-mark-ably an-im-ated. There was a group of
shab-bily dressed men smoking and laugh-ing in a corner, a
scis-sors-grinder with his wheel, two guards-men who were flirt-ing with a
nurse-girl, and sev-eral well-dressed young men who were loun-ging up and
down with ci-gars in their mouths.

“You see,” re-marked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of the
house, “this mar-riage rather sim-pli-fies mat-ters. The pho-to-graph be-comes
a double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would be as averse
to its be-ing seen by Mr. God-frey Nor-ton, as our cli-ent is to its com-ing
to the eyes of his prin-cess. Now the ques-tion is, Where are we to find
the pho-to-graph?”

“Where, in-deed?”

“It is most un-likely that she car-ries it about with her. It is cab-inet
size. Too large for easy con-ceal-ment about a wo-man’s dress. She knows
that the King is cap-able of hav-ing her way-laid and searched. Two
at-tempts of the sort have already been made. We may take it, then, that
she does not carry it about with her.”

“Where, then?”

“Her banker or her law-yer. There is that double pos-sib-il-ity. But I am
in-clined to think neither. Wo-men are nat-ur-ally se-cret-ive, and they like
to do their own se-cret-ing. Why should she hand it over to any-one else?
She could trust her own guard-i-an-ship, but she could not tell what
in-dir-ect or polit-ical in-flu-ence might be brought to bear upon a
busi-ness man. Besides, re-mem-ber that she had re-solved to use it within
a few days. It must be where she can lay her hands upon it. It must be
in her own house.”

“But it has twice been burgled.”

“Pshaw! They did not know how to look.”

“But how will you look?”

“I will not look.”

“What then?”

“I will get her to show me.”

“But she will re-fuse.”

“She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is her
car-riage. Now carry out my or-ders to the let-ter.”

As he spoke the gleam of the side-lights of a car-riage came round the
curve of the av-enue. It was a smart little landau which rattled up to
the door of Bri-ony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of the loaf-ing men at
the corner dashed for-ward to open the door in the hope of earn-ing a
cop-per, but was el-bowed away by an-other loafer, who had rushed up with
the same in-ten-tion. A fierce quar-rel broke out, which was in-creased by
the two guards-men, who took sides with one of the loun-gers, and by the
scis-sors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the other side. A blow was
struck, and in an in-stant the lady, who had stepped from her car-riage,
was the centre of a little knot of flushed and strug-gling men, who
struck sav-agely at each other with their fists and sticks. Holmes
dashed into the crowd to pro-tect the lady; but, just as he reached her,
he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blood run-ning freely
down his face. At his fall the guards-men took to their heels in one
dir-ec-tion and the loun-gers in the other, while a num-ber of bet-ter
dressed people, who had watched the scuffle without tak-ing part in it,
crowded in to help the lady and to at-tend to the in-jured man. Irene
Adler, as I will still call her, had hur-ried up the steps; but she
stood at the top with her su-perb fig-ure out-lined against the lights of
the hall, look-ing back into the street.

“Is the poor gen-tle-man much hurt?” she asked.

“He is dead,” cried sev-eral voices.

“No, no, there’s life in him!” shouted an-other. “But he’ll be gone
be-fore you can get him to hos-pital.”

“He’s a brave fel-low,” said a wo-man. “They would have had the lady’s
purse and watch if it hadn’t been for him. They were a gang, and a
rough one, too. Ah, he’s breath-ing now.”

“He can’t lie in the street. May we bring him in, marm?”

“Surely. Bring him into the sit-ting-room. There is a com-fort-able sofa.
This way, please!”

Slowly and sol-emnly he was borne into Bri-ony Lodge and laid out in the
prin-cipal room, while I still ob-served the pro-ceed-ings from my post by
the win-dow. The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had not been drawn,
so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch. I do not know
whether he was seized with com-punc-tion at that mo-ment for the part he
was play-ing, but I know that I never felt more heart-ily ashamed of
my-self in my life than when I saw the beau-ti-ful creature against whom I
was con-spir-ing, or the grace and kind-li-ness with which she waited upon
the in-jured man. And yet it would be the black-est treach-ery to Holmes
to draw back now from the part which he had in-trus-ted to me. I hardened
my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from un-der my ul-ster. After all, I
thought, we are not in-jur-ing her. We are but pre-vent-ing her from
in-jur-ing an-other.

Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him mo-tion like a man who
is in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the win-dow. At
the same in-stant I saw him raise his hand and at the sig-nal I tossed my
rocket into the room with a cry of “Fire!” The word was no sooner out
of my mouth than the whole crowd of spec-tat-ors, well dressed and
ill—gen-tle-men, ost-lers, and ser-vant maids—joined in a gen-eral shriek of
“Fire!” Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room and out at the
open win-dow. I caught a glimpse of rush-ing fig-ures, and a mo-ment later
the voice of Holmes from within as-sur-ing them that it was a false
alarm. Slip-ping through the shout-ing crowd I made my way to the corner
of the street, and in ten minutes was re-joiced to find my friend’s arm
in mine, and to get away from the scene of up-roar. He walked swiftly
and in si-lence for some few minutes un-til we had turned down one of the
quiet streets which lead to-wards the Edge-ware Road.

“You did it very nicely, Doc-tor,” he re-marked. “Noth-ing could have been
bet-ter. It is all right.”

“You have the pho-to-graph?”

“I know where it is.”

“And how did you find out?”

“She showed me, as I told you she would.”

“I am still in the dark.”

“I do not wish to make a mys-tery,” said he, laugh-ing. “The mat-ter was
per-fectly simple. You, of course, saw that every-one in the street was
an ac-com-plice. They were all en-gaged for the even-ing.”

“I guessed as much.”

“Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the
palm of my hand. I rushed for-ward, fell down, clapped my hand to my
face, and be-came a piteous spec-tacle. It is an old trick.”

“That also I could fathom.”

“Then they car-ried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else could
she do? And into her sit-ting-room, which was the very room which I
sus-pec-ted. It lay between that and her bed-room, and I was de-term-ined to
see which. They laid me on a couch, I mo-tioned for air, they were
com-pelled to open the win-dow, and you had your chance.”

“How did that help you?”

“It was all-im-port-ant. When a wo-man thinks that her house is on fire,
her in-stinct is at once to rush to the thing which she val-ues most. It
is a per-fectly over-power-ing im-pulse, and I have more than once taken
ad-vant-age of it. In the case of the Dar-ling-ton Sub-sti-tu-tion Scan-dal it
was of use to me, and also in the Arns-worth Castle busi-ness. A mar-ried
wo-man grabs at her baby; an un-mar-ried one reaches for her jewel-box.
Now it was clear to me that our lady of to-day had noth-ing in the house
more pre-cious to her than what we are in quest of. She would rush to
se-cure it. The alarm of fire was ad-mir-ably done. The smoke and shout-ing
were enough to shake nerves of steel. She re-spon-ded beau-ti-fully. The
pho-to-graph is in a re-cess be-hind a slid-ing panel just above the right
bell-pull. She was there in an in-stant, and I caught a glimpse of it as
she half drew it out. When I cried out that it was a false alarm, she
re-placed it, glanced at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I have
not seen her since. I rose, and, mak-ing my ex-cuses, es-caped from the
house. I hes-it-ated whether to at-tempt to se-cure the pho-to-graph at once;
but the coach-man had come in, and as he was watch-ing me nar-rowly, it
seemed safer to wait. A little over-pre-cip-it-ance may ruin all.”

“And now?” I asked.

“Our quest is prac-tic-ally fin-ished. I shall call with the King
to-mor-row, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be shown
into the sit-ting-room to wait for the lady, but it is prob-able that
when she comes she may find neither us nor the pho-to-graph. It might be
a sat-is-fac-tion to his Majesty to re-gain it with his own hands.”

“And when will you call?”

“At eight in the morn-ing. She will not be up, so that we shall have a
clear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this mar-riage may mean a
com-plete change in her life and habits. I must wire to the King without
delay.”

We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door. He was
search-ing his pock-ets for the key when someone passing said:

“Good-night, Mister Sh-er-lock Holmes.”

There were sev-eral people on the pave-ment at the time, but the greet-ing
ap-peared to come from a slim youth in an ul-ster who had hur-ried by.

“I’ve heard that voice be-fore,” said Holmes, star-ing down the dimly lit
street. “Now, I won-der who the deuce that could have been.”


III.

I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were en-gaged upon our toast
and cof-fee in the morn-ing when the King of Bo-hemia rushed into the
room.

“You have really got it!” he cried, grasp-ing Sh-er-lock Holmes by either
shoulder and look-ing eagerly into his face.

“Not yet.”

“But you have hopes?”

“I have hopes.”

“Then, come. I am all im-pa-tience to be gone.”

“We must have a cab.”

“No, my brougham is wait-ing.”

“Then that will sim-plify mat-ters.” We des-cen-ded and star-ted off once
more for Bri-ony Lodge.

“Irene Adler is mar-ried,” re-marked Holmes.

“Mar-ried! When?”

“Yes-ter-day.”

“But to whom?”

“To an Eng-lish law-yer named Nor-ton.”

“But she could not love him.”

“I am in hopes that she does.”

“And why in hopes?”

“Be-cause it would spare your Majesty all fear of fu-ture an-noy-ance. If
the lady loves her hus-band, she does not love your Majesty. If she does
not love your Majesty, there is no reason why she should in-ter-fere with
your Majesty’s plan.”

“It is true. And yet—! Well! I wish she had been of my own sta-tion!
What a queen she would have made!” He re-lapsed into a moody si-lence,
which was not broken un-til we drew up in Ser-pent-ine Av-enue.

The door of Bri-ony Lodge was open, and an eld-erly wo-man stood upon the
steps. She watched us with a sar-donic eye as we stepped from the
brougham.

“Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes, I be-lieve?” said she.

“I am Mr. Holmes,” answered my com-pan-ion, look-ing at her with a
ques-tion-ing and rather startled gaze.

“Indeed! My mis-tress told me that you were likely to call. She left
this morn-ing with her hus-band by the 5:15 train from Char-ing Cross for
the Contin-ent.”

“What!” Sh-er-lock Holmes staggered back, white with chag-rin and
sur-prise. “Do you mean that she has left Eng-land?”

“Never to re-turn.”

“And the pa-pers?” asked the King hoarsely. “All is lost.”

“We shall see.” He pushed past the ser-vant and rushed into the
draw-ing-room, fol-lowed by the King and my-self. The fur-niture was
scattered about in every dir-ec-tion, with dis-mantled shelves and open
draw-ers, as if the lady had hur-riedly ran-sacked them be-fore her flight.
Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small slid-ing shut-ter, and,
plunging in his hand, pulled out a pho-to-graph and a let-ter. The
pho-to-graph was of Irene Adler her-self in even-ing dress, the let-ter was
su-per-scribed to “Sh-er-lock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for.” My
friend tore it open, and we all three read it to-gether. It was dated at
mid-night of the pre-ced-ing night and ran in this way:

    “MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,—You really did it very well. You took
    me in com-pletely. Until after the alarm of fire, I had not a
    sus-pi-cion. But then, when I found how I had be-trayed my-self, I
    began to think. I had been warned against you months ago. I had
    been told that, if the King em-ployed an agent, it would cer-tainly
    be you. And your ad-dress had been given me. Yet, with all this, you
    made me re-veal what you wanted to know. Even after I be-came
    sus-pi-cious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind old
    cler-gy-man. But, you know, I have been trained as an act-ress my-self.
    Male cos-tume is noth-ing new to me. I of-ten take ad-vant-age of the
    free-dom which it gives. I sent John, the coach-man, to watch you,
    ran up-stairs, got into my walk-ing clothes, as I call them, and came
    down just as you de-par-ted.

    “Well, I fol-lowed you to your door, and so made sure that I was
    really an ob-ject of in-terest to the cel-eb-rated Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes.
    Then I, rather im-prudently, wished you good-night, and star-ted for
    the Temple to see my hus-band.

    “We both thought the best re-source was flight, when pur-sued by so
    for-mid-able an ant-ag-on-ist; so you will find the nest empty when you
    call to-mor-row. As to the pho-to-graph, your cli-ent may rest in
    peace. I love and am loved by a bet-ter man than he. The King may do
    what he will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly
    wronged. I keep it only to safe-guard my-self, and to pre-serve a
    weapon which will al-ways se-cure me from any steps which he might
    take in the fu-ture. I leave a pho-to-graph which he might care to
    pos-sess; and I re-main, dear Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes,


    “Very truly yours,

    “IRENE NORTON, _née_ ADLER.”


“What a wo-man—oh, what a wo-man!” cried the King of Bo-hemia, when we had
all three read this epistle. “Did I not tell you how quick and res-ol-ute
she was? Would she not have made an ad-mir-able queen? Is it not a pity
that she was not on my level?”

“From what I have seen of the lady, she seems, in-deed, to be on a very
dif-fer-ent level to your Majesty,” said Holmes coldly. “I am sorry that
I have not been able to bring your Majesty’s busi-ness to a more
suc-cess-ful con-clu-sion.”

“On the con-trary, my dear sir,” cried the King; “noth-ing could be more
suc-cess-ful. I know that her word is in-vi-ol-ate. The pho-to-graph is now as
safe as if it were in the fire.”

“I am glad to hear your Majesty say so.”

“I am im-mensely in-debted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can re-ward
you. This ring—” He slipped an em-er-ald snake ring from his fin-ger and
held it out upon the palm of his hand.

“Your Majesty has some-thing which I should value even more highly,”
said Holmes.

“You have but to name it.”

“This pho-to-graph!”

The King stared at him in amazement.

“Irene’s pho-to-graph!” he cried. “Cer-tainly, if you wish it.”

“I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in the mat-ter.
I have the hon-our to wish you a very good morn-ing.” He bowed, and,
turn-ing away without ob-serving the hand which the King had stretched
out to him, he set off in my com-pany for his cham-bers.

And that was how a great scan-dal threatened to af-fect the king-dom of
Bo-hemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes were beaten by a
wo-man’s wit. He used to make merry over the clev-erness of wo-men, but I
have not heard him do it of late. And when he speaks of Irene Adler, or
when he refers to her pho-to-graph, it is al-ways un-der the hon-our-able
title of _the_ wo-man.



II. THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE


 I had called upon my friend, Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes, one day in the
 au-tumn of last year and found him in deep con-ver-sa-tion with a very
 stout, florid-faced, eld-erly gen-tle-man with fiery red hair. With an
 apo-logy for my in-tru-sion, I was about to with-draw when Holmes pulled
 me ab-ruptly into the room and closed the door be-hind me.

“You could not pos-sibly have come at a bet-ter time, my dear Wat-son,” he
said cor-di-ally.

“I was afraid that you were en-gaged.”

“So I am. Very much so.”

“Then I can wait in the next room.”

“Not at all. This gen-tle-man, Mr. Wilson, has been my part-ner and helper
in many of my most suc-cess-ful cases, and I have no doubt that he will
be of the ut-most use to me in yours also.”

The stout gen-tle-man half rose from his chair and gave a bob of
greet-ing, with a quick little ques-tion-ing glance from his small
fat-en-circled eyes.

“Try the settee,” said Holmes, re-lapsing into his arm-chair and put-ting
his fin-ger-tips to-gether, as was his cus-tom when in ju-di-cial moods. “I
know, my dear Wat-son, that you share my love of all that is bizarre and
out-side the con-ven-tions and hum-drum routine of every-day life. You have
shown your rel-ish for it by the en-thu-si-asm which has promp-ted you to
chron-icle, and, if you will ex-cuse my say-ing so, some-what to em-bel-lish
so many of my own little ad-ven-tures.”

“Your cases have in-deed been of the greatest in-terest to me,” I
ob-served.

“You will re-mem-ber that I re-marked the other day, just be-fore we went
into the very simple prob-lem presen-ted by Miss Mary Suth-er-land, that
for strange ef-fects and ex-traordin-ary com-bin-a-tions we must go to life
it-self, which is al-ways far more dar-ing than any ef-fort of the
ima-gin-a-tion.”

“A pro-pos-i-tion which I took the liberty of doubt-ing.”

“You did, Doc-tor, but none the less you must come round to my view, for
oth-er-wise I shall keep on pil-ing fact upon fact on you un-til your
reason breaks down un-der them and ac-know-ledges me to be right. Now, Mr.
Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morn-ing,
and to be-gin a nar-rat-ive which prom-ises to be one of the most sin-gu-lar
which I have listened to for some time. You have heard me re-mark that
the strangest and most unique things are very of-ten con-nec-ted not with
the lar-ger but with the smal-ler crimes, and oc-ca-sion-ally, in-deed, where
there is room for doubt whether any pos-it-ive crime has been com-mit-ted.
As far as I have heard, it is im-possible for me to say whether the
present case is an in-stance of crime or not, but the course of events
is cer-tainly among the most sin-gu-lar that I have ever listened to.
Per-haps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kind-ness to re-com-mence
your nar-rat-ive. I ask you not merely be-cause my friend Dr. Wat-son has
not heard the open-ing part but also be-cause the pe-cu-liar nature of the
story makes me anxious to have every pos-sible de-tail from your lips. As
a rule, when I have heard some slight in-dic-a-tion of the course of
events, I am able to guide my-self by the thou-sands of other sim-ilar
cases which oc-cur to my memory. In the present in-stance I am forced to
ad-mit that the facts are, to the best of my be-lief, unique.”

The portly cli-ent puffed out his chest with an ap-pear-ance of some
little pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled news-pa-per from the in-side
pocket of his great-coat. As he glanced down the ad-vert-ise-ment column,
with his head thrust for-ward and the pa-per flattened out upon his knee,
I took a good look at the man and en-deav-oured, after the fash-ion of my
com-pan-ion, to read the in-dic-a-tions which might be presen-ted by his
dress or ap-pear-ance.

I did not gain very much, how-ever, by my in-spec-tion. Our vis-itor bore
every mark of be-ing an av-er-age com-mon-place Brit-ish trades-man, obese,
pom-pous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey shep-herd’s check trousers,
a not over-clean black frock-coat, un-buttoned in the front, and a drab
waist-coat with a heavy brassy Al-bert chain, and a square pierced bit of
metal dangling down as an or-na-ment. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown
over-coat with a wrinkled vel-vet col-lar lay upon a chair be-side him.
Al-to-gether, look as I would, there was noth-ing re-mark-able about the man
save his blaz-ing red head, and the ex-pres-sion of ex-treme chag-rin and
dis-con-tent upon his fea-tures.

Sh-er-lock Holmes’ quick eye took in my oc-cu-pa-tion, and he shook his head
with a smile as he no-ticed my ques-tion-ing glances. “Bey-ond the ob-vi-ous
facts that he has at some time done manual la-bour, that he takes snuff,
that he is a Free-ma-son, that he has been in Ch-ina, and that he has done
a con-sid-er-able amount of writ-ing lately, I can de-duce noth-ing else.”

Mr. Jabez Wilson star-ted up in his chair, with his fore-finger upon the
pa-per, but his eyes upon my com-pan-ion.

“How, in the name of good-for-tune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?”
he asked. “How did you know, for ex-ample, that I did manual la-bour.
It’s as true as gos-pel, for I began as a ship’s car-penter.”

“Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size lar-ger than
your left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more
de-veloped.”

“Well, the snuff, then, and the Free-ma-sonry?”

“I won’t in-sult your in-tel-li-gence by telling you how I read that,
es-pe-cially as, rather against the strict rules of your or-der, you use
an arc-and-com-pass breast-pin.”

“Ah, of course, I for-got that. But the writ-ing?”

“What else can be in-dic-ated by that right cuff so very shiny for five
inches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the el-bow where you
rest it upon the desk?”

“Well, but Ch-ina?”

“The fish that you have tat-tooed im-me-di-ately above your right wrist
could only have been done in Ch-ina. I have made a small study of tat-too
marks and have even con-trib-uted to the lit-er-at-ure of the sub-ject. That
trick of stain-ing the fishes’ scales of a del-ic-ate pink is quite
pe-cu-liar to Ch-ina. When, in ad-di-tion, I see a Chinese coin hanging from
your watch-chain, the mat-ter be-comes even more simple.”

Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heav-ily. “Well, I never!” said he. “I thought
at first that you had done some-thing clever, but I see that there was
noth-ing in it after all.”

“I be-gin to think, Wat-son,” said Holmes, “that I make a mis-take in
ex-plain-ing. ‘_Omne ig-notum pro mag-ni-fico_,’ you know, and my poor
little repu-ta-tion, such as it is, will suf-fer ship-wreck if I am so
can-did. Can you not find the ad-vert-ise-ment, Mr. Wilson?”

“Yes, I have got it now,” he answered with his thick red fin-ger planted
halfway down the column. “Here it is. This is what began it all. You
just read it for your-self, sir.”

I took the pa-per from him and read as fol-lows:

“TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On ac-count of the be-quest of the late
Ezekiah Hop-kins, of Le-banon, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., there is now an-other
va-cancy open which en-titles a mem-ber of the League to a salary of £ 4 a
week for purely nom-inal ser-vices. All red-headed men who are sound in
body and mind and above the age of twenty-one years, are eli-gible.
Ap-ply in per-son on Monday, at el-even o’clock, to Dun-can Ross, at the
of-fices of the League, 7 Pope’s Court, Fleet Street.”


“What on earth does this mean?” I ejac-u-lated after I had twice read
over the ex-traordin-ary an-nounce-ment.

Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when in
high spir-its. “It is a little off the beaten track, isn’t it?” said he.
“And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all about
your-self, your house-hold, and the ef-fect which this ad-vert-ise-ment had
upon your for-tunes. You will first make a note, Doc-tor, of the pa-per
and the date.”

“It is _The Morn-ing Chron-icle_ of April 27, 1890. Just two months ago.”

“Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?”

“Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes,”
said Jabez Wilson, mop-ping his fore-head; “I have a small pawn-broker’s
busi-ness at Coburg Square, near the City. It’s not a very large af-fair,
and of late years it has not done more than just give me a liv-ing. I
used to be able to keep two as-sist-ants, but now I only keep one; and I
would have a job to pay him but that he is will-ing to come for half
wages so as to learn the busi-ness.”

“What is the name of this ob-li-ging youth?” asked Sh-er-lock Holmes.

“His name is Vin-cent Spauld-ing, and he’s not such a youth, either. It’s
hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter as-sist-ant, Mr. Holmes;
and I know very well that he could bet-ter him-self and earn twice what I
am able to give him. But, after all, if he is sat-is-fied, why should I
put ideas in his head?”

“Why, in-deed? You seem most for-tu-nate in hav-ing an _em-ployé_ who comes
un-der the full mar-ket price. It is not a com-mon ex-per-i-ence among
em-ploy-ers in this age. I don’t know that your as-sist-ant is not as
re-mark-able as your ad-vert-ise-ment.”

“Oh, he has his faults, too,” said Mr. Wilson. “Never was such a fel-low
for pho-to-graphy. Snap-ping away with a cam-era when he ought to be
im-prov-ing his mind, and then diving down into the cel-lar like a rab-bit
into its hole to de-velop his pic-tures. That is his main fault, but on
the whole he’s a good worker. There’s no vice in him.”

“He is still with you, I pre-sume?”

“Yes, sir. He and a girl of four-teen, who does a bit of simple cook-ing
and keeps the place clean—that’s all I have in the house, for I am a
wid-ower and never had any fam-ily. We live very quietly, sir, the three
of us; and we keep a roof over our heads and pay our debts, if we do
noth-ing more.

“The first thing that put us out was that ad-vert-ise-ment. Spauld-ing, he
came down into the of-fice just this day eight weeks, with this very
pa-per in his hand, and he says:

“‘I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.’

“‘Why that?’ I asks.

“‘Why,’ says he, ‘here’s an-other va-cancy on the League of the
Red-headed Men. It’s worth quite a little for-tune to any man who gets
it, and I un-der-stand that there are more va-can-cies than there are men,
so that the trust-ees are at their wits’ end what to do with the money.
If my hair would only change col-our, here’s a nice little crib all
ready for me to step into.’

“‘Why, what is it, then?’ I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a very
stay-at-home man, and as my busi-ness came to me in-stead of my hav-ing to
go to it, I was of-ten weeks on end without put-ting my foot over the
door-mat. In that way I didn’t know much of what was go-ing on out-side,
and I was al-ways glad of a bit of news.

“‘Have you never heard of the League of the Red-headed Men?’ he asked
with his eyes open.

“‘Never.’

“‘Why, I won-der at that, for you are eli-gible your-self for one of the
va-can-cies.’

“‘And what are they worth?’ I asked.

“‘Oh, merely a couple of hun-dred a year, but the work is slight, and it
need not in-ter-fere very much with one’s other oc-cu-pa-tions.’

“Well, you can eas-ily think that that made me prick up my ears, for the
busi-ness has not been over good for some years, and an ex-tra couple of
hun-dred would have been very handy.

“‘Tell me all about it,’ said I.

“‘Well,’ said he, show-ing me the ad-vert-ise-ment, ‘you can see for
your-self that the League has a va-cancy, and there is the ad-dress where
you should ap-ply for par-tic-u-lars. As far as I can make out, the League
was foun-ded by an Amer-ican mil-lion-aire, Ezekiah Hop-kins, who was very
pe-cu-liar in his ways. He was him-self red-headed, and he had a great
sym-pathy for all red-headed men; so, when he died, it was found that he
had left his enorm-ous for-tune in the hands of trust-ees, with
in-struc-tions to ap-ply the in-terest to the provid-ing of easy berths to
men whose hair is of that col-our. From all I hear it is splen-did pay
and very little to do.’

“‘But,’ said I, ‘there would be mil-lions of red-headed men who would
ap-ply.’

“‘Not so many as you might think,’ he answered. ‘You see it is really
con-fined to Lon-don-ers, and to grown men. This Amer-ican had star-ted from
Lon-don when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town a good turn.
Then, again, I have heard it is no use your ap-ply-ing if your hair is
light red, or dark red, or any-thing but real bright, blaz-ing, fiery
red. Now, if you cared to ap-ply, Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in;
but per-haps it would hardly be worth your while to put your-self out of
the way for the sake of a few hun-dred pounds.’

“Now, it is a fact, gen-tle-men, as you may see for yourselves, that my
hair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that if
there was to be any com-pet-i-tion in the mat-ter I stood as good a chance
as any man that I had ever met. Vin-cent Spauld-ing seemed to know so
much about it that I thought he might prove use-ful, so I just ordered
him to put up the shut-ters for the day and to come right away with me.
He was very will-ing to have a hol-i-day, so we shut the busi-ness up and
star-ted off for the ad-dress that was given us in the ad-vert-ise-ment.

“I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From
north, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in his
hair had tramped into the city to an-swer the ad-vert-ise-ment. Fleet
Street was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope’s Court looked like a
coster’s or-ange bar-row. I should not have thought there were so many in
the whole coun-try as were brought to-gether by that single
ad-vert-ise-ment. Every shade of col-our they were—straw, lemon, or-ange,
brick, Irish-set-ter, liver, clay; but, as Spauld-ing said, there were
not many who had the real vivid flame-col-oured tint. When I saw how
many were wait-ing, I would have given it up in des-pair; but Spauld-ing
would not hear of it. How he did it I could not ima-gine, but he pushed
and pulled and but-ted un-til he got me through the crowd, and right up
to the steps which led to the of-fice. There was a double stream upon
the stair, some go-ing up in hope, and some com-ing back de-jec-ted; but we
wedged in as well as we could and soon found ourselves in the of-fice.”

“Your ex-per-i-ence has been a most en-ter-tain-ing one,” re-marked Holmes as
his cli-ent paused and re-freshed his memory with a huge pinch of snuff.
“Pray con-tinue your very in-ter-est-ing state-ment.”

“There was noth-ing in the of-fice but a couple of wooden chairs and a
deal table, be-hind which sat a small man with a head that was even
red-der than mine. He said a few words to each can-did-ate as he came up,
and then he al-ways man-aged to find some fault in them which would
dis-qual-ify them. Get-ting a va-cancy did not seem to be such a very easy
mat-ter, after all. However, when our turn came the little man was much
more fa-vour-able to me than to any of the oth-ers, and he closed the door
as we entered, so that he might have a private word with us.

“‘This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,’ said my as-sist-ant, ‘and he is will-ing to
fill a va-cancy in the League.’

“‘And he is ad-mir-ably suited for it,’ the other answered. ‘He has every
re-quire-ment. I can-not re-call when I have seen any-thing so fine.’ He
took a step back-ward, cocked his head on one side, and gazed at my hair
un-til I felt quite bash-ful. Then sud-denly he plunged for-ward, wrung my
hand, and con-grat-u-lated me warmly on my suc-cess.

“‘It would be in-justice to hes-it-ate,’ said he. ‘You will, how-ever, I am
sure, ex-cuse me for tak-ing an ob-vi-ous pre-cau-tion.’ With that he seized
my hair in both his hands, and tugged un-til I yelled with the pain.
‘There is wa-ter in your eyes,’ said he as he re-leased me. ‘I per-ceive
that all is as it should be. But we have to be care-ful, for we have
twice been de-ceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell you tales
of cob-bler’s wax which would dis-gust you with hu-man nature.’ He stepped
over to the win-dow and shouted through it at the top of his voice that
the va-cancy was filled. A groan of dis-ap-point-ment came up from be-low,
and the folk all trooped away in dif-fer-ent dir-ec-tions un-til there was
not a red-head to be seen ex-cept my own and that of the man-ager.

“‘My name,’ said he, ‘is Mr. Dun-can Ross, and I am my-self one of the
pen-sion-ers upon the fund left by our noble be-ne-factor. Are you a
mar-ried man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a fam-ily?’

“I answered that I had not.

“His face fell im-me-di-ately.

“‘Dear me!’ he said gravely, ‘that is very ser-i-ous in-deed! I am sorry
to hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the propaga-tion and
spread of the red-heads as well as for their main-ten-ance. It is
ex-ceed-ingly un-for-tu-nate that you should be a bach-elor.’

“My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was not
to have the va-cancy after all; but after think-ing it over for a few
minutes he said that it would be all right.

“‘In the case of an-other,’ said he, ‘the ob-jec-tion might be fatal, but
we must stretch a point in fa-vour of a man with such a head of hair as
yours. When shall you be able to enter upon your new du-ties?’

“‘Well, it is a little awk-ward, for I have a busi-ness already,’ said I.

“‘Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson!’ said Vin-cent Spauld-ing. ‘I
should be able to look after that for you.’

“‘What would be the hours?’ I asked.

“‘Ten to two.’

“Now a pawn-broker’s busi-ness is mostly done of an even-ing, Mr. Holmes,
es-pe-cially Thursday and Fri-day even-ing, which is just be-fore pay-day;
so it would suit me very well to earn a little in the morn-ings.
Besides, I knew that my as-sist-ant was a good man, and that he would see
to any-thing that turned up.

“‘That would suit me very well,’ said I. ‘And the pay?’

“‘Is £ 4 a week.’

“‘And the work?’

“‘Is purely nom-inal.’

“‘What do you call purely nom-inal?’

“‘Well, you have to be in the of-fice, or at least in the build-ing, the
whole time. If you leave, you for-feit your whole po-s-i-tion forever. The
will is very clear upon that point. You don’t com-ply with the
con-di-tions if you budge from the of-fice dur-ing that time.’

“‘It’s only four hours a day, and I should not think of leav-ing,’ said
I.

“‘No ex-cuse will avail,’ said Mr. Dun-can Ross; ‘neither sick-ness nor
busi-ness nor any-thing else. There you must stay, or you lose your
bil-let.’

“‘And the work?’

“‘Is to copy out the _En-cyc-lopæ-dia Brit-an-nica_. There is the first
volume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, and
blot-ting-pa-per, but we provide this table and chair. Will you be ready
to-mor-row?’

“‘Cer-tainly,’ I answered.

“‘Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me con-grat-u-late you once
more on the im-port-ant po-s-i-tion which you have been for-tu-nate enough to
gain.’ He bowed me out of the room and I went home with my as-sist-ant,
hardly know-ing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my own good
for-tune.

“Well, I thought over the mat-ter all day, and by even-ing I was in low
spir-its again; for I had quite per-suaded my-self that the whole af-fair
must be some great hoax or fraud, though what its ob-ject might be I
could not ima-gine. It seemed al-to-gether past be-lief that any-one could
make such a will, or that they would pay such a sum for do-ing any-thing
so simple as copy-ing out the _En-cyc-lopæ-dia Brit-an-nica_. Vin-cent
Spauld-ing did what he could to cheer me up, but by bed-time I had
reasoned my-self out of the whole thing. However, in the morn-ing I
de-term-ined to have a look at it any-how, so I bought a penny bottle of
ink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of fools-cap pa-per, I
star-ted off for Pope’s Court.

“Well, to my sur-prise and de-light, everything was as right as pos-sible.
The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Dun-can Ross was there to
see that I got fairly to work. He star-ted me off upon the let-ter A, and
then he left me; but he would drop in from time to time to see that all
was right with me. At two o’clock he bade me good-day, com-pli-men-ted me
upon the amount that I had writ-ten, and locked the door of the of-fice
after me.

“This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the man-ager
came in and planked down four golden sov-er-eigns for my week’s work. It
was the same next week, and the same the week after. Every morn-ing I
was there at ten, and every af-ter-noon I left at two. By de-grees Mr.
Dun-can Ross took to com-ing in only once of a morn-ing, and then, after a
time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared to
leave the room for an in-stant, for I was not sure when he might come,
and the bil-let was such a good one, and suited me so well, that I would
not risk the loss of it.

“Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had writ-ten about Ab-bots and
Arch-ery and Ar-mour and Ar-chi-tec-ture and At-tica, and hoped with
di-li-gence that I might get on to the B’s be-fore very long. It cost me
some-thing in fools-cap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my
writ-ings. And then sud-denly the whole busi-ness came to an end.”

“To an end?”

“Yes, sir. And no later than this morn-ing. I went to my work as usual
at ten o’clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a little square
of card-board hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Here
it is, and you can read for your-self.”

He held up a piece of white card-board about the size of a sheet of
note-pa-per. It read in this fash-ion:

“THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE IS DISSOLVED. Octo-ber 9, 1890.”


Sh-er-lock Holmes and I sur-veyed this curt an-nounce-ment and the rue-ful
face be-hind it, un-til the com-ical side of the af-fair so com-pletely
over-topped every other con-sid-er-a-tion that we both burst out into a roar
of laughter.

“I can-not see that there is any-thing very funny,” cried our cli-ent,
flush-ing up to the roots of his flam-ing head. “If you can do noth-ing
bet-ter than laugh at me, I can go else-where.”

“No, no,” cried Holmes, shov-ing him back into the chair from which he
had half risen. “I really wouldn’t miss your case for the world. It is
most re-fresh-ingly un-usual. But there is, if you will ex-cuse my say-ing
so, some-thing just a little funny about it. Pray what steps did you
take when you found the card upon the door?”

“I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called at the
of-fices round, but none of them seemed to know any-thing about it.
Fin-ally, I went to the land-lord, who is an ac-count-ant liv-ing on the
ground floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what had be-come of
the Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any such
body. Then I asked him who Mr. Dun-can Ross was. He answered that the
name was new to him.

“‘Well,’ said I, ‘the gen-tle-man at No. 4.’

“‘What, the red-headed man?’

“‘Yes.’

“‘Oh,’ said he, ‘his name was Wil-liam Mor-ris. He was a so-li-citor and
was us-ing my room as a tem-por-ary con-veni-ence un-til his new premises
were ready. He moved out yes-ter-day.’

“‘Where could I find him?’

“‘Oh, at his new of-fices. He did tell me the ad-dress. Yes, 17 King
Ed-ward Street, near St. Paul’s.’

“I star-ted off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that ad-dress it was a
man-u-fact-ory of ar-ti-fi-cial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard of
either Mr. Wil-liam Mor-ris or Mr. Dun-can Ross.”

“And what did you do then?” asked Holmes.

“I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the ad-vice of my
as-sist-ant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say that
if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough,
Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without a struggle, so,
as I had heard that you were good enough to give ad-vice to poor folk
who were in need of it, I came right away to you.”

“And you did very wisely,” said Holmes. “Your case is an ex-ceed-ingly
re-mark-able one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what you
have told me I think that it is pos-sible that graver is-sues hang from
it than might at first sight ap-pear.”

“Grave enough!” said Mr. Jabez Wilson. “Why, I have lost four pound a
week.”

“As far as you are per-son-ally con-cerned,” re-marked Holmes, “I do not
see that you have any griev-ance against this ex-traordin-ary league. On
the con-trary, you are, as I un-der-stand, richer by some £ 30, to say
noth-ing of the minute know-ledge which you have gained on every sub-ject
which comes un-der the let-ter A. You have lost noth-ing by them.”

“No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, and what
their ob-ject was in play-ing this prank—if it was a prank—upon me. It
was a pretty ex-pens-ive joke for them, for it cost them two and thirty
pounds.”

“We shall en-deav-our to clear up these points for you. And, first, one
or two ques-tions, Mr. Wilson. This as-sist-ant of yours who first called
your at-ten-tion to the ad-vert-ise-ment—how long had he been with you?”

“About a month then.”

“How did he come?”

“In an-swer to an ad-vert-ise-ment.”

“Was he the only ap-plic-ant?”

“No, I had a dozen.”

“Why did you pick him?”

“Be-cause he was handy and would come cheap.”

“At half wages, in fact.”

“Yes.”

“What is he like, this Vin-cent Spauld-ing?”

“Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face,
though he’s not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon his
fore-head.”

Holmes sat up in his chair in con-sid-er-able ex-cite-ment. “I thought as
much,” said he. “Have you ever ob-served that his ears are pierced for
ear-rings?”

“Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he was a
lad.”

“Hum!” said Holmes, sink-ing back in deep thought. “He is still with
you?”

“Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him.”

“And has your busi-ness been at-ten-ded to in your ab-sence?”

“Noth-ing to com-plain of, sir. There’s never very much to do of a
morn-ing.”

“That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opin-ion upon
the sub-ject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday, and I
hope that by Monday we may come to a con-clu-sion.”

“Well, Wat-son,” said Holmes when our vis-itor had left us, “what do you
make of it all?”

“I make noth-ing of it,” I answered frankly. “It is a most mys-ter-i-ous
busi-ness.”

“As a rule,” said Holmes, “the more bizarre a thing is the less
mys-ter-i-ous it proves to be. It is your com-mon-place, fea-ture-less crimes
which are really puzz-ling, just as a com-mon-place face is the most
dif-fi-cult to identify. But I must be prompt over this mat-ter.”

“What are you go-ing to do, then?” I asked.

“To smoke,” he answered. “It is quite a three pipe prob-lem, and I beg
that you won’t speak to me for fifty minutes.” He curled him-self up in
his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, and
there he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe thrust-ing out
like the bill of some strange bird. I had come to the con-clu-sion that
he had dropped asleep, and in-deed was nod-ding my-self, when he sud-denly
sprang out of his chair with the ges-ture of a man who has made up his
mind and put his pipe down upon the man-tel-piece.

“Sarasate plays at the St. James’s Hall this af-ter-noon,” he re-marked.
“What do you think, Wat-son? Could your pa-tients spare you for a few
hours?”

“I have noth-ing to do to-day. My prac-tice is never very ab-sorb-ing.”

“Then put on your hat and come. I am go-ing through the City first, and
we can have some lunch on the way. I ob-serve that there is a good deal
of Ger-man mu-sic on the pro-gramme, which is rather more to my taste than
Italian or French. It is in-tro-spect-ive, and I want to in-tro-spect. Come
along!”

We trav-elled by the Under-ground as far as Alder-sgate; and a short walk
took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the sin-gu-lar story which we
had listened to in the morn-ing. It was a poky, little, shabby-gen-teel
place, where four lines of dingy two-stor-ied brick houses looked out
into a small railed-in en-clos-ure, where a lawn of weedy grass and a few
clumps of faded laurel bushes made a hard fight against a smoke-laden
and un-con-genial at-mo-sphere. Three gilt balls and a brown board with
“JABEZ WILSON” in white let-ters, upon a corner house, an-nounced the
place where our red-headed cli-ent car-ried on his busi-ness. Sh-er-lock
Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on one side and looked it
all over, with his eyes shin-ing brightly between puckered lids. Then he
walked slowly up the street, and then down again to the corner, still
look-ing keenly at the houses. Fin-ally he re-turned to the pawn-broker’s,
and, hav-ing thumped vig-or-ously upon the pave-ment with his stick two or
three times, he went up to the door and knocked. It was in-stantly
opened by a bright-look-ing, clean-shaven young fel-low, who asked him to
step in.

“Thank you,” said Holmes, “I only wished to ask you how you would go
from here to the Strand.”

“Third right, fourth left,” answered the as-sist-ant promptly, clos-ing
the door.

“Smart fel-low, that,” ob-served Holmes as we walked away. “He is, in my
judg-ment, the fourth smartest man in Lon-don, and for dar-ing I am not
sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known some-thing of him
be-fore.”

“Evidently,” said I, “Mr. Wilson’s as-sist-ant counts for a good deal in
this mys-tery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you in-quired your
way merely in or-der that you might see him.”

“Not him.”

“What then?”

“The knees of his trousers.”

“And what did you see?”

“What I ex-pec-ted to see.”

“Why did you beat the pave-ment?”

“My dear doc-tor, this is a time for ob-ser-va-tion, not for talk. We are
spies in an en-emy’s coun-try. We know some-thing of Saxe-Coburg Square.
Let us now ex-plore the parts which lie be-hind it.”

The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from
the re-tired Saxe-Coburg Square presen-ted as great a con-trast to it as
the front of a pic-ture does to the back. It was one of the main
ar-ter-ies which con-veyed the traffic of the City to the north and west.
The road-way was blocked with the im-mense stream of com-merce flow-ing in
a double tide in-ward and out-ward, while the foot-paths were black with
the hur-ry-ing swarm of ped-es-tri-ans. It was dif-fi-cult to real-ise as we
looked at the line of fine shops and stately busi-ness premises that
they really abut-ted on the other side upon the faded and stag-nant
square which we had just quit-ted.

“Let me see,” said Holmes, stand-ing at the corner and glan-cing along
the line, “I should like just to re-mem-ber the or-der of the houses here.
It is a hobby of mine to have an ex-act know-ledge of Lon-don. There is
Mor-timer’s, the to-bac-con-ist, the little news-pa-per shop, the Coburg
branch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Ve-get-arian Res-taur-ant, and
McFar-lane’s car-riage-build-ing de-pot. That car-ries us right on to the
other block. And now, Doc-tor, we’ve done our work, so it’s time we had
some play. A sand-wich and a cup of cof-fee, and then off to vi-olin-land,
where all is sweet-ness and del-ic-acy and har-mony, and there are no
red-headed cli-ents to vex us with their conun-drums.”

My friend was an en-thu-si-astic mu-si-cian, be-ing him-self not only a very
cap-able per-former but a com-poser of no or-din-ary merit. All the
af-ter-noon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most per-fect hap-pi-ness,
gently wav-ing his long, thin fin-gers in time to the mu-sic, while his
gently smil-ing face and his lan-guid, dreamy eyes were as un-like those
of Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the re-lent-less, keen-wit-ted,
ready-handed crim-inal agent, as it was pos-sible to con-ceive. In his
sin-gu-lar char-ac-ter the dual nature al-tern-ately as-ser-ted it-self, and his
ex-treme ex-act-ness and as-tute-ness rep-res-en-ted, as I have of-ten thought,
the re-ac-tion against the po-etic and con-tem-plat-ive mood which
oc-ca-sion-ally pre-dom-in-ated in him. The swing of his nature took him from
ex-treme lan-guor to de-vour-ing en-ergy; and, as I knew well, he was never
so truly for-mid-able as when, for days on end, he had been loun-ging in
his arm-chair amid his im-pro-visa-tions and his black-let-ter edi-tions.
Then it was that the lust of the chase would sud-denly come upon him,
and that his bril-liant reas-on-ing power would rise to the level of
in-tu-ition, un-til those who were un-ac-quain-ted with his meth-ods would
look askance at him as on a man whose know-ledge was not that of other
mor-tals. When I saw him that af-ter-noon so en-wrapped in the mu-sic at St.
James’s Hall I felt that an evil time might be com-ing upon those whom
he had set him-self to hunt down.

“You want to go home, no doubt, Doc-tor,” he re-marked as we emerged.

“Yes, it would be as well.”

“And I have some busi-ness to do which will take some hours. This
busi-ness at Coburg Square is ser-i-ous.”

“Why ser-i-ous?”

“A con-sid-er-able crime is in con-tem-pla-tion. I have every reason to
be-lieve that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day be-ing Saturday
rather com-plic-ates mat-ters. I shall want your help to-night.”

“At what time?”

“Ten will be early enough.”

“I shall be at Baker Street at ten.”

“Very well. And, I say, Doc-tor, there may be some little danger, so
kindly put your army re-volver in your pocket.” He waved his hand,
turned on his heel, and dis-ap-peared in an in-stant among the crowd.

I trust that I am not more dense than my neigh-bours, but I was al-ways
op-pressed with a sense of my own stu-pid-ity in my deal-ings with Sh-er-lock
Holmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had seen what he had
seen, and yet from his words it was evid-ent that he saw clearly not
only what had happened but what was about to hap-pen, while to me the
whole busi-ness was still con-fused and grot-esque. As I drove home to my
house in Kens-ing-ton I thought over it all, from the ex-traordin-ary story
of the red-headed copier of the _En-cyc-lopæ-dia_ down to the visit to
Saxe-Coburg Square, and the omin-ous words with which he had par-ted from
me. What was this noc-turnal ex-ped-i-tion, and why should I go armed?
Where were we go-ing, and what were we to do? I had the hint from Holmes
that this smooth-faced pawn-broker’s as-sist-ant was a for-mid-able man—a
man who might play a deep game. I tried to puzzle it out, but gave it
up in des-pair and set the mat-ter aside un-til night should bring an
ex-plan-a-tion.

It was a quarter-past nine when I star-ted from home and made my way
across the Park, and so through Ox-ford Street to Baker Street. Two
hansoms were stand-ing at the door, and as I entered the pas-sage I heard
the sound of voices from above. On en-ter-ing his room, I found Holmes in
an-im-ated con-ver-sa-tion with two men, one of whom I re-cog-nised as Peter
Jones, the of-fi-cial po-lice agent, while the other was a long, thin,
sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and op-press-ively re-spect-able
frock-coat.

“Ha! Our party is com-plete,” said Holmes, but-ton-ing up his pea-jacket
and tak-ing his heavy hunt-ing crop from the rack. “Wat-son, I think you
know Mr. Jones, of Scot-land Yard? Let me in-tro-duce you to Mr.
Merry-weather, who is to be our com-pan-ion in to-night’s ad-ven-ture.”

“We’re hunt-ing in couples again, Doc-tor, you see,” said Jones in his
con-sequen-tial way. “Our friend here is a won-der-ful man for start-ing a
chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the run-ning down.”

“I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase,”
ob-served Mr. Merry-weather gloomily.

“You may place con-sid-er-able con-fid-ence in Mr. Holmes, sir,” said the
po-lice agent loftily. “He has his own little meth-ods, which are, if he
won’t mind my say-ing so, just a little too the-or-et-ical and fant-astic,
but he has the mak-ings of a de-tect-ive in him. It is not too much to say
that once or twice, as in that busi-ness of the Sholto murder and the
Agra treas-ure, he has been more nearly cor-rect than the of-fi-cial
force.”

“Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right,” said the stranger with
de-fer-ence. “Still, I con-fess that I miss my rub-ber. It is the first
Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I have not had my
rub-ber.”

“I think you will find,” said Sh-er-lock Holmes, “that you will play for
a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that the play
will be more ex-cit-ing. For you, Mr. Merry-weather, the stake will be
some £ 30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom you
wish to lay your hands.”

“John Clay, the mur-derer, thief, smasher, and for-ger. He’s a young man,
Mr. Merry-weather, but he is at the head of his pro-fes-sion, and I would
rather have my brace-lets on him than on any crim-inal in Lon-don. He’s a
re-mark-able man, is young John Clay. His grand-father was a royal duke,
and he him-self has been to Eton and Ox-ford. His brain is as cun-ning as
his fin-gers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we never
know where to find the man him-self. He’ll crack a crib in Scot-land one
week, and be rais-ing money to build an orphan-age in Corn-wall the next.
I’ve been on his track for years and have never set eyes on him yet.”

“I hope that I may have the pleas-ure of in-tro-du-cing you to-night. I’ve
had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree with
you that he is at the head of his pro-fes-sion. It is past ten, how-ever,
and quite time that we star-ted. If you two will take the first hansom,
Wat-son and I will fol-low in the second.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes was not very com-mu-nic-at-ive dur-ing the long drive and
lay back in the cab hum-ming the tunes which he had heard in the
af-ter-noon. We rattled through an end-less labyrinth of gas-lit streets
un-til we emerged into Far-ring-ton Street.

“We are close there now,” my friend re-marked. “This fel-low Merry-weather
is a bank dir-ector, and per-son-ally in-ter-ested in the mat-ter. I thought
it as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad fel-low, though
an ab-so-lute im-be-cile in his pro-fes-sion. He has one pos-it-ive vir-tue. He
is as brave as a bull-dog and as ten-a-cious as a lob-ster if he gets his
claws upon any-one. Here we are, and they are wait-ing for us.”

We had reached the same crowded thor-ough-fare in which we had found
ourselves in the morn-ing. Our cabs were dis-missed, and, fol-low-ing the
guid-ance of Mr. Merry-weather, we passed down a nar-row pas-sage and
through a side door, which he opened for us. Within there was a small
cor-ridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also was
opened, and led down a flight of wind-ing stone steps, which ter-min-ated
at an-other for-mid-able gate. Mr. Merry-weather stopped to light a
lan-tern, and then con-duc-ted us down a dark, earth-smelling pas-sage, and
so, after open-ing a third door, into a huge vault or cel-lar, which was
piled all round with crates and massive boxes.

“You are not very vul-ner-able from above,” Holmes re-marked as he held up
the lan-tern and gazed about him.

“Nor from be-low,” said Mr. Merry-weather, strik-ing his stick upon the
flags which lined the floor. “Why, dear me, it sounds quite hol-low!” he
re-marked, look-ing up in sur-prise.

“I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!” said Holmes
severely. “You have already im-per-illed the whole suc-cess of our
ex-ped-i-tion. Might I beg that you would have the good-ness to sit down
upon one of those boxes, and not to in-ter-fere?”

The sol-emn Mr. Merry-weather perched him-self upon a crate, with a very
in-jured ex-pres-sion upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his knees upon
the floor and, with the lan-tern and a mag-ni-fy-ing lens, began to ex-am-ine
minutely the cracks between the stones. A few seconds suf-ficed to
sat-isfy him, for he sprang to his feet again and put his glass in his
pocket.

“We have at least an hour be-fore us,” he re-marked, “for they can hardly
take any steps un-til the good pawn-broker is safely in bed. Then they
will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their work the longer
time they will have for their es-cape. We are at present, Doc-tor—as no
doubt you have di-vined—in the cel-lar of the City branch of one of the
prin-cipal Lon-don banks. Mr. Merry-weather is the chair-man of dir-ect-ors,
and he will ex-plain to you that there are reas-ons why the more dar-ing
crim-in-als of Lon-don should take a con-sid-er-able in-terest in this cel-lar
at present.”

“It is our French gold,” whispered the dir-ector. “We have had sev-eral
warn-ings that an at-tempt might be made upon it.”

“Your French gold?”

“Yes. We had oc-ca-sion some months ago to strengthen our re-sources and
bor-rowed for that pur-pose 30,000 na-po-leons from the Bank of France. It
has be-come known that we have never had oc-ca-sion to un-pack the money,
and that it is still ly-ing in our cel-lar. The crate upon which I sit
con-tains 2,000 na-po-leons packed between lay-ers of lead foil. Our
re-serve of bul-lion is much lar-ger at present than is usu-ally kept in a
single branch of-fice, and the dir-ect-ors have had mis-giv-ings upon the
sub-ject.”

“Which were very well jus-ti-fied,” ob-served Holmes. “And now it is time
that we ar-ranged our little plans. I ex-pect that within an hour mat-ters
will come to a head. In the mean-time Mr. Merry-weather, we must put the
screen over that dark lan-tern.”

“And sit in the dark?”

“I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I
thought that, as we were a _partie car-rée_, you might have your rub-ber
after all. But I see that the en-emy’s pre-par-a-tions have gone so far
that we can-not risk the pres-ence of a light. And, first of all, we must
choose our po-s-i-tions. These are dar-ing men, and though we shall take
them at a dis-ad-vant-age, they may do us some harm un-less we are care-ful.
I shall stand be-hind this crate, and do you con-ceal yourselves be-hind
those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If they
fire, Wat-son, have no com-punc-tion about shoot-ing them down.”

I placed my re-volver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case be-hind
which I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of his lan-tern
and left us in pitch dark-ness—such an ab-so-lute dark-ness as I have never
be-fore ex-per-i-enced. The smell of hot metal re-mained to as-sure us that
the light was still there, ready to flash out at a mo-ment’s no-tice. To
me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch of ex-pect-ancy, there was
some-thing de-press-ing and sub-du-ing in the sud-den gloom, and in the cold
dank air of the vault.

“They have but one re-treat,” whispered Holmes. “That is back through
the house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what I
asked you, Jones?”

“I have an in-spector and two of-ficers wait-ing at the front door.”

“Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be si-lent and
wait.”

What a time it seemed! From com-par-ing notes af-ter-wards it was but an
hour and a quarter, yet it ap-peared to me that the night must have
al-most gone, and the dawn be break-ing above us. My limbs were weary and
stiff, for I feared to change my po-s-i-tion; yet my nerves were worked up
to the highest pitch of ten-sion, and my hear-ing was so acute that I
could not only hear the gentle breath-ing of my com-pan-ions, but I could
dis-tin-guish the deeper, heav-ier in-breath of the bulky Jones from the
thin, sigh-ing note of the bank dir-ector. From my po-s-i-tion I could look
over the case in the dir-ec-tion of the floor. Sud-denly my eyes caught
the glint of a light.

At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pave-ment. Then it
lengthened out un-til it be-came a yel-low line, and then, without any
warn-ing or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand ap-peared, a white,
al-most wo-manly hand, which felt about in the centre of the little area
of light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writh-ing fin-gers,
pro-truded out of the floor. Then it was with-drawn as sud-denly as it
ap-peared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark which
marked a chink between the stones.

Its dis-ap-pear-ance, how-ever, was but mo-ment-ary. With a rend-ing, tear-ing
sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon its side and
left a square, gap-ing hole, through which streamed the light of a
lan-tern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boy-ish face, which
looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand on either side of the
aper-ture, drew it-self shoulder-high and waist-high, un-til one knee
res-ted upon the edge. In an-other in-stant he stood at the side of the
hole and was haul-ing after him a com-pan-ion, lithe and small like
him-self, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.

“It’s all clear,” he whispered. “Have you the chisel and the bags?
Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and I’ll swing for it!”

Sh-er-lock Holmes had sprung out and seized the in-truder by the col-lar.
The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of rend-ing cloth
as Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed upon the bar-rel of a
re-volver, but Holmes’ hunt-ing crop came down on the man’s wrist, and
the pis-tol clinked upon the stone floor.

“It’s no use, John Clay,” said Holmes blandly. “You have no chance at
all.”

“So I see,” the other answered with the ut-most cool-ness. “I fancy that
my pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails.”

“There are three men wait-ing for him at the door,” said Holmes.

“Oh, in-deed! You seem to have done the thing very com-pletely. I must
com-pli-ment you.”

“And I you,” Holmes answered. “Your red-headed idea was very new and
ef-fect-ive.”

“You’ll see your pal again presently,” said Jones. “He’s quicker at
climb-ing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the derbies.”

“I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands,” re-marked our
pris-oner as the hand-cuffs clattered upon his wrists. “You may not be
aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the good-ness, also,
when you ad-dress me al-ways to say ‘sir’ and ‘please.’”

“All right,” said Jones with a stare and a snig-ger. “Well, would you
please, sir, march up-stairs, where we can get a cab to carry your
High-ness to the po-lice-sta-tion?”

“That is bet-ter,” said John Clay se-renely. He made a sweep-ing bow to
the three of us and walked quietly off in the cus-tody of the de-tect-ive.

“Really, Mr. Holmes,” said Mr. Merry-weather as we fol-lowed them from
the cel-lar, “I do not know how the bank can thank you or re-pay you.
There is no doubt that you have de-tec-ted and de-feated in the most
com-plete man-ner one of the most de-term-ined at-tempts at bank rob-bery
that have ever come within my ex-per-i-ence.”

“I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr. John
Clay,” said Holmes. “I have been at some small ex-pense over this
mat-ter, which I shall ex-pect the bank to re-fund, but bey-ond that I am
amply re-paid by hav-ing had an ex-per-i-ence which is in many ways unique,
and by hear-ing the very re-mark-able nar-rat-ive of the Red-headed League.”

“You see, Wat-son,” he ex-plained in the early hours of the morn-ing as we
sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, “it was per-fectly
ob-vi-ous from the first that the only pos-sible ob-ject of this rather
fant-astic busi-ness of the ad-vert-ise-ment of the League, and the copy-ing
of the _En-cyc-lopæ-dia_, must be to get this not over-bright pawn-broker
out of the way for a num-ber of hours every day. It was a curi-ous way of
man-aging it, but, really, it would be dif-fi-cult to sug-gest a bet-ter.
The method was no doubt sug-ges-ted to Clay’s in-geni-ous mind by the
col-our of his ac-com-plice’s hair. The £ 4 a week was a lure which must
draw him, and what was it to them, who were play-ing for thou-sands? They
put in the ad-vert-ise-ment, one rogue has the tem-por-ary of-fice, the other
rogue in-cites the man to ap-ply for it, and to-gether they man-age to
se-cure his ab-sence every morn-ing in the week. From the time that I
heard of the as-sist-ant hav-ing come for half wages, it was ob-vi-ous to me
that he had some strong motive for se-cur-ing the situ-ation.”

“But how could you guess what the motive was?”

“Had there been wo-men in the house, I should have sus-pec-ted a mere
vul-gar in-trigue. That, how-ever, was out of the ques-tion. The man’s
busi-ness was a small one, and there was noth-ing in his house which
could ac-count for such elab-or-ate pre-par-a-tions, and such an ex-pendit-ure
as they were at. It must, then, be some-thing out of the house. What
could it be? I thought of the as-sist-ant’s fond-ness for pho-to-graphy, and
his trick of van-ish-ing into the cel-lar. The cel-lar! There was the end
of this tangled clue. Then I made in-quir-ies as to this mys-ter-i-ous
as-sist-ant and found that I had to deal with one of the coolest and most
dar-ing crim-in-als in Lon-don. He was do-ing some-thing in the
cel-lar—some-thing which took many hours a day for months on end. What
could it be, once more? I could think of noth-ing save that he was
run-ning a tun-nel to some other build-ing.

“So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of ac-tion. I
sur-prised you by beat-ing upon the pave-ment with my stick. I was
as-cer-tain-ing whether the cel-lar stretched out in front or be-hind. It
was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the as-sist-ant
answered it. We have had some skir-mishes, but we had never set eyes
upon each other be-fore. I hardly looked at his face. His knees were
what I wished to see. You must your-self have re-marked how worn,
wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours of
bur-row-ing. The only re-main-ing point was what they were bur-row-ing for. I
walked round the corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abut-ted on our
friend’s premises, and felt that I had solved my prob-lem. When you
drove home after the con-cert I called upon Scot-land Yard and upon the
chair-man of the bank dir-ect-ors, with the res-ult that you have seen.”

“And how could you tell that they would make their at-tempt to-night?” I
asked.

“Well, when they closed their League of-fices that was a sign that they
cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson’s pres-ence—in other words, that
they had com-pleted their tun-nel. But it was es-sen-tial that they should
use it soon, as it might be dis-covered, or the bul-lion might be
re-moved. Saturday would suit them bet-ter than any other day, as it
would give them two days for their es-cape. For all these reas-ons I
ex-pec-ted them to come to-night.”

“You reasoned it out beau-ti-fully,” I ex-claimed in un-feigned ad-mir-a-tion.
“It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true.”

“It saved me from en-nui,” he answered, yawn-ing. “Alas! I already feel
it clos-ing in upon me. My life is spent in one long ef-fort to es-cape
from the com-mon-places of ex-ist-ence. These little prob-lems help me to do
so.”

“And you are a be-ne-factor of the race,” said I.

He shrugged his shoulders. “Well, per-haps, after all, it is of some
little use,” he re-marked. “‘_L’homme c’est rien—l’œuvre c’est tout_,’
as Gustave Flaubert wrote to Ge-orge Sand.”



III. A CASE OF IDENTITY

“My dear fel-low,” said Sh-er-lock Holmes as we sat on either side of the
fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, “life is in-fin-itely stranger than
any-thing which the mind of man could in-vent. We would not dare to
con-ceive the things which are really mere com-mon-places of ex-ist-ence. If
we could fly out of that win-dow hand in hand, hover over this great
city, gently re-move the roofs, and peep in at the queer things which
are go-ing on, the strange co-in-cid-ences, the plan-nings, the
cross-pur-poses, the won-der-ful chains of events, work-ing through
gen-er-a-tions, and lead-ing to the most _outré_ res-ults, it would make all
fic-tion with its con-ven-tion-al-it-ies and fore-seen con-clu-sions most stale
and un-prof-it-able.”

“And yet I am not con-vinced of it,” I answered. “The cases which come
to light in the pa-pers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vul-gar enough.
We have in our po-lice re-ports real-ism pushed to its ex-treme lim-its, and
yet the res-ult is, it must be con-fessed, neither fas-cin-at-ing nor
artistic.”

“A cer-tain se-lec-tion and dis-cre-tion must be used in pro-du-cing a
real-istic ef-fect,” re-marked Holmes. “This is want-ing in the po-lice
re-port, where more stress is laid, per-haps, upon the plat-it-udes of the
ma-gis-trate than upon the de-tails, which to an ob-server con-tain the
vi-tal es-sence of the whole mat-ter. Depend upon it, there is noth-ing so
un-nat-ural as the com-mon-place.”

I smiled and shook my head. “I can quite un-der-stand your think-ing so,”
I said. “Of course, in your po-s-i-tion of un-of-fi-cial ad-viser and helper
to every-body who is ab-so-lutely puzzled, through-out three con-tin-ents,
you are brought in con-tact with all that is strange and bizarre. But
here”—I picked up the morn-ing pa-per from the ground—“let us put it to a
prac-tical test. Here is the first head-ing upon which I come. ‘A
hus-band’s cruelty to his wife.’ There is half a column of print, but I
know without read-ing it that it is all per-fectly fa-mil-iar to me. There
is, of course, the other wo-man, the drink, the push, the blow, the
bruise, the sym-path-etic sis-ter or land-lady. The crudest of writers
could in-vent noth-ing more crude.”

“Indeed, your ex-ample is an un-for-tu-nate one for your ar-gu-ment,” said
Holmes, tak-ing the pa-per and glan-cing his eye down it. “This is the
Dun-das sep-ar-a-tion case, and, as it hap-pens, I was en-gaged in clear-ing
up some small points in con-nec-tion with it. The hus-band was a
tee-totaler, there was no other wo-man, and the con-duct com-plained of was
that he had drif-ted into the habit of wind-ing up every meal by tak-ing
out his false teeth and hurl-ing them at his wife, which, you will
al-low, is not an ac-tion likely to oc-cur to the ima-gin-a-tion of the
av-er-age story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, Doc-tor, and ac-know-ledge
that I have scored over you in your ex-ample.”

He held out his snuff-box of old gold, with a great amethyst in the
centre of the lid. Its splend-our was in such con-trast to his homely
ways and simple life that I could not help com-ment-ing upon it.

“Ah,” said he, “I for-got that I had not seen you for some weeks. It is
a little souvenir from the King of Bo-hemia in re-turn for my as-sist-ance
in the case of the Irene Adler pa-pers.”

“And the ring?” I asked, glan-cing at a re-mark-able bril-liant which
sparkled upon his fin-ger.

“It was from the reign-ing fam-ily of Hol-land, though the mat-ter in which
I served them was of such del-ic-acy that I can-not con-fide it even to
you, who have been good enough to chron-icle one or two of my little
prob-lems.”

“And have you any on hand just now?” I asked with in-terest.

“Some ten or twelve, but none which present any fea-ture of in-terest.
They are im-port-ant, you un-der-stand, without be-ing in-ter-est-ing. Indeed,
I have found that it is usu-ally in un-im-port-ant mat-ters that there is a
field for the ob-ser-va-tion, and for the quick ana-lysis of cause and
ef-fect which gives the charm to an in-vest-ig-a-tion. The lar-ger crimes are
apt to be the sim-pler, for the big-ger the crime the more ob-vi-ous, as a
rule, is the motive. In these cases, save for one rather in-tric-ate
mat-ter which has been re-ferred to me from Mar-seilles, there is noth-ing
which presents any fea-tures of in-terest. It is pos-sible, how-ever, that
I may have some-thing bet-ter be-fore very many minutes are over, for this
is one of my cli-ents, or I am much mis-taken.”

He had risen from his chair and was stand-ing between the par-ted blinds
gaz-ing down into the dull neut-ral-tin-ted Lon-don street. Look-ing over
his shoulder, I saw that on the pave-ment op-pos-ite there stood a large
wo-man with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a large curl-ing red
feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a coquet-tish Duchess
of Devon-shire fash-ion over her ear. From un-der this great panoply she
peeped up in a nervous, hes-it-at-ing fash-ion at our win-dows, while her
body os-cil-lated back-ward and for-ward, and her fin-gers fid-geted with her
glove but-tons. Sud-denly, with a plunge, as of the swim-mer who leaves
the bank, she hur-ried across the road, and we heard the sharp clang of
the bell.

“I have seen those symp-toms be-fore,” said Holmes, throw-ing his
ci-gar-ette into the fire. “Os-cil-la-tion upon the pave-ment al-ways means an
_af-faire de cœur_. She would like ad-vice, but is not sure that the
mat-ter is not too del-ic-ate for com-mu-nic-a-tion. And yet even here we may
dis-crim-in-ate. When a wo-man has been ser-i-ously wronged by a man she no
longer os-cil-lates, and the usual symp-tom is a broken bell wire. Here we
may take it that there is a love mat-ter, but that the maiden is not so
much angry as per-plexed, or grieved. But here she comes in per-son to
re-solve our doubts.”

As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in but-tons entered
to an-nounce Miss Mary Suth-er-land, while the lady her-self loomed be-hind
his small black fig-ure like a full-sailed mer-chant-man be-hind a tiny
pi-lot boat. Sh-er-lock Holmes wel-comed her with the easy cour-tesy for
which he was re-mark-able, and, hav-ing closed the door and bowed her into
an arm-chair, he looked her over in the minute and yet ab-strac-ted
fash-ion which was pe-cu-liar to him.

“Do you not find,” he said, “that with your short sight it is a little
try-ing to do so much type-writ-ing?”

“I did at first,” she answered, “but now I know where the let-ters are
without look-ing.” Then, sud-denly real-ising the full pur-port of his
words, she gave a vi-ol-ent start and looked up, with fear and
as-ton-ish-ment upon her broad, good-hu-moured face. “You’ve heard about
me, Mr. Holmes,” she cried, “else how could you know all that?”

“Never mind,” said Holmes, laugh-ing; “it is my busi-ness to know things.
Per-haps I have trained my-self to see what oth-ers over-look. If not, why
should you come to con-sult me?”

“I came to you, sir, be-cause I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whose
hus-band you found so easy when the po-lice and every-one had given him up
for dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much for me. I’m not
rich, but still I have a hun-dred a year in my own right, be-sides the
little that I make by the ma-chine, and I would give it all to know what
has be-come of Mr. Hos-mer An-gel.”

“Why did you come away to con-sult me in such a hurry?” asked Sh-er-lock
Holmes, with his fin-ger-tips to-gether and his eyes to the ceil-ing.

Again a startled look came over the some-what vacu-ous face of Miss Mary
Suth-er-land. “Yes, I did bang out of the house,” she said, “for it made
me angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Wind-ibank—that is, my
father—took it all. He would not go to the po-lice, and he would not go
to you, and so at last, as he would do noth-ing and kept on say-ing that
there was no harm done, it made me mad, and I just on with my things
and came right away to you.”

“Your father,” said Holmes, “your step-father, surely, since the name is
dif-fer-ent.”

“Yes, my step-father. I call him father, though it sounds funny, too,
for he is only five years and two months older than my-self.”

“And your mother is alive?”

“Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn’t best pleased, Mr. Holmes,
when she mar-ried again so soon after father’s death, and a man who was
nearly fif-teen years younger than her-self. Father was a plumber in the
Tot-ten-ham Court Road, and he left a tidy busi-ness be-hind him, which
mother car-ried on with Mr. Hardy, the fore-man; but when Mr. Wind-ibank
came he made her sell the busi-ness, for he was very su-per-ior, be-ing a
trav-el-ler in wines. They got £ 4700 for the good-will and in-terest,
which wasn’t near as much as father could have got if he had been
alive.”

I had ex-pec-ted to see Sh-er-lock Holmes im-pa-tient un-der this ram-bling and
in-con-sequen-tial nar-rat-ive, but, on the con-trary, he had listened with
the greatest con-cen-tra-tion of at-ten-tion.

“Your own little in-come,” he asked, “does it come out of the busi-ness?”

“Oh, no, sir. It is quite sep-ar-ate and was left me by my uncle Ned in
Auck-land. It is in New Zea-l-and stock, pay-ing 4½ per cent. Two thou-sand
five hun-dred pounds was the amount, but I can only touch the in-terest.”

“You in-terest me ex-tremely,” said Holmes. “And since you draw so large
a sum as a hun-dred a year, with what you earn into the bar-gain, you no
doubt travel a little and in-dulge your-self in every way. I be-lieve that
a single lady can get on very nicely upon an in-come of about £ 60.”

“I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you un-der-stand
that as long as I live at home I don’t wish to be a bur-den to them, and
so they have the use of the money just while I am stay-ing with them. Of
course, that is only just for the time. Mr. Wind-ibank draws my in-terest
every quarter and pays it over to mother, and I find that I can do
pretty well with what I earn at type-writ-ing. It brings me two-pence a
sheet, and I can of-ten do from fif-teen to twenty sheets in a day.”

“You have made your po-s-i-tion very clear to me,” said Holmes. “This is
my friend, Dr. Wat-son, be-fore whom you can speak as freely as be-fore
my-self. Kindly tell us now all about your con-nec-tion with Mr. Hos-mer
An-gel.”

A flush stole over Miss Suth-er-land’s face, and she picked nervously at
the fringe of her jacket. “I met him first at the gas-fit-ters’ ball,”
she said. “They used to send father tick-ets when he was alive, and then
af-ter-wards they re-membered us, and sent them to mother. Mr. Wind-ibank
did not wish us to go. He never did wish us to go any-where. He would
get quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat. But
this time I was set on go-ing, and I would go; for what right had he to
pre-vent? He said the folk were not fit for us to know, when all
father’s friends were to be there. And he said that I had noth-ing fit
to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so much as taken
out of the drawer. At last, when noth-ing else would do, he went off to
France upon the busi-ness of the firm, but we went, mother and I, with
Mr. Hardy, who used to be our fore-man, and it was there I met Mr.
Hos-mer An-gel.”

“I sup-pose,” said Holmes, “that when Mr. Wind-ibank came back from
France he was very an-noyed at your hav-ing gone to the ball.”

“Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I re-mem-ber, and
shrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use deny-ing any-thing to a
wo-man, for she would have her way.”

“I see. Then at the gas-fit-ters’ ball you met, as I un-der-stand, a
gen-tle-man called Mr. Hos-mer An-gel.”

“Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if we
had got home all safe, and after that we met him—that is to say, Mr.
Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father came back
again, and Mr. Hos-mer An-gel could not come to the house any more.”

“No?”

“Well, you know father didn’t like any-thing of the sort. He wouldn’t
have any vis-it-ors if he could help it, and he used to say that a wo-man
should be happy in her own fam-ily circle. But then, as I used to say to
mother, a wo-man wants her own circle to be-gin with, and I had not got
mine yet.”

“But how about Mr. Hos-mer An-gel? Did he make no at-tempt to see you?”

“Well, father was go-ing off to France again in a week, and Hos-mer wrote
and said that it would be safer and bet-ter not to see each other un-til
he had gone. We could write in the mean-time, and he used to write every
day. I took the let-ters in in the morn-ing, so there was no need for
father to know.”

“Were you en-gaged to the gen-tle-man at this time?”

“Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were en-gaged after the first walk that we
took. Hos-mer—Mr. An-gel—was a cash-ier in an of-fice in Lead-en-hall
Street—and—”

“What of-fice?”

“That’s the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don’t know.”

“Where did he live, then?”

“He slept on the premises.”

“And you don’t know his ad-dress?”

“No—ex-cept that it was Lead-en-hall Street.”

“Where did you ad-dress your let-ters, then?”

“To the Lead-en-hall Street Post Of-fice, to be left till called for. He
said that if they were sent to the of-fice he would be chaffed by all
the other clerks about hav-ing let-ters from a lady, so I offered to
type-write them, like he did his, but he wouldn’t have that, for he said
that when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when they were
type-writ-ten he al-ways felt that the ma-chine had come between us. That
will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes, and the little
things that he would think of.”

“It was most sug-gest-ive,” said Holmes. “It has long been an ax-iom of
mine that the little things are in-fin-itely the most im-port-ant. Can you
re-mem-ber any other little things about Mr. Hos-mer An-gel?”

“He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me in the
even-ing than in the day-light, for he said that he hated to be
con-spicu-ous. Very re-tir-ing and gen-tle-manly he was. Even his voice was
gentle. He’d had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, he
told me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hes-it-at-ing,
whis-per-ing fash-ion of speech. He was al-ways well dressed, very neat and
plain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore tin-ted
glasses against the glare.”

“Well, and what happened when Mr. Wind-ibank, your step-father, re-turned
to France?”

“Mr. Hos-mer An-gel came to the house again and pro-posed that we should
marry be-fore father came back. He was in dread-ful earn-est and made me
swear, with my hands on the Testa-ment, that whatever happened I would
al-ways be true to him. Mother said he was quite right to make me swear,
and that it was a sign of his pas-sion. Mother was all in his fa-vour
from the first and was even fonder of him than I was. Then, when they
talked of mar-ry-ing within the week, I began to ask about father; but
they both said never to mind about father, but just to tell him
af-ter-wards, and mother said she would make it all right with him. I
didn’t quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should ask
his leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but I didn’t want
to do any-thing on the sly, so I wrote to father at Bordeaux, where the
com-pany has its French of-fices, but the let-ter came back to me on the
very morn-ing of the wed-ding.”

“It missed him, then?”

“Yes, sir; for he had star-ted to Eng-land just be-fore it ar-rived.”

“Ha! that was un-for-tu-nate. Your wed-ding was ar-ranged, then, for the
Fri-day. Was it to be in church?”

“Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Sa-viour’s, near King’s
Cross, and we were to have break-fast af-ter-wards at the St. Pan-cras
Hotel. Hos-mer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two of us he
put us both into it and stepped him-self into a four-wheeler, which
happened to be the only other cab in the street. We got to the church
first, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to step
out, but he never did, and when the cab-man got down from the box and
looked there was no one there! The cab-man said that he could not
ima-gine what had be-come of him, for he had seen him get in with his own
eyes. That was last Fri-day, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or heard
any-thing since then to throw any light upon what be-came of him.”

“It seems to me that you have been very shame-fully treated,” said
Holmes.

“Oh, no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all the
morn-ing he was say-ing to me that, whatever happened, I was to be true;
and that even if some-thing quite un-fore-seen oc-curred to sep-ar-ate us, I
was al-ways to re-mem-ber that I was pledged to him, and that he would
claim his pledge sooner or later. It seemed strange talk for a
wed-ding-morn-ing, but what has happened since gives a mean-ing to it.”

“Most cer-tainly it does. Your own opin-ion is, then, that some
un-fore-seen cata-strophe has oc-curred to him?”

“Yes, sir. I be-lieve that he foresaw some danger, or else he would not
have talked so. And then I think that what he foresaw happened.”

“But you have no no-tion as to what it could have been?”

“None.”

“One more ques-tion. How did your mother take the mat-ter?”

“She was angry, and said that I was never to speak of the mat-ter
again.”

“And your father? Did you tell him?”

“Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that some-thing had happened, and
that I should hear of Hos-mer again. As he said, what in-terest could
any-one have in bring-ing me to the doors of the church, and then leav-ing
me? Now, if he had bor-rowed my money, or if he had mar-ried me and got
my money settled on him, there might be some reason, but Hos-mer was
very in-de-pend-ent about money and never would look at a shil-ling of
mine. And yet, what could have happened? And why could he not write?
Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and I can’t sleep a wink at
night.” She pulled a little handker-chief out of her muff and began to
sob heav-ily into it.

“I shall glance into the case for you,” said Holmes, rising, “and I
have no doubt that we shall reach some def-in-ite res-ult. Let the weight
of the mat-ter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind dwell upon it
fur-ther. Above all, try to let Mr. Hos-mer An-gel van-ish from your
memory, as he has done from your life.”

“Then you don’t think I’ll see him again?”

“I fear not.”

“Then what has happened to him?”

“You will leave that ques-tion in my hands. I should like an ac-cur-ate
de-scrip-tion of him and any let-ters of his which you can spare.”

“I ad-vert-ised for him in last Saturday’s _Chron-icle_,” said she. “Here
is the slip and here are four let-ters from him.”

“Thank you. And your ad-dress?”

“No. 31 Lyon Place, Cam-ber-well.”

“Mr. An-gel’s ad-dress you never had, I un-der-stand. Where is your
father’s place of busi-ness?”

“He travels for Wes-t-house & Mar-b-ank, the great claret im-port-ers of
Fen-church Street.”

“Thank you. You have made your state-ment very clearly. You will leave
the pa-pers here, and re-mem-ber the ad-vice which I have given you. Let
the whole in-cid-ent be a sealed book, and do not al-low it to af-fect your
life.”

“You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I can-not do that. I shall be true
to Hos-mer. He shall find me ready when he comes back.”

For all the pre-pos-ter-ous hat and the vacu-ous face, there was some-thing
noble in the simple faith of our vis-itor which com-pelled our re-spect.
She laid her little bundle of pa-pers upon the table and went her way,
with a prom-ise to come again whenever she might be summoned.

Sh-er-lock Holmes sat si-lent for a few minutes with his fin-ger-tips still
pressed to-gether, his legs stretched out in front of him, and his gaze
dir-ec-ted up-ward to the ceil-ing. Then he took down from the rack the old
and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a coun-sel-lor, and, hav-ing lit
it, he leaned back in his chair, with the thick blue cloud-wreaths
spin-ning up from him, and a look of in-fin-ite lan-guor in his face.

“Quite an in-ter-est-ing study, that maiden,” he ob-served. “I found her
more in-ter-est-ing than her little prob-lem, which, by the way, is rather
a trite one. You will find par-al-lel cases, if you con-sult my in-dex, in
An-dover in ’77, and there was some-thing of the sort at The Hague last
year. Old as is the idea, how-ever, there were one or two de-tails which
were new to me. But the maiden her-self was most in-struct-ive.”

“You ap-peared to read a good deal upon her which was quite in-vis-ible to
me,” I re-marked.

“Not in-vis-ible but un-noticed, Wat-son. You did not know where to look,
and so you missed all that was im-port-ant. I can never bring you to
real-ise the im-port-ance of sleeves, the sug-gest-ive-ness of thumb-nails,
or the great is-sues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did you
gather from that wo-man’s ap-pear-ance? Describe it.”

“Well, she had a slate-col-oured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a
feather of a brick-ish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewn
upon it, and a fringe of little black jet or-na-ments. Her dress was
brown, rather darker than cof-fee col-our, with a little purple plush at
the neck and sleeves. Her gloves were grey-ish and were worn through at
the right fore-finger. Her boots I didn’t ob-serve. She had small round,
hanging gold ear-rings, and a gen-eral air of be-ing fairly well-to-do in
a vul-gar, com-fort-able, easy-go-ing way.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes clapped his hands softly to-gether and chuckled.

“’Pon my word, Wat-son, you are com-ing along won-der-fully. You have
really done very well in-deed. It is true that you have missed
everything of im-port-ance, but you have hit upon the method, and you
have a quick eye for col-our. Never trust to gen-eral im-pres-sions, my
boy, but con-cen-trate your-self upon de-tails. My first glance is al-ways
at a wo-man’s sleeve. In a man it is per-haps bet-ter first to take the
knee of the trouser. As you ob-serve, this wo-man had plush upon her
sleeves, which is a most use-ful ma-ter-ial for show-ing traces. The double
line a little above the wrist, where the type-writ-ist presses against
the table, was beau-ti-fully defined. The sew-ing-ma-chine, of the hand
type, leaves a sim-ilar mark, but only on the left arm, and on the side
of it farthest from the thumb, in-stead of be-ing right across the
broad-est part, as this was. I then glanced at her face, and, ob-serving
the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I ven-tured a re-mark
upon short sight and type-writ-ing, which seemed to sur-prise her.”

“It sur-prised me.”

“But, surely, it was ob-vi-ous. I was then much sur-prised and in-ter-ested
on glan-cing down to ob-serve that, though the boots which she was
wear-ing were not un-like each other, they were really odd ones; the one
hav-ing a slightly dec-or-ated toe-cap, and the other a plain one. One was
buttoned only in the two lower but-tons out of five, and the other at
the first, third, and fifth. Now, when you see that a young lady,
oth-er-wise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd boots,
half-buttoned, it is no great de-duc-tion to say that she came away in a
hurry.”

“And what else?” I asked, keenly in-ter-ested, as I al-ways was, by my
friend’s in-cis-ive reas-on-ing.

“I noted, in passing, that she had writ-ten a note be-fore leav-ing home
but after be-ing fully dressed. You ob-served that her right glove was
torn at the fore-finger, but you did not ap-par-ently see that both glove
and fin-ger were stained with vi-olet ink. She had writ-ten in a hurry and
dipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morn-ing, or the mark
would not re-main clear upon the fin-ger. All this is amus-ing, though
rather ele-ment-ary, but I must go back to busi-ness, Wat-son. Would you
mind read-ing me the ad-vert-ised de-scrip-tion of Mr. Hos-mer An-gel?”

I held the little prin-ted slip to the light. “Miss-ing,” it said, “on
the morn-ing of the four-teenth, a gen-tle-man named Hos-mer An-gel. About
five ft. seven in. in height; strongly built, sal-low com-plex-ion, black
hair, a little bald in the centre, bushy, black side-whiskers and
mous-tache; tin-ted glasses, slight in-firm-ity of speech. Was dressed,
when last seen, in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waist-coat,
gold Al-bert chain, and grey Har-ris tweed trousers, with brown gaiters
over elastic-sided boots. Known to have been em-ployed in an of-fice in
Lead-en-hall Street. Anybody bring-ing,” &c, &c.

“That will do,” said Holmes. “As to the let-ters,” he con-tin-ued,
glan-cing over them, “they are very com-mon-place. Ab-so-lutely no clue in
them to Mr. An-gel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is one
re-mark-able point, how-ever, which will no doubt strike you.”

“They are type-writ-ten,” I re-marked.

“Not only that, but the sig-na-ture is type-writ-ten. Look at the neat
little ‘Hos-mer An-gel’ at the bot-tom. There is a date, you see, but no
su-per-scrip-tion ex-cept Lead-en-hall Street, which is rather vague. The
point about the sig-na-ture is very sug-gest-ive—in fact, we may call it
con-clus-ive.”

“Of what?”

“My dear fel-low, is it pos-sible you do not see how strongly it bears
upon the case?”

“I can-not say that I do un-less it were that he wished to be able to
deny his sig-na-ture if an ac-tion for breach of prom-ise were in-sti-tuted.”

“No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two let-ters, which
should settle the mat-ter. One is to a firm in the City, the other is to
the young lady’s step-father, Mr. Wind-ibank, ask-ing him whether he could
meet us here at six o’clock to-mor-row even-ing. It is just as well that
we should do busi-ness with the male re-l-at-ives. And now, Doc-tor, we can
do noth-ing un-til the an-swers to those let-ters come, so we may put our
little prob-lem upon the shelf for the in-terim.”

I had had so many reas-ons to be-lieve in my friend’s subtle powers of
reas-on-ing and ex-traordin-ary en-ergy in ac-tion that I felt that he must
have some solid grounds for the as-sured and easy de-mean-our with which
he treated the sin-gu-lar mys-tery which he had been called upon to
fathom. Once only had I known him to fail, in the case of the King of
Bo-hemia and of the Irene Adler pho-to-graph; but when I looked back to
the weird busi-ness of the Sign of Four, and the ex-traordin-ary
cir-cum-stances con-nec-ted with the Study in Scar-let, I felt that it would
be a strange tangle in-deed which he could not un-ravel.

I left him then, still puff-ing at his black clay pipe, with the
con-vic-tion that when I came again on the next even-ing I would find that
he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up to the iden-tity
of the dis-ap-pear-ing bride-groom of Miss Mary Suth-er-land.

A pro-fes-sional case of great grav-ity was en-ga-ging my own at-ten-tion at
the time, and the whole of next day I was busy at the bed-side of the
suf-ferer. It was not un-til close upon six o’clock that I found my-self
free and was able to spring into a hansom and drive to Baker Street,
half afraid that I might be too late to as-sist at the _dénoue-ment_ of
the little mys-tery. I found Sh-er-lock Holmes alone, how-ever, half
asleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the re-cesses of his
arm-chair. A for-mid-able ar-ray of bottles and test-tubes, with the
pun-gent cleanly smell of hy-dro-chloric acid, told me that he had spent
his day in the chem-ical work which was so dear to him.

“Well, have you solved it?” I asked as I entered.

“Yes. It was the bi-sul-phate of ba-ryta.”

“No, no, the mys-tery!” I cried.

“Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been work-ing upon. There
was never any mys-tery in the mat-ter, though, as I said yes-ter-day, some
of the de-tails are of in-terest. The only draw-back is that there is no
law, I fear, that can touch the scoun-drel.”

“Who was he, then, and what was his ob-ject in desert-ing Miss
Suth-er-land?”

The ques-tion was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet opened
his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy foot-fall in the pas-sage and a
tap at the door.

“This is the girl’s step-father, Mr. James Wind-ibank,” said Holmes. “He
has writ-ten to me to say that he would be here at six. Come in!”

The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fel-low, some thirty
years of age, clean-shaven, and sal-low-skinned, with a bland,
in-sinu-at-ing man-ner, and a pair of won-der-fully sharp and pen-et-rat-ing
grey eyes. He shot a ques-tion-ing glance at each of us, placed his shiny
top-hat upon the side-board, and with a slight bow sidled down into the
nearest chair.

“Good-even-ing, Mr. James Wind-ibank,” said Holmes. “I think that this
type-writ-ten let-ter is from you, in which you made an ap-point-ment with
me for six o’clock?”

“Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not quite my
own mas-ter, you know. I am sorry that Miss Suth-er-land has troubled you
about this little mat-ter, for I think it is far bet-ter not to wash
linen of the sort in pub-lic. It was quite against my wishes that she
came, but she is a very ex-cit-able, im-puls-ive girl, as you may have
no-ticed, and she is not eas-ily con-trolled when she has made up her mind
on a point. Of course, I did not mind you so much, as you are not
con-nec-ted with the of-fi-cial po-lice, but it is not pleas-ant to have a
fam-ily mis-for-tune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a use-less
ex-pense, for how could you pos-sibly find this Hos-mer An-gel?”

“On the con-trary,” said Holmes quietly; “I have every reason to be-lieve
that I will suc-ceed in dis-cov-er-ing Mr. Hos-mer An-gel.”

Mr. Wind-ibank gave a vi-ol-ent start and dropped his gloves. “I am
de-lighted to hear it,” he said.

“It is a curi-ous thing,” re-marked Holmes, “that a type-writer has really
quite as much in-di-vidu-al-ity as a man’s hand-writ-ing. Un-less they are
quite new, no two of them write ex-actly alike. Some let-ters get more
worn than oth-ers, and some wear only on one side. Now, you re-mark in
this note of yours, Mr. Wind-ibank, that in every case there is some
little slur-ring over of the ‘e,’ and a slight de-fect in the tail of the
‘r.’ There are four-teen other char-ac-ter-ist-ics, but those are the more
ob-vi-ous.”

“We do all our cor-res-pond-ence with this ma-chine at the of-fice, and no
doubt it is a little worn,” our vis-itor answered, glan-cing keenly at
Holmes with his bright little eyes.

“And now I will show you what is really a very in-ter-est-ing study, Mr.
Wind-ibank,” Holmes con-tin-ued. “I think of writ-ing an-other little
mono-graph some of these days on the type-writer and its re-la-tion to
crime. It is a sub-ject to which I have de-voted some little at-ten-tion. I
have here four let-ters which pur-port to come from the miss-ing man. They
are all type-writ-ten. In each case, not only are the ‘e’s’ slurred and
the ‘r’s’ tail-less, but you will ob-serve, if you care to use my
mag-ni-fy-ing lens, that the four-teen other char-ac-ter-ist-ics to which I
have al-luded are there as well.”

Mr. Wind-ibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat. “I can-not
waste time over this sort of fant-astic talk, Mr. Holmes,” he said. “If
you can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you have done
it.”

“Cer-tainly,” said Holmes, step-ping over and turn-ing the key in the
door. “I let you know, then, that I have caught him!”

“What! where?” shouted Mr. Wind-ibank, turn-ing white to his lips and
glan-cing about him like a rat in a trap.

“Oh, it won’t do—really it won’t,” said Holmes suavely. “There is no
pos-sible get-ting out of it, Mr. Wind-ibank. It is quite too trans-par-ent,
and it was a very bad com-pli-ment when you said that it was im-possible
for me to solve so simple a ques-tion. That’s right! Sit down and let us
talk it over.”

Our vis-itor col-lapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a glit-ter
of mois-ture on his brow. “It—it’s not ac-tion-able,” he stammered.

“I am very much afraid that it is not. But between ourselves,
Wind-ibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heart-less a trick in a petty
way as ever came be-fore me. Now, let me just run over the course of
events, and you will con-tra-dict me if I go wrong.”

The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his
breast, like one who is ut-terly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up on
the corner of the man-tel-piece and, lean-ing back with his hands in his
pock-ets, began talk-ing, rather to him-self, as it seemed, than to us.

“The man mar-ried a wo-man very much older than him-self for her money,”
said he, “and he en-joyed the use of the money of the daugh-ter as long
as she lived with them. It was a con-sid-er-able sum, for people in their
po-s-i-tion, and the loss of it would have made a ser-i-ous dif-fer-ence. It
was worth an ef-fort to pre-serve it. The daugh-ter was of a good, ami-able
dis-pos-i-tion, but af-fec-tion-ate and warm-hearted in her ways, so that it
was evid-ent that with her fair per-sonal ad-vant-ages, and her little
in-come, she would not be al-lowed to re-main single long. Now her
mar-riage would mean, of course, the loss of a hun-dred a year, so what
does her step-father do to pre-vent it? He takes the ob-vi-ous course of
keep-ing her at home and for-bid-ding her to seek the com-pany of people of
her own age. But soon he found that that would not an-swer forever. She
be-came rest-ive, in-sisted upon her rights, and fi-nally an-nounced her
pos-it-ive in-ten-tion of go-ing to a cer-tain ball. What does her clever
step-father do then? He con-ceives an idea more cred-it-able to his head
than to his heart. With the con-niv-ance and as-sist-ance of his wife he
dis-guised him-self, covered those keen eyes with tin-ted glasses, masked
the face with a mous-tache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear
voice into an in-sinu-at-ing whis-per, and doubly se-cure on ac-count of the
girl’s short sight, he ap-pears as Mr. Hos-mer An-gel, and keeps off other
lov-ers by mak-ing love him-self.”

“It was only a joke at first,” groaned our vis-itor. “We never thought
that she would have been so car-ried away.”

“Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady was very
de-cidedly car-ried away, and, hav-ing quite made up her mind that her
step-father was in France, the sus-pi-cion of treach-ery never for an
in-stant entered her mind. She was flattered by the gen-tle-man’s
at-ten-tions, and the ef-fect was in-creased by the loudly ex-pressed
ad-mir-a-tion of her mother. Then Mr. An-gel began to call, for it was
ob-vi-ous that the mat-ter should be pushed as far as it would go if a
real ef-fect were to be pro-duced. There were meet-ings, and an
en-gage-ment, which would fi-nally se-cure the girl’s af-fec-tions from
turn-ing to-wards any-one else. But the de-cep-tion could not be kept up
forever. These pre-ten-ded jour-neys to France were rather cum-brous. The
thing to do was clearly to bring the busi-ness to an end in such a
dra-matic man-ner that it would leave a per-man-ent im-pres-sion upon the
young lady’s mind and pre-vent her from look-ing upon any other suitor
for some time to come. Hence those vows of fi-del-ity ex-ac-ted upon a
Testa-ment, and hence also the al-lu-sions to a pos-sib-il-ity of some-thing
hap-pen-ing on the very morn-ing of the wed-ding. James Wind-ibank wished
Miss Suth-er-land to be so bound to Hos-mer An-gel, and so un-cer-tain as to
his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not listen
to an-other man. As far as the church door he brought her, and then, as
he could go no farther, he con-veni-ently van-ished away by the old trick
of step-ping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at the other. I
think that was the chain of events, Mr. Wind-ibank!”

Our vis-itor had re-covered some-thing of his as-sur-ance while Holmes had
been talk-ing, and he rose from his chair now with a cold sneer upon his
pale face.

“It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “but if you are so
very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who are
break-ing the law now, and not me. I have done noth-ing ac-tion-able from
the first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay your-self
open to an ac-tion for as-sault and il-legal con-straint.”

“The law can-not, as you say, touch you,” said Holmes, un-lock-ing and
throw-ing open the door, “yet there never was a man who de-served
pun-ish-ment more. If the young lady has a brother or a friend, he ought
to lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!” he con-tin-ued, flush-ing
up at the sight of the bit-ter sneer upon the man’s face, “it is not
part of my du-ties to my cli-ent, but here’s a hunt-ing crop handy, and I
think I shall just treat my-self to—” He took two swift steps to the
whip, but be-fore he could grasp it there was a wild clat-ter of steps
upon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged, and from the win-dow we
could see Mr. James Wind-ibank run-ning at the top of his speed down the
road.

“There’s a cold-blooded scoun-drel!” said Holmes, laugh-ing, as he threw
him-self down into his chair once more. “That fel-low will rise from
crime to crime un-til he does some-thing very bad, and ends on a gal-lows.
The case has, in some re-spects, been not en-tirely devoid of in-terest.”

“I can-not now en-tirely see all the steps of your reas-on-ing,” I
re-marked.

“Well, of course it was ob-vi-ous from the first that this Mr. Hos-mer
An-gel must have some strong ob-ject for his curi-ous con-duct, and it was
equally clear that the only man who really profited by the in-cid-ent, as
far as we could see, was the step-father. Then the fact that the two men
were never to-gether, but that the one al-ways ap-peared when the other
was away, was sug-gest-ive. So were the tin-ted spec-tacles and the curi-ous
voice, which both hin-ted at a dis-guise, as did the bushy whiskers. My
sus-pi-cions were all con-firmed by his pe-cu-liar ac-tion in type-writ-ing his
sig-na-ture, which, of course, in-ferred that his hand-writ-ing was so
fa-mil-iar to her that she would re-cog-nise even the smal-lest sample of
it. You see all these isol-ated facts, to-gether with many minor ones,
all poin-ted in the same dir-ec-tion.”

“And how did you verify them?”

“Hav-ing once spot-ted my man, it was easy to get cor-rob-or-a-tion. I knew
the firm for which this man worked. Hav-ing taken the prin-ted
de-scrip-tion. I elim-in-ated everything from it which could be the res-ult
of a dis-guise—the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I sent it to
the firm, with a re-quest that they would in-form me whether it answered
to the de-scrip-tion of any of their trav-el-lers. I had already no-ticed
the pe-cu-li-ar-it-ies of the type-writer, and I wrote to the man him-self at
his busi-ness ad-dress ask-ing him if he would come here. As I ex-pec-ted,
his reply was type-writ-ten and re-vealed the same trivial but
char-ac-ter-istic de-fects. The same post brought me a let-ter from
Wes-t-house & Mar-b-ank, of Fen-church Street, to say that the de-scrip-tion
tal-lied in every re-spect with that of their em-ployé, James Wind-ibank.
_Voilà tout_!”

“And Miss Suth-er-land?”

“If I tell her she will not be-lieve me. You may re-mem-ber the old
Per-sian say-ing, ‘There is danger for him who taketh the ti-ger cub, and
danger also for whoso snatches a de-lu-sion from a wo-man.’ There is as
much sense in Hafiz as in Hor-ace, and as much know-ledge of the world.”



 IV. THE BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERY

We were seated at break-fast one morn-ing, my wife and I, when the maid
brought in a tele-gram. It was from Sh-er-lock Holmes and ran in this way:

“Have you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for from the
west of Eng-land in con-nec-tion with Bo-scombe Val-ley tragedy. Shall be
glad if you will come with me. Air and scenery per-fect. Leave
Pad-ding-ton by the 11:15.”

“What do you say, dear?” said my wife, look-ing across at me. “Will you
go?”

“I really don’t know what to say. I have a fairly long list at
present.”

“Oh, An-struther would do your work for you. You have been look-ing a
little pale lately. I think that the change would do you good, and you
are al-ways so in-ter-ested in Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes’ cases.”

“I should be un-grate-ful if I were not, see-ing what I gained through one
of them,” I answered. “But if I am to go, I must pack at once, for I
have only half an hour.”

My ex-per-i-ence of camp life in Afgh-anistan had at least had the ef-fect
of mak-ing me a prompt and ready trav-el-ler. My wants were few and
simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a cab with my
valise, rat-tling away to Pad-ding-ton Sta-tion. Sh-er-lock Holmes was pa-cing
up and down the plat-form, his tall, gaunt fig-ure made even gaunter and
taller by his long grey trav-el-ling-cloak and close-fit-ting cloth cap.

“It is really very good of you to come, Wat-son,” said he. “It makes a
con-sid-er-able dif-fer-ence to me, hav-ing someone with me on whom I can
thor-oughly rely. Local aid is al-ways either worth-less or else bi-assed.
If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get the tick-ets.”

We had the car-riage to ourselves save for an im-mense lit-ter of pa-pers
which Holmes had brought with him. Among these he rum-maged and read,
with in-ter-vals of note-tak-ing and of med-it-a-tion, un-til we were past
Read-ing. Then he sud-denly rolled them all into a gi-gantic ball and
tossed them up onto the rack.

“Have you heard any-thing of the case?” he asked.

“Not a word. I have not seen a pa-per for some days.”

“The Lon-don press has not had very full ac-counts. I have just been
look-ing through all the re-cent pa-pers in or-der to mas-ter the
par-tic-u-lars. It seems, from what I gather, to be one of those simple
cases which are so ex-tremely dif-fi-cult.”

“That sounds a little para-dox-ical.”

“But it is pro-foundly true. Sin-gu-lar-ity is al-most in-vari-ably a clue.
The more fea-ture-less and com-mon-place a crime is, the more dif-fi-cult it
is to bring it home. In this case, how-ever, they have es-tab-lished a
very ser-i-ous case against the son of the murdered man.”

“It is a murder, then?”

“Well, it is con-jec-tured to be so. I shall take noth-ing for gran-ted
un-til I have the op-por-tun-ity of look-ing per-son-ally into it. I will
ex-plain the state of things to you, as far as I have been able to
un-der-stand it, in a very few words.

“Bo-scombe Val-ley is a coun-try dis-trict not very far from Ross, in
Here-ford-shire. The largest landed pro-pri-etor in that part is a Mr. John
Turner, who made his money in Aus-tralia and re-turned some years ago to
the old coun-try. One of the farms which he held, that of Hath-er-ley, was
let to Mr. Charles McCarthy, who was also an ex-Aus-tralian. The men had
known each other in the colon-ies, so that it was not un-nat-ural that
when they came to settle down they should do so as near each other as
pos-sible. Turner was ap-par-ently the richer man, so McCarthy be-came his
ten-ant but still re-mained, it seems, upon terms of per-fect equal-ity, as
they were fre-quently to-gether. McCarthy had one son, a lad of eight-een,
and Turner had an only daugh-ter of the same age, but neither of them
had wives liv-ing. They ap-pear to have avoided the so-ci-ety of the
neigh-bour-ing Eng-lish fam-il-ies and to have led re-tired lives, though
both the McCarthys were fond of sport and were fre-quently seen at the
race-meet-ings of the neigh-bour-hood. McCarthy kept two ser-vants—a man
and a girl. Turner had a con-sid-er-able house-hold, some half-dozen at the
least. That is as much as I have been able to gather about the
fam-il-ies. Now for the facts.

“On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left his house at
Hath-er-ley about three in the af-ter-noon and walked down to the Bo-scombe
Pool, which is a small lake formed by the spread-ing out of the stream
which runs down the Bo-scombe Val-ley. He had been out with his
serving-man in the morn-ing at Ross, and he had told the man that he
must hurry, as he had an ap-point-ment of im-port-ance to keep at three.
From that ap-point-ment he never came back alive.

“From Hath-er-ley Farm-house to the Bo-scombe Pool is a quarter of a mile,
and two people saw him as he passed over this ground. One was an old
wo-man, whose name is not men-tioned, and the other was Wil-liam Crowder,
a game-keeper in the em-ploy of Mr. Turner. Both these wit-nesses de-pose
that Mr. McCarthy was walk-ing alone. The game-keeper adds that within a
few minutes of his see-ing Mr. McCarthy pass he had seen his son, Mr.
James McCarthy, go-ing the same way with a gun un-der his arm. To the
best of his be-lief, the father was ac-tu-ally in sight at the time, and
the son was fol-low-ing him. He thought no more of the mat-ter un-til he
heard in the even-ing of the tragedy that had oc-curred.

“The two McCarthys were seen after the time when Wil-liam Crowder, the
game-keeper, lost sight of them. The Bo-scombe Pool is thickly wooded
round, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the edge. A girl
of four-teen, Pa-tience Moran, who is the daugh-ter of the lodge-keeper of
the Bo-scombe Val-ley es-tate, was in one of the woods pick-ing flowers.
She states that while she was there she saw, at the bor-der of the wood
and close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son, and that they ap-peared
to be hav-ing a vi-ol-ent quar-rel. She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder us-ing
very strong lan-guage to his son, and she saw the lat-ter raise up his
hand as if to strike his father. She was so frightened by their
vi-ol-ence that she ran away and told her mother when she reached home
that she had left the two McCarthys quar-rel-ling near Bo-scombe Pool, and
that she was afraid that they were go-ing to fight. She had hardly said
the words when young Mr. McCarthy came run-ning up to the lodge to say
that he had found his father dead in the wood, and to ask for the help
of the lodge-keeper. He was much ex-cited, without either his gun or his
hat, and his right hand and sleeve were ob-served to be stained with
fresh blood. On fol-low-ing him they found the dead body stretched out
upon the grass be-side the pool. The head had been beaten in by re-peated
blows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The in-jur-ies were such as might
very well have been in-flic-ted by the butt-end of his son’s gun, which
was found ly-ing on the grass within a few paces of the body. Under
these cir-cum-stances the young man was in-stantly ar-res-ted, and a ver-dict
of ‘wil-ful murder’ hav-ing been re-turned at the in-quest on Tues-day, he
was on Wed-nes-day brought be-fore the ma-gis-trates at Ross, who have
re-ferred the case to the next Ass-izes. Those are the main facts of the
case as they came out be-fore the cor-oner and the po-lice-court.”

“I could hardly ima-gine a more damning case,” I re-marked. “If ever
cir-cum-stan-tial evid-ence poin-ted to a crim-inal it does so here.”

“Cir-cum-stan-tial evid-ence is a very tricky thing,” answered Holmes
thought-fully. “It may seem to point very straight to one thing, but if
you shift your own point of view a little, you may find it point-ing in
an equally un-com-prom-ising man-ner to some-thing en-tirely dif-fer-ent. It
must be con-fessed, how-ever, that the case looks ex-ceed-ingly grave
against the young man, and it is very pos-sible that he is in-deed the
cul-prit. There are sev-eral people in the neigh-bour-hood, how-ever, and
among them Miss Turner, the daugh-ter of the neigh-bour-ing landowner, who
be-lieve in his in-no-cence, and who have re-tained Lestrade, whom you may
re-col-lect in con-nec-tion with the Study in Scar-let, to work out the case
in his in-terest. Lestrade, be-ing rather puzzled, has re-ferred the case
to me, and hence it is that two middle-aged gen-tle-men are fly-ing
west-ward at fifty miles an hour in-stead of quietly di-gest-ing their
break-fasts at home.”

“I am afraid,” said I, “that the facts are so ob-vi-ous that you will
find little credit to be gained out of this case.”

“There is noth-ing more de-cept-ive than an ob-vi-ous fact,” he answered,
laugh-ing. “Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other ob-vi-ous facts
which may have been by no means ob-vi-ous to Mr. Lestrade. You know me
too well to think that I am boast-ing when I say that I shall either
con-firm or des-troy his the-ory by means which he is quite in-cap-able of
em-ploy-ing, or even of un-der-stand-ing. To take the first ex-ample to hand,
I very clearly per-ceive that in your bed-room the win-dow is upon the
right-hand side, and yet I ques-tion whether Mr. Lestrade would have
noted even so self-evid-ent a thing as that.”

“How on earth—”

“My dear fel-low, I know you well. I know the mil-it-ary neat-ness which
char-ac-ter-ises you. You shave every morn-ing, and in this sea-son you
shave by the sun-light; but since your shav-ing is less and less com-plete
as we get farther back on the left side, un-til it be-comes pos-it-ively
slov-enly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it is surely very clear
that that side is less il-lu-min-ated than the other. I could not ima-gine
a man of your habits look-ing at him-self in an equal light and be-ing
sat-is-fied with such a res-ult. I only quote this as a trivial ex-ample of
ob-ser-va-tion and in-fer-ence. Therein lies my _méti-er_, and it is just
pos-sible that it may be of some ser-vice in the in-vest-ig-a-tion which lies
be-fore us. There are one or two minor points which were brought out in
the in-quest, and which are worth con-sid-er-ing.”

“What are they?”

“It ap-pears that his ar-rest did not take place at once, but after the
re-turn to Hath-er-ley Farm. On the in-spector of con-stabu-lary in-form-ing
him that he was a pris-oner, he re-marked that he was not sur-prised to
hear it, and that it was no more than his deserts. This ob-ser-va-tion of
his had the nat-ural ef-fect of re-mov-ing any traces of doubt which might
have re-mained in the minds of the cor-oner’s jury.”

“It was a con-fes-sion,” I ejac-u-lated.

“No, for it was fol-lowed by a prot-est-a-tion of in-no-cence.”

“Com-ing on the top of such a damning series of events, it was at least
a most sus-pi-cious re-mark.”

“On the con-trary,” said Holmes, “it is the bright-est rift which I can
at present see in the clouds. However in-no-cent he might be, he could
not be such an ab-so-lute im-be-cile as not to see that the cir-cum-stances
were very black against him. Had he ap-peared sur-prised at his own
ar-rest, or feigned in-dig-na-tion at it, I should have looked upon it as
highly sus-pi-cious, be-cause such sur-prise or an-ger would not be nat-ural
un-der the cir-cum-stances, and yet might ap-pear to be the best policy to
a schem-ing man. His frank ac-cept-ance of the situ-ation marks him as
either an in-no-cent man, or else as a man of con-sid-er-able self-re-straint
and firm-ness. As to his re-mark about his deserts, it was also not
un-nat-ural if you con-sider that he stood be-side the dead body of his
father, and that there is no doubt that he had that very day so far
for-got-ten his fi-lial duty as to bandy words with him, and even,
ac-cord-ing to the little girl whose evid-ence is so im-port-ant, to raise
his hand as if to strike him. The self-re-proach and con-tri-tion which
are dis-played in his re-mark ap-pear to me to be the signs of a healthy
mind rather than of a guilty one.”

I shook my head. “Many men have been hanged on far slighter evid-ence,”
I re-marked.

“So they have. And many men have been wrong-fully hanged.”

“What is the young man’s own ac-count of the mat-ter?”

“It is, I am afraid, not very en-cour-aging to his sup-port-ers, though
there are one or two points in it which are sug-gest-ive. You will find
it here, and may read it for your-self.”

He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Here-ford-shire pa-per,
and hav-ing turned down the sheet he poin-ted out the para-graph in which
the un-for-tu-nate young man had given his own state-ment of what had
oc-curred. I settled my-self down in the corner of the car-riage and read
it very care-fully. It ran in this way:

“Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the de-ceased, was then called and
gave evid-ence as fol-lows: ‘I had been away from home for three days at
Bris-tol, and had only just re-turned upon the morn-ing of last Monday,
the 3rd. My father was ab-sent from home at the time of my ar-rival, and
I was in-formed by the maid that he had driven over to Ross with John
Cobb, the groom. Shortly after my re-turn I heard the wheels of his trap
in the yard, and, look-ing out of my win-dow, I saw him get out and walk
rap-idly out of the yard, though I was not aware in which dir-ec-tion he
was go-ing. I then took my gun and strolled out in the dir-ec-tion of the
Bo-scombe Pool, with the in-ten-tion of vis-it-ing the rab-bit war-ren which
is upon the other side. On my way I saw Wil-liam Crowder, the
game-keeper, as he had stated in his evid-ence; but he is mis-taken in
think-ing that I was fol-low-ing my father. I had no idea that he was in
front of me. When about a hun-dred yards from the pool I heard a cry of
“Cooee!” which was a usual sig-nal between my father and my-self. I then
hur-ried for-ward, and found him stand-ing by the pool. He ap-peared to be
much sur-prised at see-ing me and asked me rather roughly what I was
do-ing there. A con-ver-sa-tion en-sued which led to high words and al-most
to blows, for my father was a man of a very vi-ol-ent tem-per. See-ing that
his pas-sion was be-com-ing un-gov-ern-able, I left him and re-turned to-wards
Hath-er-ley Farm. I had not gone more than 150 yards, how-ever, when I
heard a hideous out-cry be-hind me, which caused me to run back again. I
found my father ex-pir-ing upon the ground, with his head ter-ribly
in-jured. I dropped my gun and held him in my arms, but he al-most
in-stantly ex-pired. I knelt be-side him for some minutes, and then made
my way to Mr. Turner’s lodge-keeper, his house be-ing the nearest, to
ask for as-sist-ance. I saw no one near my father when I re-turned, and I
have no idea how he came by his in-jur-ies. He was not a pop-u-lar man,
be-ing some-what cold and for-bid-ding in his man-ners, but he had, as far
as I know, no act-ive en-emies. I know noth-ing fur-ther of the mat-ter.’

“The Cor-oner: Did your father make any state-ment to you be-fore he died?

“Wit-ness: He mumbled a few words, but I could only catch some al-lu-sion
to a rat.

“The Cor-oner: What did you un-der-stand by that?

“Wit-ness: It con-veyed no mean-ing to me. I thought that he was
de-li-ri-ous.

“The Cor-oner: What was the point upon which you and your father had
this fi-nal quar-rel?

“Wit-ness: I should prefer not to an-swer.

“The Cor-oner: I am afraid that I must press it.

“Wit-ness: It is really im-possible for me to tell you. I can as-sure you
that it has noth-ing to do with the sad tragedy which fol-lowed.

“The Cor-oner: That is for the court to de-cide. I need not point out to
you that your re-fusal to an-swer will pre-ju-dice your case con-sid-er-ably
in any fu-ture pro-ceed-ings which may arise.

“Wit-ness: I must still re-fuse.

“The Cor-oner: I un-der-stand that the cry of ‘Cooee’ was a com-mon sig-nal
between you and your father?

“Wit-ness: It was.

“The Cor-oner: How was it, then, that he uttered it be-fore he saw you,
and be-fore he even knew that you had re-turned from Bris-tol?

“Wit-ness (with con-sid-er-able con-fu-sion): I do not know.

“A Jury-man: Did you see noth-ing which aroused your sus-pi-cions when you
re-turned on hear-ing the cry and found your father fatally in-jured?

“Wit-ness: Noth-ing def-in-ite.

“The Cor-oner: What do you mean?

“Wit-ness: I was so dis-turbed and ex-cited as I rushed out into the open,
that I could think of noth-ing ex-cept of my father. Yet I have a vague
im-pres-sion that as I ran for-ward some-thing lay upon the ground to the
left of me. It seemed to me to be some-thing grey in col-our, a coat of
some sort, or a plaid per-haps. When I rose from my father I looked
round for it, but it was gone.

“‘Do you mean that it dis-ap-peared be-fore you went for help?’

“‘Yes, it was gone.’

“  ‘You can-not say what it was?’

“‘No, I had a feel-ing some-thing was there.’

“‘How far from the body?’

“‘A dozen yards or so.’

“‘And how far from the edge of the wood?’

“‘About the same.’

“‘Then if it was re-moved it was while you were within a dozen yards of
it?’

“‘Yes, but with my back to-wards it.’

“This con-cluded the ex-am-in-a-tion of the wit-ness.”

“I see,” said I as I glanced down the column, “that the cor-oner in his
con-clud-ing re-marks was rather severe upon young McCarthy. He calls
at-ten-tion, and with reason, to the dis-crep-ancy about his father hav-ing
sig-nalled to him be-fore see-ing him, also to his re-fusal to give de-tails
of his con-ver-sa-tion with his father, and his sin-gu-lar ac-count of his
father’s dy-ing words. They are all, as he re-marks, very much against
the son.”

Holmes laughed softly to him-self and stretched him-self out upon the
cush-ioned seat. “Both you and the cor-oner have been at some pains,”
said he, “to single out the very strongest points in the young man’s
fa-vour. Don’t you see that you al-tern-ately give him credit for hav-ing
too much ima-gin-a-tion and too little? Too little, if he could not in-vent
a cause of quar-rel which would give him the sym-pathy of the jury; too
much, if he evolved from his own in-ner con-scious-ness any-thing so
_outré_ as a dy-ing ref-er-ence to a rat, and the in-cid-ent of the
van-ish-ing cloth. No, sir, I shall ap-proach this case from the point of
view that what this young man says is true, and we shall see whither
that hy-po-thesis will lead us. And now here is my pocket Petrarch, and
not an-other word shall I say of this case un-til we are on the scene of
ac-tion. We lunch at Swin-don, and I see that we shall be there in twenty
minutes.”

It was nearly four o’clock when we at last, after passing through the
beau-ti-ful Stroud Val-ley, and over the broad gleam-ing Severn, found
ourselves at the pretty little coun-try-town of Ross. A lean,
fer-ret-like man, furt-ive and sly-look-ing, was wait-ing for us upon the
plat-form. In spite of the light brown dust-coat and leather-leg-gings
which he wore in de-fer-ence to his rus-tic sur-round-ings, I had no
dif-fi-culty in re-cog-nising Lestrade, of Scot-land Yard. With him we drove
to the Here-ford Arms where a room had already been en-gaged for us.

“I have ordered a car-riage,” said Lestrade as we sat over a cup of tea.
“I knew your en-er-getic nature, and that you would not be happy un-til
you had been on the scene of the crime.”

“It was very nice and com-pli-ment-ary of you,” Holmes answered. “It is
en-tirely a ques-tion of ba-ro-met-ric pres-sure.”

Lestrade looked startled. “I do not quite fol-low,” he said.

“How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and not a cloud in the
sky. I have a case-ful of ci-gar-ettes here which need smoking, and the
sofa is very much su-per-ior to the usual coun-try hotel ab-om-in-a-tion. I do
not think that it is prob-able that I shall use the car-riage to-night.”

Lestrade laughed in-dul-gently. “You have, no doubt, already formed your
con-clu-sions from the news-pa-pers,” he said. “The case is as plain as a
pikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainer it be-comes. Still,
of course, one can’t re-fuse a lady, and such a very pos-it-ive one, too.
She has heard of you, and would have your opin-ion, though I re-peatedly
told her that there was noth-ing which you could do which I had not
already done. Why, bless my soul! here is her car-riage at the door.”

He had hardly spoken be-fore there rushed into the room one of the most
lovely young wo-men that I have ever seen in my life. Her vi-olet eyes
shin-ing, her lips par-ted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, all thought of
her nat-ural re-serve lost in her over-power-ing ex-cite-ment and con-cern.

“Oh, Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes!” she cried, glan-cing from one to the other of
us, and fi-nally, with a wo-man’s quick in-tu-ition, fasten-ing upon my
com-pan-ion, “I am so glad that you have come. I have driven down to tell
you so. I know that James didn’t do it. I know it, and I want you to
start upon your work know-ing it, too. Never let your-self doubt upon
that point. We have known each other since we were little chil-dren, and
I know his faults as no one else does; but he is too tender-hearted to
hurt a fly. Such a charge is ab-surd to any-one who really knows him.”

“I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner,” said Sh-er-lock Holmes. “You may
rely upon my do-ing all that I can.”

“But you have read the evid-ence. You have formed some con-clu-sion? Do
you not see some loop-hole, some flaw? Do you not your-self think that he
is in-no-cent?”

“I think that it is very prob-able.”

“There, now!” she cried, throw-ing back her head and look-ing de-fi-antly
at Lestrade. “You hear! He gives me hopes.”

Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. “I am afraid that my col-league has
been a little quick in form-ing his con-clu-sions,” he said.

“But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did it. And
about his quar-rel with his father, I am sure that the reason why he
would not speak about it to the cor-oner was be-cause I was con-cerned in
it.”

“In what way?” asked Holmes.

“It is no time for me to hide any-thing. James and his father had many
dis-agree-ments about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there should
be a mar-riage between us. James and I have al-ways loved each other as
brother and sis-ter; but of course he is young and has seen very little
of life yet, and—and—well, he nat-ur-ally did not wish to do any-thing
like that yet. So there were quar-rels, and this, I am sure, was one of
them.”

“And your father?” asked Holmes. “Was he in fa-vour of such a union?”

“No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in fa-vour of
it.” A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shot one
of his keen, ques-tion-ing glances at her.

“Thank you for this in-form-a-tion,” said he. “May I see your father if I
call to-mor-row?”

“I am afraid the doc-tor won’t al-low it.”

“The doc-tor?”

“Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for years
back, but this has broken him down com-pletely. He has taken to his bed,
and Dr. Wil-lows says that he is a wreck and that his nervous sys-tem is
shattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who had known dad in the
old days in Vict-oria.”

“Ha! In Vict-oria! That is im-port-ant.”

“Yes, at the mines.”

“Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I un-der-stand, Mr. Turner made
his money.”

“Yes, cer-tainly.”

“Thank you, Miss Turner. You have been of ma-ter-ial as-sist-ance to me.”

“You will tell me if you have any news to-mor-row. No doubt you will go
to the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him that
I know him to be in-no-cent.”

“I will, Miss Turner.”

“I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if I
leave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your un-der-tak-ing.” She hur-ried
from the room as im-puls-ively as she had entered, and we heard the
wheels of her car-riage rattle off down the street.

“I am ashamed of you, Holmes,” said Lestrade with dig-nity after a few
minutes’ si-lence. “Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound to
dis-ap-point? I am not over-tender of heart, but I call it cruel.”

“I think that I see my way to clear-ing James McCarthy,” said Holmes.
“Have you an or-der to see him in prison?”

“Yes, but only for you and me.”

“Then I shall re-con-sider my res-ol-u-tion about go-ing out. We have still
time to take a train to Here-ford and see him to-night?”

“Ample.”

“Then let us do so. Wat-son, I fear that you will find it very slow, but
I shall only be away a couple of hours.”

I walked down to the sta-tion with them, and then wandered through the
streets of the little town, fi-nally re-turn-ing to the hotel, where I lay
upon the sofa and tried to in-terest my-self in a yel-low-backed novel.
The puny plot of the story was so thin, how-ever, when com-pared to the
deep mys-tery through which we were grop-ing, and I found my at-ten-tion
wander so con-tinu-ally from the ac-tion to the fact, that I at last flung
it across the room and gave my-self up en-tirely to a con-sid-er-a-tion of
the events of the day. Sup-pos-ing that this un-happy young man’s story
were ab-so-lutely true, then what hellish thing, what ab-so-lutely
un-fore-seen and ex-traordin-ary calam-ity could have oc-curred between the
time when he par-ted from his father, and the mo-ment when, drawn back by
his screams, he rushed into the glade? It was some-thing ter-rible and
deadly. What could it be? Might not the nature of the in-jur-ies re-veal
some-thing to my med-ical in-stincts? I rang the bell and called for the
weekly county pa-per, which con-tained a ver-batim ac-count of the in-quest.
In the sur-geon’s de-pos-ition it was stated that the pos-terior third of
the left pari-etal bone and the left half of the oc-cipital bone had been
shattered by a heavy blow from a blunt weapon. I marked the spot upon
my own head. Clearly such a blow must have been struck from be-hind.
That was to some ex-tent in fa-vour of the ac-cused, as when seen
quar-rel-ling he was face to face with his father. Still, it did not go
for very much, for the older man might have turned his back be-fore the
blow fell. Still, it might be worth while to call Holmes’ at-ten-tion to
it. Then there was the pe-cu-liar dy-ing ref-er-ence to a rat. What could
that mean? It could not be de-li-rium. A man dy-ing from a sud-den blow
does not com-monly be-come de-li-ri-ous. No, it was more likely to be an
at-tempt to ex-plain how he met his fate. But what could it in-dic-ate? I
cudgelled my brains to find some pos-sible ex-plan-a-tion. And then the
in-cid-ent of the grey cloth seen by young McCarthy. If that were true
the mur-derer must have dropped some part of his dress, pre-sum-ably his
over-coat, in his flight, and must have had the hardi-hood to re-turn and
to carry it away at the in-stant when the son was kneel-ing with his back
turned not a dozen paces off. What a tis-sue of mys-ter-ies and
im-prob-ab-il-it-ies the whole thing was! I did not won-der at Lestrade’s
opin-ion, and yet I had so much faith in Sh-er-lock Holmes’ in-sight that I
could not lose hope as long as every fresh fact seemed to strengthen
his con-vic-tion of young McCarthy’s in-no-cence.

It was late be-fore Sh-er-lock Holmes re-turned. He came back alone, for
Lestrade was stay-ing in lodgings in the town.

“The glass still keeps very high,” he re-marked as he sat down. “It is
of im-port-ance that it should not rain be-fore we are able to go over the
ground. On the other hand, a man should be at his very best and keen-est
for such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it when fagged by
a long jour-ney. I have seen young McCarthy.”

“And what did you learn from him?”

“Noth-ing.”

“Could he throw no light?”

“None at all. I was in-clined to think at one time that he knew who had
done it and was screen-ing him or her, but I am con-vinced now that he is
as puzzled as every-one else. He is not a very quick-wit-ted youth,
though comely to look at and, I should think, sound at heart.”

“I can-not ad-mire his taste,” I re-marked, “if it is in-deed a fact that
he was averse to a mar-riage with so charm-ing a young lady as this Miss
Turner.”

“Ah, thereby hangs a rather pain-ful tale. This fel-low is madly,
in-sanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was only a
lad, and be-fore he really knew her, for she had been away five years at
a board-ing-school, what does the idiot do but get into the clutches of
a bar-maid in Bris-tol and marry her at a re-gistry of-fice? No one knows a
word of the mat-ter, but you can ima-gine how mad-den-ing it must be to him
to be up-braided for not do-ing what he would give his very eyes to do,
but what he knows to be ab-so-lutely im-possible. It was sheer frenzy of
this sort which made him throw his hands up into the air when his
father, at their last in-ter-view, was goad-ing him on to pro-pose to Miss
Turner. On the other hand, he had no means of sup-port-ing him-self, and
his father, who was by all ac-counts a very hard man, would have thrown
him over ut-terly had he known the truth. It was with his bar-maid wife
that he had spent the last three days in Bris-tol, and his father did
not know where he was. Mark that point. It is of im-port-ance. Good has
come out of evil, how-ever, for the bar-maid, find-ing from the pa-pers
that he is in ser-i-ous trouble and likely to be hanged, has thrown him
over ut-terly and has writ-ten to him to say that she has a hus-band
already in the Ber-muda Dock-yard, so that there is really no tie between
them. I think that that bit of news has con-soled young McCarthy for all
that he has suffered.”

“But if he is in-no-cent, who has done it?”

“Ah! who? I would call your at-ten-tion very par-tic-u-larly to two points.
One is that the murdered man had an ap-point-ment with someone at the
pool, and that the someone could not have been his son, for his son was
away, and he did not know when he would re-turn. The second is that the
murdered man was heard to cry ‘Cooee!’ be-fore he knew that his son had
re-turned. Those are the cru-cial points upon which the case de-pends. And
now let us talk about Ge-orge Meredith, if you please, and we shall
leave all minor mat-ters un-til to-mor-row.”

There was no rain, as Holmes had fore-told, and the morn-ing broke bright
and cloud-less. At nine o’clock Lestrade called for us with the
car-riage, and we set off for Hath-er-ley Farm and the Bo-scombe Pool.

“There is ser-i-ous news this morn-ing,” Lestrade ob-served. “It is said
that Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is des-paired of.”

“An eld-erly man, I pre-sume?” said Holmes.

“About sixty; but his con-sti-tu-tion has been shattered by his life
abroad, and he has been in fail-ing health for some time. This busi-ness
has had a very bad ef-fect upon him. He was an old friend of McCarthy’s,
and, I may add, a great be-ne-factor to him, for I have learned that he
gave him Hath-er-ley Farm rent free.”

“Indeed! That is in-ter-est-ing,” said Holmes.

“Oh, yes! In a hun-dred other ways he has helped him. Every-body about
here speaks of his kind-ness to him.”

“Really! Does it not strike you as a little sin-gu-lar that this
McCarthy, who ap-pears to have had little of his own, and to have been
un-der such ob-lig-a-tions to Turner, should still talk of mar-ry-ing his son
to Turner’s daugh-ter, who is, pre-sum-ably, heir-ess to the es-tate, and
that in such a very cock-sure man-ner, as if it were merely a case of a
pro-posal and all else would fol-low? It is the more strange, since we
know that Turner him-self was averse to the idea. The daugh-ter told us
as much. Do you not de-duce some-thing from that?”

“We have got to the de-duc-tions and the in-fer-ences,” said Lestrade,
wink-ing at me. “I find it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes, without
fly-ing away after the-or-ies and fan-cies.”

“You are right,” said Holmes de-murely; “you do find it very hard to
tackle the facts.”

“Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find it dif-fi-cult to
get hold of,” replied Lestrade with some warmth.

“And that is—”

“That McCarthy senior met his death from McCarthy ju-nior and that all
the-or-ies to the con-trary are the merest moon-shine.”

“Well, moon-shine is a brighter thing than fog,” said Holmes, laugh-ing.
“But I am very much mis-taken if this is not Hath-er-ley Farm upon the
left.”

“Yes, that is it.” It was a wide-spread, com-fort-able-look-ing build-ing,
two-stor-ied, slate-roofed, with great yel-low blotches of lichen upon
the grey walls. The drawn blinds and the smoke-less chim-neys, how-ever,
gave it a stricken look, as though the weight of this hor-ror still lay
heavy upon it. We called at the door, when the maid, at Holmes’
re-quest, showed us the boots which her mas-ter wore at the time of his
death, and also a pair of the son’s, though not the pair which he had
then had. Hav-ing meas-ured these very care-fully from seven or eight
dif-fer-ent points, Holmes de-sired to be led to the court-yard, from
which we all fol-lowed the wind-ing track which led to Bo-scombe Pool.

Sh-er-lock Holmes was trans-formed when he was hot upon such a scent as
this. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and lo-gi-cian of Baker
Street would have failed to re-cog-nise him. His face flushed and
darkened. His brows were drawn into two hard black lines, while his
eyes shone out from be-neath them with a steely glit-ter. His face was
bent down-ward, his shoulders bowed, his lips com-pressed, and the veins
stood out like whip-cord in his long, sinewy neck. His nos-trils seemed
to dilate with a purely an-imal lust for the chase, and his mind was so
ab-so-lutely con-cen-trated upon the mat-ter be-fore him that a ques-tion or
re-mark fell un-heeded upon his ears, or, at the most, only pro-voked a
quick, im-pa-tient snarl in reply. Swiftly and si-lently he made his way
along the track which ran through the mead-ows, and so by way of the
woods to the Bo-scombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, as is all that
dis-trict, and there were marks of many feet, both upon the path and
amid the short grass which bounded it on either side. So-me-times Holmes
would hurry on, some-times stop dead, and once he made quite a little
de-tour into the meadow. Lestrade and I walked be-hind him, the de-tect-ive
in-dif-fer-ent and con-temp-tu-ous, while I watched my friend with the
in-terest which sprang from the con-vic-tion that every one of his ac-tions
was dir-ec-ted to-wards a def-in-ite end.

The Bo-scombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of wa-ter some
fifty yards across, is situ-ated at the bound-ary between the Hath-er-ley
Farm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner. Above the woods
which lined it upon the farther side we could see the red, jut-ting
pin-nacles which marked the site of the rich landowner’s dwell-ing. On
the Hath-er-ley side of the pool the woods grew very thick, and there was
a nar-row belt of sod-den grass twenty paces across between the edge of
the trees and the reeds which lined the lake. Lestrade showed us the
ex-act spot at which the body had been found, and, in-deed, so moist was
the ground, that I could plainly see the traces which had been left by
the fall of the stricken man. To Holmes, as I could see by his eager
face and peer-ing eyes, very many other things were to be read upon the
trampled grass. He ran round, like a dog who is pick-ing up a scent, and
then turned upon my com-pan-ion.

“What did you go into the pool for?” he asked.

“I fished about with a rake. I thought there might be some weapon or
other trace. But how on earth—”

“Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with its in-ward
twist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and there it
van-ishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been had I
been here be-fore they came like a herd of buf-falo and wal-lowed all over
it. Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper came, and they have
covered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body. But here are
three sep-ar-ate tracks of the same feet.” He drew out a lens and lay
down upon his wa-ter-proof to have a bet-ter view, talk-ing all the time
rather to him-self than to us. “These are young McCarthy’s feet. Twice
he was walk-ing, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles are deeply
marked and the heels hardly vis-ible. That bears out his story. He ran
when he saw his father on the ground. Then here are the father’s feet
as he paced up and down. What is this, then? It is the butt-end of the
gun as the son stood listen-ing. And this? Ha, ha! What have we here?
Tip-toes! tip-toes! Square, too, quite un-usual boots! They come, they go,
they come again—of course that was for the cloak. Now where did they
come from?” He ran up and down, some-times los-ing, some-times find-ing the
track un-til we were well within the edge of the wood and un-der the
shadow of a great beech, the largest tree in the neigh-bour-hood. Holmes
traced his way to the farther side of this and lay down once more upon
his face with a little cry of sat-is-fac-tion. For a long time he re-mained
there, turn-ing over the leaves and dried sticks, gath-er-ing up what
seemed to me to be dust into an en-vel-ope and ex-amin-ing with his lens
not only the ground but even the bark of the tree as far as he could
reach. A jagged stone was ly-ing among the moss, and this also he
care-fully ex-amined and re-tained. Then he fol-lowed a path-way through the
wood un-til he came to the highroad, where all traces were lost.

“It has been a case of con-sid-er-able in-terest,” he re-marked, re-turn-ing
to his nat-ural man-ner. “I fancy that this grey house on the right must
be the lodge. I think that I will go in and have a word with Moran, and
per-haps write a little note. Hav-ing done that, we may drive back to our
lunch-eon. You may walk to the cab, and I shall be with you presently.”

It was about ten minutes be-fore we re-gained our cab and drove back into
Ross, Holmes still car-ry-ing with him the stone which he had picked up
in the wood.

“This may in-terest you, Lestrade,” he re-marked, hold-ing it out. “The
murder was done with it.”

“I see no marks.”

“There are none.”

“How do you know, then?”

“The grass was grow-ing un-der it. It had only lain there a few days.
There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It cor-res-ponds
with the in-jur-ies. There is no sign of any other weapon.”

“And the mur-derer?”

“Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wears
thick-soled shoot-ing-boots and a grey cloak, smokes In-dian ci-gars, uses
a ci-gar-holder, and car-ries a blunt pen-knife in his pocket. There are
sev-eral other in-dic-a-tions, but these may be enough to aid us in our
search.”

Lestrade laughed. “I am afraid that I am still a scep-tic,” he said.
“The-or-ies are all very well, but we have to deal with a hard-headed
Brit-ish jury.”

“_Nous ver-rons_,” answered Holmes calmly. “You work your own method,
and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this af-ter-noon, and shall
prob-ably re-turn to Lon-don by the even-ing train.”

“And leave your case un-fin-ished?”

“No, fin-ished.”

“But the mys-tery?”

“It is solved.”

“Who was the crim-inal, then?”

“The gen-tle-man I de-scribe.”

“But who is he?”

“Surely it would not be dif-fi-cult to find out. This is not such a
pop-u-lous neigh-bour-hood.”

Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. “I am a prac-tical man,” he said, “and
I really can-not un-der-take to go about the coun-try look-ing for a
left-handed gen-tle-man with a game leg. I should be-come the
laugh-ing-stock of Scot-land Yard.”

“All right,” said Holmes quietly. “I have given you the chance. Here
are your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line be-fore I leave.”

Hav-ing left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where we
found lunch upon the table. Holmes was si-lent and bur-ied in thought
with a pained ex-pres-sion upon his face, as one who finds him-self in a
per-plex-ing po-s-i-tion.

“Look here, Wat-son,” he said when the cloth was cleared “just sit down
in this chair and let me preach to you for a little. I don’t know quite
what to do, and I should value your ad-vice. Light a ci-gar and let me
ex-pound.”

 “Pray do so.”

“Well, now, in con-sid-er-ing this case there are two points about young
McCarthy’s nar-rat-ive which struck us both in-stantly, al-though they
im-pressed me in his fa-vour and you against him. One was the fact that
his father should, ac-cord-ing to his ac-count, cry ‘Cooee!’ be-fore see-ing
him. The other was his sin-gu-lar dy-ing ref-er-ence to a rat. He mumbled
sev-eral words, you un-der-stand, but that was all that caught the son’s
ear. Now from this double point our re-search must com-mence, and we will
be-gin it by pre-sum-ing that what the lad says is ab-so-lutely true.”

“What of this ‘Cooee!’ then?”

“Well, ob-vi-ously it could not have been meant for the son. The son, as
far as he knew, was in Bris-tol. It was mere chance that he was within
earshot. The ‘Cooee!’ was meant to at-tract the at-ten-tion of who-ever it
was that he had the ap-point-ment with. But ‘Cooee’ is a dis-tinctly
Aus-tralian cry, and one which is used between Aus-trali-ans. There is a
strong pre-sump-tion that the per-son whom McCarthy ex-pec-ted to meet him
at Bo-scombe Pool was someone who had been in Aus-tralia.”

“What of the rat, then?”

Sh-er-lock Holmes took a fol-ded pa-per from his pocket and flattened it
out on the table. “This is a map of the Co-lony of Vict-oria,” he said.
“I wired to Bris-tol for it last night.” He put his hand over part of
the map. “What do you read?”

“ARAT,” I read.

“And now?” He raised his hand.

“BALLARAT.”

“Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his son only
caught the last two syl-lables. He was try-ing to ut-ter the name of his
mur-derer. So and so, of Bal-larat.”

“It is won-der-ful!” I ex-claimed.

“It is ob-vi-ous. And now, you see, I had nar-rowed the field down
con-sid-er-ably. The pos-ses-sion of a grey gar-ment was a third point which,
grant-ing the son’s state-ment to be cor-rect, was a cer-tainty. We have
come now out of mere vague-ness to the def-in-ite con-cep-tion of an
Aus-tralian from Bal-larat with a grey cloak.”

“Cer-tainly.”

“And one who was at home in the dis-trict, for the pool can only be
ap-proached by the farm or by the es-tate, where strangers could hardly
wander.”

“Quite so.”

“Then comes our ex-ped-i-tion of to-day. By an ex-am-in-a-tion of the ground I
gained the tri-fling de-tails which I gave to that im-be-cile Lestrade, as
to the per-son-al-ity of the crim-inal.”

“But how did you gain them?”

“You know my method. It is foun-ded upon the ob-ser-va-tion of trifles.”

“His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length of his
stride. His boots, too, might be told from their traces.”

“Yes, they were pe-cu-liar boots.”

“But his lame-ness?”

“The im-pres-sion of his right foot was al-ways less dis-tinct than his
left. He put less weight upon it. Why? Be-cause he limped—he was lame.”

“But his left-handed-ness.”

“You were your-self struck by the nature of the in-jury as re-cor-ded by
the sur-geon at the in-quest. The blow was struck from im-me-di-ately
be-hind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be un-less it
were by a left-handed man? He had stood be-hind that tree dur-ing the
in-ter-view between the father and son. He had even smoked there. I found
the ash of a ci-gar, which my spe-cial know-ledge of to-bacco ashes en-ables
me to pro-nounce as an In-dian ci-gar. I have, as you know, de-voted some
at-ten-tion to this, and writ-ten a little mono-graph on the ashes of 140
dif-fer-ent vari-et-ies of pipe, ci-gar, and ci-gar-ette to-bacco. Hav-ing found
the ash, I then looked round and dis-covered the stump among the moss
where he had tossed it. It was an In-dian ci-gar, of the vari-ety which
are rolled in Rot-ter-dam.”

“And the ci-gar-holder?”

“I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. There-fore he used
a holder. The tip had been cut off, not bit-ten off, but the cut was not
a clean one, so I de-duced a blunt pen-knife.”

“Holmes,” I said, “you have drawn a net round this man from which he
can-not es-cape, and you have saved an in-no-cent hu-man life as truly as if
you had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the dir-ec-tion in
which all this points. The cul-prit is—”

“Mr. John Turner,” cried the hotel waiter, open-ing the door of our
sit-ting-room, and ush-er-ing in a vis-itor.

The man who entered was a strange and im-press-ive fig-ure. His slow,
limp-ing step and bowed shoulders gave the ap-pear-ance of de-crep-itude,
and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy fea-tures, and his enorm-ous limbs
showed that he was pos-sessed of un-usual strength of body and of
char-ac-ter. His tangled beard, grizzled hair, and out-stand-ing, droop-ing
eye-brows com-bined to give an air of dig-nity and power to his
ap-pear-ance, but his face was of an ashen white, while his lips and the
corners of his nos-trils were tinged with a shade of blue. It was clear
to me at a glance that he was in the grip of some deadly and chronic
dis-ease.

“Pray sit down on the sofa,” said Holmes gently. “You had my note?”

“Yes, the lodge-keeper brought it up. You said that you wished to see
me here to avoid scan-dal.”

“I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall.”

“And why did you wish to see me?” He looked across at my com-pan-ion with
des-pair in his weary eyes, as though his ques-tion was already answered.

“Yes,” said Holmes, an-swer-ing the look rather than the words. “It is
so. I know all about McCarthy.”

The old man sank his face in his hands. “God help me!” he cried. “But I
would not have let the young man come to harm. I give you my word that
I would have spoken out if it went against him at the Ass-izes.”

“I am glad to hear you say so,” said Holmes gravely.

“I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It would
break her heart—it will break her heart when she hears that I am
ar-res-ted.”

“It may not come to that,” said Holmes.

“What?”

“I am no of-fi-cial agent. I un-der-stand that it was your daugh-ter who
re-quired my pres-ence here, and I am act-ing in her in-terests. Young
McCarthy must be got off, how-ever.”

“I am a dy-ing man,” said old Turner. “I have had dia-betes for years. My
doc-tor says it is a ques-tion whether I shall live a month. Yet I would
rather die un-der my own roof than in a gaol.”

Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand and a
bundle of pa-per be-fore him. “Just tell us the truth,” he said. “I shall
jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Wat-son here can wit-ness it.
Then I could pro-duce your con-fes-sion at the last ex-tremity to save
young McCarthy. I prom-ise you that I shall not use it un-less it is
ab-so-lutely needed.”

“It’s as well,” said the old man; “it’s a ques-tion whether I shall live
to the Ass-izes, so it mat-ters little to me, but I should wish to spare
Alice the shock. And now I will make the thing clear to you; it has
been a long time in the act-ing, but will not take me long to tell.

“You didn’t know this dead man, McCarthy. He was a devil in-carn-ate. I
tell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he.
His grip has been upon me these twenty years, and he has blas-ted my
life. I’ll tell you first how I came to be in his power.

“It was in the early ’60’s at the dig-gings. I was a young chap then,
hot-blooded and reck-less, ready to turn my hand at any-thing; I got
among bad com-pan-ions, took to drink, had no luck with my claim, took to
the bush, and in a word be-came what you would call over here a high-way
rob-ber. There were six of us, and we had a wild, free life of it,
stick-ing up a sta-tion from time to time, or stop-ping the wag-ons on the
road to the dig-gings. Black Jack of Bal-larat was the name I went un-der,
and our party is still re-membered in the colony as the Bal-larat Gang.

“One day a gold con-voy came down from Bal-larat to Mel-bourne, and we lay
in wait for it and at-tacked it. There were six troop-ers and six of us,
so it was a close thing, but we emp-tied four of their saddles at the
first vol-ley. Three of our boys were killed, how-ever, be-fore we got the
swag. I put my pis-tol to the head of the wagon-driver, who was this
very man McCarthy. I wish to the Lord that I had shot him then, but I
spared him, though I saw his wicked little eyes fixed on my face, as
though to re-mem-ber every fea-ture. We got away with the gold, be-came
wealthy men, and made our way over to Eng-land without be-ing sus-pec-ted.
There I par-ted from my old pals and de-term-ined to settle down to a
quiet and re-spect-able life. I bought this es-tate, which chanced to be
in the mar-ket, and I set my-self to do a little good with my money, to
make up for the way in which I had earned it. I mar-ried, too, and
though my wife died young she left me my dear little Alice. Even when
she was just a baby her wee hand seemed to lead me down the right path
as noth-ing else had ever done. In a word, I turned over a new leaf and
did my best to make up for the past. All was go-ing well when McCarthy
laid his grip upon me.

“I had gone up to town about an in-vest-ment, and I met him in Re-gent
Street with hardly a coat to his back or a boot to his foot.

“‘Here we are, Jack,’ says he, touch-ing me on the arm; ‘we’ll be as
good as a fam-ily to you. There’s two of us, me and my son, and you can
have the keep-ing of us. If you don’t—it’s a fine, law-abid-ing coun-try
is Eng-land, and there’s al-ways a po-lice-man within hail.’

“Well, down they came to the west coun-try, there was no shak-ing them
off, and there they have lived rent free on my best land ever since.
There was no rest for me, no peace, no for-get-ful-ness; turn where I
would, there was his cun-ning, grin-ning face at my el-bow. It grew worse
as Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was more afraid of her know-ing my
past than of the po-lice. Whatever he wanted he must have, and whatever
it was I gave him without ques-tion, land, money, houses, un-til at last
he asked a thing which I could not give. He asked for Alice.

“His son, you see, had grown up, and so had my girl, and as I was known
to be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke to him that his lad
should step into the whole prop-erty. But there I was firm. I would not
have his cursed stock mixed with mine; not that I had any dis-like to
the lad, but his blood was in him, and that was enough. I stood firm.
McCarthy threatened. I braved him to do his worst. We were to meet at
the pool mid-way between our houses to talk it over.

“When I went down there I found him talk-ing with his son, so I smoked a
ci-gar and waited be-hind a tree un-til he should be alone. But as I
listened to his talk all that was black and bit-ter in me seemed to come
up-per-most. He was ur-ging his son to marry my daugh-ter with as little
re-gard for what she might think as if she were a slut from off the
streets. It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held most dear
should be in the power of such a man as this. Could I not snap the
bond? I was already a dy-ing and a des-per-ate man. Though clear of mind
and fairly strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was sealed. But my
memory and my girl! Both could be saved if I could but si-lence that
foul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply as I
have sinned, I have led a life of mar-tyr-dom to atone for it. But that
my girl should be en-tangled in the same meshes which held me was more
than I could suf-fer. I struck him down with no more com-punc-tion than if
he had been some foul and venom-ous beast. His cry brought back his son;
but I had gained the cover of the wood, though I was forced to go back
to fetch the cloak which I had dropped in my flight. That is the true
story, gen-tle-men, of all that oc-curred.”

“Well, it is not for me to judge you,” said Holmes as the old man
signed the state-ment which had been drawn out. “I pray that we may
never be ex-posed to such a tempta-tion.”

“I pray not, sir. And what do you in-tend to do?”

“In view of your health, noth-ing. You are your-self aware that you will
soon have to an-swer for your deed at a higher court than the Ass-izes. I
will keep your con-fes-sion, and if McCarthy is con-demned I shall be
forced to use it. If not, it shall never be seen by mor-tal eye; and
your secret, whether you be alive or dead, shall be safe with us.”

“Farewell, then,” said the old man sol-emnly. “Your own deathbeds, when
they come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace which you
have given to mine.” Tot-ter-ing and shak-ing in all his gi-ant frame, he
stumbled slowly from the room.

“God help us!” said Holmes after a long si-lence. “Why does fate play
such tricks with poor, help-less worms? I never hear of such a case as
this that I do not think of Bax-ter’s words, and say, ‘There, but for
the grace of God, goes Sh-er-lock Holmes.’”

James McCarthy was ac-quit-ted at the Ass-izes on the strength of a num-ber
of ob-jec-tions which had been drawn out by Holmes and sub-mit-ted to the
de-fend-ing coun-sel. Old Turner lived for seven months after our
in-ter-view, but he is now dead; and there is every pro-spect that the son
and daugh-ter may come to live hap-pily to-gether in ig-nor-ance of the
black cloud which rests upon their past.



V. THE FIVE ORANGE PIPS

When I glance over my notes and re-cords of the Sh-er-lock Holmes cases
between the years ’82 and ’90, I am faced by so many which present
strange and in-ter-est-ing fea-tures that it is no easy mat-ter to know
which to choose and which to leave. Some, how-ever, have already gained
pub-li-city through the pa-pers, and oth-ers have not offered a field for
those pe-cu-liar qual-it-ies which my friend pos-sessed in so high a de-gree,
and which it is the ob-ject of these pa-pers to il-lus-trate. Some, too,
have baffled his ana-lyt-ical skill, and would be, as nar-rat-ives,
be-gin-nings without an end-ing, while oth-ers have been but par-tially
cleared up, and have their ex-plan-a-tions foun-ded rather upon con-jec-ture
and sur-mise than on that ab-so-lute lo-gical proof which was so dear to
him. There is, how-ever, one of these last which was so re-mark-able in
its de-tails and so start-ling in its res-ults that I am temp-ted to give
some ac-count of it in spite of the fact that there are points in
con-nec-tion with it which never have been, and prob-ably never will be,
en-tirely cleared up.

The year ’87 fur-nished us with a long series of cases of greater or
less in-terest, of which I re-tain the re-cords. Among my head-ings un-der
this one twelve months I find an ac-count of the ad-ven-ture of the
Paradol Cham-ber, of the Amateur Men-dic-ant So-ci-ety, who held a lux-uri-ous
club in the lower vault of a fur-niture ware-house, of the facts
con-nec-ted with the loss of the Brit-ish barque _Sophy Ander-son_, of the
sin-gu-lar ad-ven-tures of the Grice Pater-sons in the is-land of Uffa, and
fi-nally of the Cam-ber-well pois-on-ing case. In the lat-ter, as may be
re-membered, Sh-er-lock Holmes was able, by wind-ing up the dead man’s
watch, to prove that it had been wound up two hours be-fore, and that
there-fore the de-ceased had gone to bed within that time—a de-duc-tion
which was of the greatest im-port-ance in clear-ing up the case. All these
I may sketch out at some fu-ture date, but none of them present such
sin-gu-lar fea-tures as the strange train of cir-cum-stances which I have
now taken up my pen to de-scribe.

It was in the lat-ter days of Septem-ber, and the equi-noc-tial gales had
set in with ex-cep-tional vi-ol-ence. All day the wind had screamed and the
rain had beaten against the win-dows, so that even here in the heart of
great, hand-made Lon-don we were forced to raise our minds for the
in-stant from the routine of life and to re-cog-nise the pres-ence of those
great ele-mental forces which shriek at man-kind through the bars of his
civil-isa-tion, like un-tamed beasts in a cage. As even-ing drew in, the
storm grew higher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like a
child in the chim-ney. Sh-er-lock Holmes sat moodily at one side of the
fire-place cross-in-dex-ing his re-cords of crime, while I at the other was
deep in one of Clark Rus-sell’s fine sea-stor-ies un-til the howl of the
gale from without seemed to blend with the text, and the splash of the
rain to lengthen out into the long swash of the sea waves. My wife was
on a visit to her mother’s, and for a few days I was a dweller once
more in my old quar-ters at Baker Street.

“Why,” said I, glan-cing up at my com-pan-ion, “that was surely the bell.
Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, per-haps?”

“Ex-cept your-self I have none,” he answered. “I do not en-cour-age
vis-it-ors.”

“A cli-ent, then?”

“If so, it is a ser-i-ous case. Noth-ing less would bring a man out on
such a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely to
be some crony of the land-lady’s.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes was wrong in his con-jec-ture, how-ever, for there came a
step in the pas-sage and a tap-ping at the door. He stretched out his
long arm to turn the lamp away from him-self and to-wards the va-cant
chair upon which a new-comer must sit.

“Come in!” said he.

The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the out-side,
well-groomed and trimly clad, with some-thing of re-fine-ment and del-ic-acy
in his bear-ing. The stream-ing um-brella which he held in his hand, and
his long shin-ing wa-ter-proof told of the fierce weather through which he
had come. He looked about him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I
could see that his face was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of a
man who is weighed down with some great anxi-ety.

“I owe you an apo-logy,” he said, rais-ing his golden pince-nez to his
eyes. “I trust that I am not in-trud-ing. I fear that I have brought some
traces of the storm and rain into your snug cham-ber.”

“Give me your coat and um-brella,” said Holmes. “They may rest here on
the hook and will be dry presently. You have come up from the
south-west, I see.”

“Yes, from Hor-sham.”

“That clay and chalk mix-ture which I see upon your toe caps is quite
dis-tinct-ive.”

“I have come for ad-vice.”

“That is eas-ily got.”

“And help.”

“That is not al-ways so easy.”

“I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Ma-jor Prender-gast how
you saved him in the Tankerville Club scan-dal.”

“Ah, of course. He was wrong-fully ac-cused of cheat-ing at cards.”

“He said that you could solve any-thing.”

“He said too much.”

“That you are never beaten.”

“I have been beaten four times—three times by men, and once by a
wo-man.”

“But what is that com-pared with the num-ber of your suc-cesses?”

“It is true that I have been gen-er-ally suc-cess-ful.”

“Then you may be so with me.”

“I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and fa-vour me with
some de-tails as to your case.”

“It is no or-din-ary one.”

“None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of ap-peal.”

“And yet I ques-tion, sir, whether, in all your ex-per-i-ence, you have
ever listened to a more mys-ter-i-ous and in-ex-plic-able chain of events
than those which have happened in my own fam-ily.”

“You fill me with in-terest,” said Holmes. “Pray give us the es-sen-tial
facts from the com-mence-ment, and I can af-ter-wards ques-tion you as to
those de-tails which seem to me to be most im-port-ant.”

The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out to-wards
the blaze.

“My name,” said he, “is John Open-shaw, but my own af-fairs have, as far
as I can un-der-stand, little to do with this aw-ful busi-ness. It is a
hered-it-ary mat-ter; so in or-der to give you an idea of the facts, I must
go back to the com-mence-ment of the af-fair.

“You must know that my grand-father had two sons—my uncle Elias and my
father Joseph. My father had a small fact-ory at Coventry, which he
en-larged at the time of the in-ven-tion of bi-cyc-ling. He was a pat-entee
of the Open-shaw un-break-able tire, and his busi-ness met with such
suc-cess that he was able to sell it and to re-tire upon a hand-some
com-pet-ence.

“My uncle Elias emig-rated to Amer-ica when he was a young man and be-came
a planter in Flor-ida, where he was re-por-ted to have done very well. At
the time of the war he fought in Jack-son’s army, and af-ter-wards un-der
Hood, where he rose to be a col-onel. When Lee laid down his arms my
uncle re-turned to his plant-a-tion, where he re-mained for three or four
years. About 1869 or 1870 he came back to Europe and took a small
es-tate in Sus-sex, near Hor-sham. He had made a very con-sid-er-able for-tune
in the States, and his reason for leav-ing them was his aver-sion to the
negroes, and his dis-like of the Re-pub-lican policy in ex-tend-ing the
fran-chise to them. He was a sin-gu-lar man, fierce and quick-tempered,
very foul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a most re-tir-ing
dis-pos-i-tion. Dur-ing all the years that he lived at Hor-sham, I doubt if
ever he set foot in the town. He had a garden and two or three fields
round his house, and there he would take his ex-er-cise, though very
of-ten for weeks on end he would never leave his room. He drank a great
deal of brandy and smoked very heav-ily, but he would see no so-ci-ety and
did not want any friends, not even his own brother.

“He didn’t mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the time
when he saw me first I was a young-ster of twelve or so. This would be
in the year 1878, after he had been eight or nine years in Eng-land. He
begged my father to let me live with him and he was very kind to me in
his way. When he was sober he used to be fond of play-ing back-gam-mon and
draughts with me, and he would make me his rep-res-ent-at-ive both with the
ser-vants and with the trades-people, so that by the time that I was
six-teen I was quite mas-ter of the house. I kept all the keys and could
go where I liked and do what I liked, so long as I did not dis-turb him
in his pri-vacy. There was one sin-gu-lar ex-cep-tion, how-ever, for he had a
single room, a lum-ber-room up among the at-tics, which was in-vari-ably
locked, and which he would never per-mit either me or any-one else to
enter. With a boy’s curi-os-ity I have peeped through the key-hole, but I
was never able to see more than such a col-lec-tion of old trunks and
bundles as would be ex-pec-ted in such a room.

“One day—it was in March, 1883—a let-ter with a for-eign stamp lay upon
the table in front of the col-onel’s plate. It was not a com-mon thing
for him to re-ceive let-ters, for his bills were all paid in ready money,
and he had no friends of any sort. ‘From In-dia!’ said he as he took it
up, ‘Pon-di-ch-erry post-mark! What can this be?’ Open-ing it hur-riedly, out
there jumped five little dried or-ange pips, which pattered down upon
his plate. I began to laugh at this, but the laugh was struck from my
lips at the sight of his face. His lip had fallen, his eyes were
pro-trud-ing, his skin the col-our of putty, and he glared at the en-vel-ope
which he still held in his trem-bling hand, ‘K. K. K.!’ he shrieked, and
then, ‘My God, my God, my sins have over-taken me!’

“‘What is it, uncle?’ I cried.

“‘Death,’ said he, and rising from the table he re-tired to his room,
leav-ing me pal-pit-at-ing with hor-ror. I took up the en-vel-ope and saw
scrawled in red ink upon the in-ner flap, just above the gum, the let-ter
K three times re-peated. There was noth-ing else save the five dried
pips. What could be the reason of his over-power-ing ter-ror? I left the
break-fast-table, and as I as-cen-ded the stair I met him com-ing down with
an old rusty key, which must have be-longed to the at-tic, in one hand,
and a small brass box, like a cash-box, in the other.

“‘They may do what they like, but I’ll check-mate them still,’ said he
with an oath. ‘Tell Mary that I shall want a fire in my room to-day,
and send down to Ford-ham, the Hor-sham law-yer.’

“I did as he ordered, and when the law-yer ar-rived I was asked to step
up to the room. The fire was burn-ing brightly, and in the grate there
was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned pa-per, while the brass
box stood open and empty be-side it. As I glanced at the box I no-ticed,
with a start, that upon the lid was prin-ted the treble K which I had
read in the morn-ing upon the en-vel-ope.

“‘I wish you, John,’ said my uncle, ‘to wit-ness my will. I leave my
es-tate, with all its ad-vant-ages and all its dis-ad-vant-ages, to my
brother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, des-cend to you. If you
can en-joy it in peace, well and good! If you find you can-not, take my
ad-vice, my boy, and leave it to your dead-li-est en-emy. I am sorry to
give you such a two-edged thing, but I can’t say what turn things are
go-ing to take. Kindly sign the pa-per where Mr. Ford-ham shows you.’

“I signed the pa-per as dir-ec-ted, and the law-yer took it away with him.
The sin-gu-lar in-cid-ent made, as you may think, the deep-est im-pres-sion
upon me, and I pondered over it and turned it every way in my mind
without be-ing able to make any-thing of it. Yet I could not shake off
the vague feel-ing of dread which it left be-hind, though the sen-sa-tion
grew less keen as the weeks passed and noth-ing happened to dis-turb the
usual routine of our lives. I could see a change in my uncle, how-ever.
He drank more than ever, and he was less in-clined for any sort of
so-ci-ety. Most of his time he would spend in his room, with the door
locked upon the in-side, but some-times he would emerge in a sort of
drunken frenzy and would burst out of the house and tear about the
garden with a re-volver in his hand, scream-ing out that he was afraid of
no man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like a sheep in a pen, by
man or devil. When these hot fits were over, how-ever, he would rush
tu-mul-tu-ously in at the door and lock and bar it be-hind him, like a man
who can brazen it out no longer against the ter-ror which lies at the
roots of his soul. At such times I have seen his face, even on a cold
day, glisten with mois-ture, as though it were new raised from a basin.

“Well, to come to an end of the mat-ter, Mr. Holmes, and not to ab-use
your pa-tience, there came a night when he made one of those drunken
sal-lies from which he never came back. We found him, when we went to
search for him, face down-ward in a little green-scummed pool, which lay
at the foot of the garden. There was no sign of any vi-ol-ence, and the
wa-ter was but two feet deep, so that the jury, hav-ing re-gard to his
known ec-cent-ri-city, brought in a ver-dict of ‘sui-cide.’ But I, who knew
how he winced from the very thought of death, had much ado to per-suade
my-self that he had gone out of his way to meet it. The mat-ter passed,
how-ever, and my father entered into pos-ses-sion of the es-tate, and of
some £ 14,000, which lay to his credit at the bank.”

“One mo-ment,” Holmes in-ter-posed, “your state-ment is, I fore-see, one of
the most re-mark-able to which I have ever listened. Let me have the date
of the re-cep-tion by your uncle of the let-ter, and the date of his
sup-posed sui-cide.”

“The let-ter ar-rived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks later,
upon the night of May 2nd.”

“Thank you. Pray pro-ceed.”

“When my father took over the Hor-sham prop-erty, he, at my re-quest, made
a care-ful ex-am-in-a-tion of the at-tic, which had been al-ways locked up. We
found the brass box there, al-though its con-tents had been des-troyed. On
the in-side of the cover was a pa-per la-bel, with the ini-tials of K. K.
K. re-peated upon it, and ‘Let-ters, memor-anda, re-ceipts, and a re-gister’
writ-ten be-neath. These, we pre-sume, in-dic-ated the nature of the pa-pers
which had been des-troyed by Co-l-onel Open-shaw. For the rest, there was
noth-ing of much im-port-ance in the at-tic save a great many scattered
pa-pers and note-books bear-ing upon my uncle’s life in Amer-ica. Some of
them were of the war time and showed that he had done his duty well and
had borne the re-pute of a brave sol-dier. Oth-ers were of a date dur-ing
the re-con-struc-tion of the South-ern states, and were mostly con-cerned
with polit-ics, for he had evid-ently taken a strong part in op-pos-ing the
car-pet-bag politi-cians who had been sent down from the North.

“Well, it was the be-gin-ning of ’84 when my father came to live at
Hor-sham, and all went as well as pos-sible with us un-til the Janu-ary of
’85. On the fourth day after the new year I heard my father give a
sharp cry of sur-prise as we sat to-gether at the break-fast-table. There
he was, sit-ting with a newly opened en-vel-ope in one hand and five dried
or-ange pips in the out-stretched palm of the other one. He had al-ways
laughed at what he called my cock-and-bull story about the col-onel, but
he looked very scared and puzzled now that the same thing had come upon
him-self.

“‘Why, what on earth does this mean, John?’ he stammered.

“My heart had turned to lead. ‘It is K. K. K.,’ said I.

“He looked in-side the en-vel-ope. ‘So it is,’ he cried. ‘Here are the
very let-ters. But what is this writ-ten above them?’

“‘Put the pa-pers on the sun-dial,’ I read, peep-ing over his shoulder.

“‘What pa-pers? What sun-dial?’ he asked.

“‘The sun-dial in the garden. There is no other,’ said I; ‘but the
pa-pers must be those that are des-troyed.’

“‘Pooh!’ said he, grip-ping hard at his cour-age. ‘We are in a civ-il-ised
land here, and we can’t have tom-fool-ery of this kind. Where does the
thing come from?’

“‘From Dun-dee,’ I answered, glan-cing at the post-mark.

“‘Some pre-pos-ter-ous prac-tical joke,’ said he. ‘What have I to do with
sun-di-als and pa-pers? I shall take no no-tice of such non-sense.’

“‘I should cer-tainly speak to the po-lice,’ I said.

“‘And be laughed at for my pains. Noth-ing of the sort.’

“‘Then let me do so?’

“‘No, I for-bid you. I won’t have a fuss made about such non-sense.’

“It was in vain to ar-gue with him, for he was a very ob-stin-ate man. I
went about, how-ever, with a heart which was full of fore-bod-ings.

“On the third day after the com-ing of the let-ter my father went from
home to visit an old friend of his, Ma-jor Free-body, who is in com-mand
of one of the forts upon Ports-down Hill. I was glad that he should go,
for it seemed to me that he was farther from danger when he was away
from home. In that, how-ever, I was in er-ror. Upon the second day of his
ab-sence I re-ceived a tele-gram from the ma-jor, im-plor-ing me to come at
once. My father had fallen over one of the deep chalk-pits which abound
in the neigh-bour-hood, and was ly-ing sense-less, with a shattered skull.
I hur-ried to him, but he passed away without hav-ing ever re-covered his
con-scious-ness. He had, as it ap-pears, been re-turn-ing from Fare-ham in
the twi-light, and as the coun-try was un-known to him, and the chalk-pit
un-fenced, the jury had no hes-it-a-tion in bring-ing in a ver-dict of ‘death
from ac-ci-dental causes.’ Care-fully as I ex-amined every fact con-nec-ted
with his death, I was un-able to find any-thing which could sug-gest the
idea of murder. There were no signs of vi-ol-ence, no foot-marks, no
rob-bery, no re-cord of strangers hav-ing been seen upon the roads. And
yet I need not tell you that my mind was far from at ease, and that I
was well-nigh cer-tain that some foul plot had been woven round him.

“In this sin-is-ter way I came into my in-her-it-ance. You will ask me why I
did not dis-pose of it? I an-swer, be-cause I was well con-vinced that our
troubles were in some way de-pend-ent upon an in-cid-ent in my uncle’s
life, and that the danger would be as press-ing in one house as in
an-other.

“It was in Janu-ary, ’85, that my poor father met his end, and two years
and eight months have elapsed since then. Dur-ing that time I have lived
hap-pily at Hor-sham, and I had be-gun to hope that this curse had passed
away from the fam-ily, and that it had ended with the last gen-er-a-tion. I
had be-gun to take com-fort too soon, how-ever; yes-ter-day morn-ing the blow
fell in the very shape in which it had come upon my father.”

The young man took from his waist-coat a crumpled en-vel-ope, and turn-ing
to the table he shook out upon it five little dried or-ange pips.

“This is the en-vel-ope,” he con-tin-ued. “The post-mark is Lon-don—east-ern
di-vi-sion. Within are the very words which were upon my father’s last
mes-sage: ‘K. K. K.’; and then ‘Put the pa-pers on the sun-dial.’”

“What have you done?” asked Holmes.

“Noth-ing.”

“Noth-ing?”

“To tell the truth”—he sank his face into his thin, white hands—“I have
felt help-less. I have felt like one of those poor rab-bits when the
snake is writh-ing to-wards it. I seem to be in the grasp of some
res-ist-less, in-ex-or-able evil, which no foresight and no pre-cau-tions can
guard against.”

“Tut! tut!” cried Sh-er-lock Holmes. “You must act, man, or you are lost.
Noth-ing but en-ergy can save you. This is no time for des-pair.”

“I have seen the po-lice.”

“Ah!”

“But they listened to my story with a smile. I am con-vinced that the
in-spector has formed the opin-ion that the let-ters are all prac-tical
jokes, and that the deaths of my re-la-tions were really ac-ci-dents, as
the jury stated, and were not to be con-nec-ted with the warn-ings.”

Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. “In-cred-ible im-be-cil-ity!” he
cried.

“They have, how-ever, al-lowed me a po-lice-man, who may re-main in the
house with me.”

“Has he come with you to-night?”

“No. His or-ders were to stay in the house.”

Again Holmes raved in the air.

“Why did you come to me?” he said, “and, above all, why did you not
come at once?”

“I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Ma-jor Prender-gast
about my troubles and was ad-vised by him to come to you.”

“It is really two days since you had the let-ter. We should have ac-ted
be-fore this. You have no fur-ther evid-ence, I sup-pose, than that which
you have placed be-fore us—no sug-gest-ive de-tail which might help us?”

“There is one thing,” said John Open-shaw. He rum-maged in his coat
pocket, and, draw-ing out a piece of dis-col-oured, blue-tin-ted pa-per, he
laid it out upon the table. “I have some re-mem-brance,” said he, “that
on the day when my uncle burned the pa-pers I ob-served that the small,
un-burned mar-gins which lay amid the ashes were of this par-tic-u-lar
col-our. I found this single sheet upon the floor of his room, and I am
in-clined to think that it may be one of the pa-pers which has, per-haps,
fluttered out from among the oth-ers, and in that way has es-caped
de-struc-tion. Bey-ond the men-tion of pips, I do not see that it helps us
much. I think my-self that it is a page from some private di-ary. The
writ-ing is un-doubtedly my uncle’s.”

Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of pa-per, which
showed by its ragged edge that it had in-deed been torn from a book. It
was headed, “March, 1869,” and be-neath were the fol-low-ing en-ig-mat-ical
no-tices:

“4th. Hud-son came. Same old plat-form.

“7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Para-more, and John Swain of St.
Augustine.

“9th. McCauley cleared.

“10th. John Swain cleared.

“12th. Vis-ited Para-more. All well.”

“Thank you!” said Holmes, fold-ing up the pa-per and re-turn-ing it to our
vis-itor. “And now you must on no ac-count lose an-other in-stant. We
can-not spare time even to dis-cuss what you have told me. You must get
home in-stantly and act.”

“What shall I do?”

“There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must put
this piece of pa-per which you have shown us into the brass box which
you have de-scribed. You must also put in a note to say that all the
other pa-pers were burned by your uncle, and that this is the only one
which re-mains. You must as-sert that in such words as will carry
con-vic-tion with them. Hav-ing done this, you must at once put the box
out upon the sun-dial, as dir-ec-ted. Do you un-der-stand?”

“Entirely.”

“Do not think of re-venge, or any-thing of the sort, at present. I think
that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our web to
weave, while theirs is already woven. The first con-sid-er-a-tion is to
re-move the press-ing danger which threatens you. The second is to clear
up the mys-tery and to pun-ish the guilty parties.”

“I thank you,” said the young man, rising and pulling on his over-coat.
“You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall cer-tainly do as you
ad-vise.”

“Do not lose an in-stant. And, above all, take care of your-self in the
mean-while, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that you are
threatened by a very real and im-min-ent danger. How do you go back?”

“By train from Water-loo.”

“It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so I trust that you
may be in safety. And yet you can-not guard your-self too closely.”

“I am armed.”

“That is well. To-mor-row I shall set to work upon your case.”

“I shall see you at Hor-sham, then?”

“No, your secret lies in Lon-don. It is there that I shall seek it.”

“Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as to
the box and the pa-pers. I shall take your ad-vice in every par-tic-u-lar.”
He shook hands with us and took his leave. Out-side the wind still
screamed and the rain splashed and pattered against the win-dows. This
strange, wild story seemed to have come to us from amid the mad
ele-ments—blown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a gale—and now to
have been re-ab-sorbed by them once more.

Sh-er-lock Holmes sat for some time in si-lence, with his head sunk
for-ward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire. Then he lit
his pipe, and lean-ing back in his chair he watched the blue smoke-rings
as they chased each other up to the ceil-ing.

“I think, Wat-son,” he re-marked at last, “that of all our cases we have
had none more fant-astic than this.”

“Save, per-haps, the Sign of Four.”

“Well, yes. Save, per-haps, that. And yet this John Open-shaw seems to me
to be walk-ing amid even greater per-ils than did the Shol-tos.”

“But have you,” I asked, “formed any def-in-ite con-cep-tion as to what
these per-ils are?”

“There can be no ques-tion as to their nature,” he answered.

“Then what are they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pur-sue this
un-happy fam-ily?”

Sh-er-lock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his el-bows upon the arms of
his chair, with his fin-ger-tips to-gether. “The ideal reasoner,” he
re-marked, “would, when he had once been shown a single fact in all its
bear-ings, de-duce from it not only all the chain of events which led up
to it but also all the res-ults which would fol-low from it. As Cuvier
could cor-rectly de-scribe a whole an-imal by the con-tem-pla-tion of a
single bone, so the ob-server who has thor-oughly un-der-stood one link in
a series of in-cid-ents should be able to ac-cur-ately state all the other
ones, both be-fore and after. We have not yet grasped the res-ults which
the reason alone can at-tain to. Prob-lems may be solved in the study
which have baffled all those who have sought a solu-tion by the aid of
their senses. To carry the art, how-ever, to its highest pitch, it is
ne-ces-sary that the reasoner should be able to util-ise all the facts
which have come to his know-ledge; and this in it-self im-plies, as you
will read-ily see, a pos-ses-sion of all know-ledge, which, even in these
days of free edu-ca-tion and en-cyc-lopæ-dias, is a some-what rare
ac-com-plish-ment. It is not so im-possible, how-ever, that a man should
pos-sess all know-ledge which is likely to be use-ful to him in his work,
and this I have en-deav-oured in my case to do. If I re-mem-ber rightly,
you on one oc-ca-sion, in the early days of our friend-ship, defined my
lim-its in a very pre-cise fash-ion.”

“Yes,” I answered, laugh-ing. “It was a sin-gu-lar doc-u-ment. Philo-sophy,
as-tro-nomy, and polit-ics were marked at zero, I re-mem-ber. Botany
vari-able, geo-logy pro-found as re-gards the mud-stains from any re-gion
within fifty miles of town, chem-istry ec-cent-ric, ana-tomy un-sys-tem-atic,
sen-sa-tional lit-er-at-ure and crime re-cords unique, vi-olin-player, boxer,
swords-man, law-yer, and self-pois-oner by co-caine and to-bacco. Those, I
think, were the main points of my ana-lysis.”

Holmes grinned at the last item. “Well,” he said, “I say now, as I said
then, that a man should keep his little brain-at-tic stocked with all
the fur-niture that he is likely to use, and the rest he can put away in
the lum-ber-room of his lib-rary, where he can get it if he wants it.
Now, for such a case as the one which has been sub-mit-ted to us
to-night, we need cer-tainly to muster all our re-sources. Kindly hand me
down the let-ter K of the _Amer-ican En-cyc-lopæ-dia_ which stands upon the
shelf be-side you. Thank you. Now let us con-sider the situ-ation and see
what may be de-duced from it. In the first place, we may start with a
strong pre-sump-tion that Co-l-onel Open-shaw had some very strong reason
for leav-ing Amer-ica. Men at his time of life do not change all their
habits and ex-change will-ingly the charm-ing cli-mate of Flor-ida for the
lonely life of an Eng-lish pro-vin-cial town. His ex-treme love of solitude
in Eng-land sug-gests the idea that he was in fear of someone or
some-thing, so we may as-sume as a work-ing hy-po-thesis that it was fear of
someone or some-thing which drove him from Amer-ica. As to what it was he
feared, we can only de-duce that by con-sid-er-ing the for-mid-able let-ters
which were re-ceived by him-self and his suc-cessors. Did you re-mark the
post-marks of those let-ters?”

“The first was from Pon-di-ch-erry, the second from Dun-dee, and the third
from Lon-don.”

“From East Lon-don. What do you de-duce from that?”

“They are all sea-ports. That the writer was on board of a ship.”

“Ex-cel-lent. We have already a clue. There can be no doubt that the
prob-ab-il-ity—the strong prob-ab-il-ity—is that the writer was on board of a
ship. And now let us con-sider an-other point. In the case of
Pon-di-ch-erry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its ful-fil-ment,
in Dun-dee it was only some three or four days. Does that sug-gest
any-thing?”

“A greater dis-tance to travel.”

“But the let-ter had also a greater dis-tance to come.”

“Then I do not see the point.”

“There is at least a pre-sump-tion that the ves-sel in which the man or
men are is a sail-ing-ship. It looks as if they al-ways send their
sin-gu-lar warn-ing or token be-fore them when start-ing upon their mis-sion.
You see how quickly the deed fol-lowed the sign when it came from
Dun-dee. If they had come from Pon-di-ch-erry in a steamer they would have
ar-rived al-most as soon as their let-ter. But, as a mat-ter of fact, seven
weeks elapsed. I think that those seven weeks rep-res-en-ted the
dif-fer-ence between the mail-boat which brought the let-ter and the
sail-ing ves-sel which brought the writer.”

“It is pos-sible.”

“More than that. It is prob-able. And now you see the deadly ur-gency of
this new case, and why I urged young Open-shaw to cau-tion. The blow has
al-ways fallen at the end of the time which it would take the senders to
travel the dis-tance. But this one comes from Lon-don, and there-fore we
can-not count upon delay.”

“Good God!” I cried. “What can it mean, this re-lent-less per-se-cu-tion?”

“The pa-pers which Open-shaw car-ried are ob-vi-ously of vi-tal im-port-ance to
the per-son or per-sons in the sail-ing-ship. I think that it is quite
clear that there must be more than one of them. A single man could not
have car-ried out two deaths in such a way as to de-ceive a cor-oner’s
jury. There must have been sev-eral in it, and they must have been men
of re-source and de-term-in-a-tion. Their pa-pers they mean to have, be the
holder of them who it may. In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to be
the ini-tials of an in-di-vidual and be-comes the badge of a so-ci-ety.”

“But of what so-ci-ety?”

“Have you never—” said Sh-er-lock Holmes, bend-ing for-ward and sink-ing his
voice—“have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?”

“I never have.”

Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee. “Here it is,”
said he presently:

“‘Ku Klux Klan. A name de-rived from the fanci-ful re-semb-lance to the
sound pro-duced by cock-ing a rifle. This ter-rible secret so-ci-ety was
formed by some ex-Con-fed-er-ate sol-diers in the South-ern states after the
Civil War, and it rap-idly formed local branches in dif-fer-ent parts of
the coun-try, not-ably in Ten-nessee, Louisi-ana, the Caro-li-nas, Ge-or-gia,
and Flor-ida. Its power was used for polit-ical pur-poses, prin-cip-ally for
the ter-ror-ising of the negro voters and the mur-der-ing and driv-ing from
the coun-try of those who were op-posed to its views. Its out-rages were
usu-ally pre-ceded by a warn-ing sent to the marked man in some fant-astic
but gen-er-ally re-cog-nised shape—a sprig of oak-leaves in some parts,
melon seeds or or-ange pips in oth-ers. On re-ceiv-ing this the vic-tim
might either openly ab-jure his former ways, or might fly from the
coun-try. If he braved the mat-ter out, death would un-fail-ingly come upon
him, and usu-ally in some strange and un-fore-seen man-ner. So per-fect was
the or-gan-isa-tion of the so-ci-ety, and so sys-tem-atic its meth-ods, that
there is hardly a case upon re-cord where any man suc-ceeded in brav-ing
it with im-pun-ity, or in which any of its out-rages were traced home to
the per-pet-rat-ors. For some years the or-gan-isa-tion flour-ished in spite
of the ef-forts of the Un-ited States gov-ern-ment and of the bet-ter
classes of the com-munity in the South. Even-tu-ally, in the year 1869,
the move-ment rather sud-denly col-lapsed, al-though there have been
sporadic out-breaks of the same sort since that date.’

“You will ob-serve,” said Holmes, lay-ing down the volume, “that the
sud-den break-ing up of the so-ci-ety was co-in-cid-ent with the dis-ap-pear-ance
of Open-shaw from Amer-ica with their pa-pers. It may well have been cause
and ef-fect. It is no won-der that he and his fam-ily have some of the
more im-plac-able spir-its upon their track. You can un-der-stand that this
re-gister and di-ary may im-plic-ate some of the first men in the South,
and that there may be many who will not sleep easy at night un-til it is
re-covered.”

“Then the page we have seen—”

“Is such as we might ex-pect. It ran, if I re-mem-ber right, ‘sent the
pips to A, B, and C’—that is, sent the so-ci-ety’s warn-ing to them. Then
there are suc-cess-ive entries that A and B cleared, or left the coun-try,
and fi-nally that C was vis-ited, with, I fear, a sin-is-ter res-ult for C.
Well, I think, Doc-tor, that we may let some light into this dark place,
and I be-lieve that the only chance young Open-shaw has in the mean-time
is to do what I have told him. There is noth-ing more to be said or to
be done to-night, so hand me over my vi-olin and let us try to for-get
for half an hour the miser-able weather and the still more miser-able
ways of our fel-low men.”

It had cleared in the morn-ing, and the sun was shin-ing with a sub-dued
bright-ness through the dim veil which hangs over the great city.
Sh-er-lock Holmes was already at break-fast when I came down.

“You will ex-cuse me for not wait-ing for you,” said he; “I have, I
fore-see, a very busy day be-fore me in look-ing into this case of young
Open-shaw’s.”

“What steps will you take?” I asked.

“It will very much de-pend upon the res-ults of my first in-quir-ies. I may
have to go down to Hor-sham, after all.”

“You will not go there first?”

“No, I shall com-mence with the City. Just ring the bell and the maid
will bring up your cof-fee.”

As I waited, I lif-ted the un-opened news-pa-per from the table and glanced
my eye over it. It res-ted upon a head-ing which sent a chill to my
heart.

“Holmes,” I cried, “you are too late.”

“Ah!” said he, lay-ing down his cup, “I feared as much. How was it
done?” He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.

“My eye caught the name of Open-shaw, and the head-ing ‘Tragedy Near
Water-loo Bridge.’ Here is the ac-count:

“‘Between nine and ten last night Po-lice-Con-stable Cook, of the H
Di-vi-sion, on duty near Water-loo Bridge, heard a cry for help and a
splash in the wa-ter. The night, how-ever, was ex-tremely dark and stormy,
so that, in spite of the help of sev-eral pass-ers-by, it was quite
im-possible to ef-fect a res-cue. The alarm, how-ever, was given, and, by
the aid of the wa-ter-po-lice, the body was even-tu-ally re-covered. It
proved to be that of a young gen-tle-man whose name, as it ap-pears from
an en-vel-ope which was found in his pocket, was John Open-shaw, and whose
res-id-ence is near Hor-sham. It is con-jec-tured that he may have been
hur-ry-ing down to catch the last train from Water-loo Sta-tion, and that
in his haste and the ex-treme dark-ness he missed his path and walked
over the edge of one of the small land-ing-places for river steam-boats.
The body ex-hib-ited no traces of vi-ol-ence, and there can be no doubt
that the de-ceased had been the vic-tim of an un-for-tu-nate ac-ci-dent, which
should have the ef-fect of call-ing the at-ten-tion of the au-thor-it-ies to
the con-di-tion of the river-side land-ing-stages.’”

We sat in si-lence for some minutes, Holmes more de-pressed and shaken
than I had ever seen him.

“That hurts my pride, Wat-son,” he said at last. “It is a petty feel-ing,
no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It be-comes a per-sonal mat-ter with me
now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my hand upon this gang.
That he should come to me for help, and that I should send him away to
his death—!” He sprang from his chair and paced about the room in
un-con-trol-lable agit-a-tion, with a flush upon his sal-low cheeks and a
nervous clasp-ing and un-clasp-ing of his long thin hands.

“They must be cun-ning dev-ils,” he ex-claimed at last. “How could they
have de-coyed him down there? The Em-bank-ment is not on the dir-ect line
to the sta-tion. The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such a
night, for their pur-pose. Well, Wat-son, we shall see who will win in
the long run. I am go-ing out now!”

“To the po-lice?”

“No; I shall be my own po-lice. When I have spun the web they may take
the flies, but not be-fore.”

All day I was en-gaged in my pro-fes-sional work, and it was late in the
even-ing be-fore I re-turned to Baker Street. Sh-er-lock Holmes had not come
back yet. It was nearly ten o’clock be-fore he entered, look-ing pale and
worn. He walked up to the side-board, and tear-ing a piece from the loaf
he de-voured it vo-ra-ciously, wash-ing it down with a long draught of
wa-ter.

“You are hungry,” I re-marked.

“Starving. It had es-caped my memory. I have had noth-ing since
break-fast.”

“Noth-ing?”

“Not a bite. I had no time to think of it.”

“And how have you suc-ceeded?”

“Well.”

“You have a clue?”

“I have them in the hol-low of my hand. Young Open-shaw shall not long
re-main un-avenged. Why, Wat-son, let us put their own dev-il-ish trade-mark
upon them. It is well thought of!”

“What do you mean?”

He took an or-ange from the cup-board, and tear-ing it to pieces he
squeezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five and thrust
them into an en-vel-ope. On the in-side of the flap he wrote “S. H. for J.
O.” Then he sealed it and ad-dressed it to “Cap-tain James Cal-houn,
Barque _Lone Star_, Sa-van-nah, Ge-or-gia.”

“That will await him when he enters port,” said he, chuck-ling. “It may
give him a sleep-less night. He will find it as sure a pre-cursor of his
fate as Open-shaw did be-fore him.”

“And who is this Cap-tain Cal-houn?”

“The leader of the gang. I shall have the oth-ers, but he first.”

“How did you trace it, then?”

He took a large sheet of pa-per from his pocket, all covered with dates
and names.

“I have spent the whole day,” said he, “over Lloyd’s re-gisters and
files of the old pa-pers, fol-low-ing the fu-ture ca-reer of every ves-sel
which touched at Pon-di-ch-erry in Janu-ary and Febru-ary in ’83. There were
thirty-six ships of fair ton-nage which were re-por-ted there dur-ing those
months. Of these, one, the _Lone Star_, in-stantly at-trac-ted my
at-ten-tion, since, al-though it was re-por-ted as hav-ing cleared from
Lon-don, the name is that which is given to one of the states of the
Union.”

“Texas, I think.”

“I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship must have an
Amer-ican ori-gin.”

“What then?”

“I searched the Dun-dee re-cords, and when I found that the barque _Lone
Star_ was there in Janu-ary, ’85, my sus-pi-cion be-came a cer-tainty. I
then in-quired as to the ves-sels which lay at present in the port of
Lon-don.”

“Yes?”

“The _Lone Star_ had ar-rived here last week. I went down to the Al-bert
Dock and found that she had been taken down the river by the early tide
this morn-ing, home-ward bound to Sa-van-nah. I wired to Gravesend and
learned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind is east-erly
I have no doubt that she is now past the Good-wins and not very far from
the Isle of Wight.”

“What will you do, then?”

“Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are as I learn, the
only nat-ive-born Amer-ic-ans in the ship. The oth-ers are Finns and
Ger-mans. I know, also, that they were all three away from the ship last
night. I had it from the steve-dore who has been load-ing their cargo. By
the time that their sail-ing-ship reaches Sa-van-nah the mail-boat will
have car-ried this let-ter, and the cable will have in-formed the po-lice
of Sa-van-nah that these three gen-tle-men are badly wanted here upon a
charge of murder.”

There is ever a flaw, how-ever, in the best laid of hu-man plans, and the
mur-der-ers of John Open-shaw were never to re-ceive the or-ange pips which
would show them that an-other, as cun-ning and as res-ol-ute as them-selves,
was upon their track. Very long and very severe were the equi-noc-tial
gales that year. We waited long for news of the _Lone Star_ of
Sa-van-nah, but none ever reached us. We did at last hear that some-where
far out in the At-lantic a shattered stern-post of a boat was seen
swinging in the trough of a wave, with the let-ters “L. S.” carved upon
it, and that is all which we shall ever know of the fate of the _Lone
Star_.



VI. THE MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIP

Isa Whit-ney, brother of the late Elias Whit-ney, D.D., Prin-cipal of the
Theolo-gical Col-lege of St. Ge-orge’s, was much ad-dicted to opium. The
habit grew upon him, as I un-der-stand, from some fool-ish freak when he
was at col-lege; for hav-ing read De Quin-cey’s de-scrip-tion of his dreams
and sen-sa-tions, he had drenched his to-bacco with laudanum in an at-tempt
to pro-duce the same ef-fects. He found, as so many more have done, that
the prac-tice is easier to at-tain than to get rid of, and for many years
he con-tin-ued to be a slave to the drug, an ob-ject of mingled hor-ror and
pity to his friends and re-l-at-ives. I can see him now, with yel-low,
pasty face, droop-ing lids, and pin-point pu-pils, all huddled in a
chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble man.

One night—it was in June, ’89—there came a ring to my bell, about the
hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the clock. I sat up
in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work down in her lap and made
a little face of dis-ap-point-ment.

“A pa-tient!” said she. “You’ll have to go out.”

I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.

We heard the door open, a few hur-ried words, and then quick steps upon
the li-no-leum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in some
dark-col-oured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.

“You will ex-cuse my call-ing so late,” she began, and then, sud-denly
los-ing her self-con-trol, she ran for-ward, threw her arms about my
wife’s neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. “Oh, I’m in such trouble!”
she cried; “I do so want a little help.”

“Why,” said my wife, pulling up her veil, “it is Kate Whit-ney. How you
startled me, Kate! I had not an idea who you were when you came in.”

“I didn’t know what to do, so I came straight to you.” That was al-ways
the way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds to a
light-house.

“It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine and
wa-ter, and sit here com-fort-ably and tell us all about it. Or should you
rather that I sent James off to bed?”

“Oh, no, no! I want the doc-tor’s ad-vice and help, too. It’s about Isa.
He has not been home for two days. I am so frightened about him!”

It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her hus-band’s
trouble, to me as a doc-tor, to my wife as an old friend and school
com-pan-ion. We soothed and com-for-ted her by such words as we could find.
Did she know where her hus-band was? Was it pos-sible that we could bring
him back to her?

It seems that it was. She had the surest in-form-a-tion that of late he
had, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the farthest
east of the City. Hitherto his or-gies had al-ways been con-fined to one
day, and he had come back, twitch-ing and shattered, in the even-ing. But
now the spell had been upon him eight-and-forty hours, and he lay
there, doubt-less among the dregs of the docks, breath-ing in the poison
or sleep-ing off the ef-fects. There he was to be found, she was sure of
it, at the Bar of Gold, in Up-per Swan-dam Lane. But what was she to do?
How could she, a young and timid wo-man, make her way into such a place
and pluck her hus-band out from among the ruf-fi-ans who sur-roun-ded him?

There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it.
Might I not es-cort her to this place? And then, as a second thought,
why should she come at all? I was Isa Whit-ney’s med-ical ad-viser, and as
such I had in-flu-ence over him. I could man-age it bet-ter if I were
alone. I prom-ised her on my word that I would send him home in a cab
within two hours if he were in-deed at the ad-dress which she had given
me. And so in ten minutes I had left my arm-chair and cheery
sit-ting-room be-hind me, and was speed-ing east-ward in a hansom on a
strange er-rand, as it seemed to me at the time, though the fu-ture only
could show how strange it was to be.

But there was no great dif-fi-culty in the first stage of my ad-ven-ture.
Up-per Swan-dam Lane is a vile al-ley lurk-ing be-hind the high wharves
which line the north side of the river to the east of Lon-don Bridge.
Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, ap-proached by a steep flight of
steps lead-ing down to a black gap like the mouth of a cave, I found the
den of which I was in search. Or-der-ing my cab to wait, I passed down
the steps, worn hol-low in the centre by the cease-less tread of drunken
feet; and by the light of a flick-er-ing oil-lamp above the door I found
the latch and made my way into a long, low room, thick and heavy with
the brown opium smoke, and ter-raced with wooden berths, like the
fore-castle of an emig-rant ship.

Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bod-ies ly-ing in
strange fant-astic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads thrown
back, and chins point-ing up-ward, with here and there a dark,
lack-lustre eye turned upon the new-comer. Out of the black shad-ows
there glimmered little red circles of light, now bright, now faint, as
the burn-ing poison waxed or waned in the bowls of the metal pipes. The
most lay si-lent, but some muttered to them-selves, and oth-ers talked
to-gether in a strange, low, mono-ton-ous voice, their con-ver-sa-tion com-ing
in gushes, and then sud-denly tail-ing off into si-lence, each mum-bling
out his own thoughts and pay-ing little heed to the words of his
neigh-bour. At the farther end was a small bra-zier of burn-ing char-coal,
be-side which on a three-legged wooden stool there sat a tall, thin old
man, with his jaw rest-ing upon his two fists, and his el-bows upon his
knees, star-ing into the fire.

As I entered, a sal-low Malay at-tend-ant had hur-ried up with a pipe for
me and a sup-ply of the drug, beck-on-ing me to an empty berth.

“Thank you. I have not come to stay,” said I. “There is a friend of
mine here, Mr. Isa Whit-ney, and I wish to speak with him.”

There was a move-ment and an ex-clam-a-tion from my right, and peer-ing
through the gloom, I saw Whit-ney, pale, hag-gard, and un-kempt, star-ing
out at me.

“My God! It’s Wat-son,” said he. He was in a pi-ti-able state of re-ac-tion,
with every nerve in a twit-ter. “I say, Wat-son, what o’clock is it?”

“Nearly el-even.”

“Of what day?”

“Of Fri-day, June 19th.”

“Good heav-ens! I thought it was Wed-nes-day. It is Wed-nes-day. What d’you
want to frighten a chap for?” He sank his face onto his arms and began
to sob in a high treble key.

“I tell you that it is Fri-day, man. Your wife has been wait-ing this two
days for you. You should be ashamed of your-self!”

“So I am. But you’ve got mixed, Wat-son, for I have only been here a few
hours, three pipes, four pipes—I for-get how many. But I’ll go home with
you. I wouldn’t frighten Kate—poor little Kate. Give me your hand! Have
you a cab?”

“Yes, I have one wait-ing.”

“Then I shall go in it. But I must owe some-thing. Find what I owe,
Wat-son. I am all off col-our. I can do noth-ing for my-self.”

I walked down the nar-row pas-sage between the double row of sleep-ers,
hold-ing my breath to keep out the vile, stu-pefy-ing fumes of the drug,
and look-ing about for the man-ager. As I passed the tall man who sat by
the bra-zier I felt a sud-den pluck at my skirt, and a low voice
whispered, “Walk past me, and then look back at me.” The words fell
quite dis-tinctly upon my ear. I glanced down. They could only have come
from the old man at my side, and yet he sat now as ab-sorbed as ever,
very thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling down
from between his knees, as though it had dropped in sheer las-sit-ude
from his fin-gers. I took two steps for-ward and looked back. It took all
my self-con-trol to pre-vent me from break-ing out into a cry of
as-ton-ish-ment. He had turned his back so that none could see him but I.
His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dull eyes had
re-gained their fire, and there, sit-ting by the fire and grin-ning at my
sur-prise, was none other than Sh-er-lock Holmes. He made a slight mo-tion
to me to ap-proach him, and in-stantly, as he turned his face half round
to the com-pany once more, sub-sided into a dod-der-ing, loose-lipped
senil-ity.

“Holmes!” I whispered, “what on earth are you do-ing in this den?”

“As low as you can,” he answered; “I have ex-cel-lent ears. If you would
have the great kind-ness to get rid of that sot-tish friend of yours I
should be ex-ceed-ingly glad to have a little talk with you.”

“I have a cab out-side.”

“Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for he
ap-pears to be too limp to get into any mis-chief. I should re-com-mend you
also to send a note by the cab-man to your wife to say that you have
thrown in your lot with me. If you will wait out-side, I shall be with
you in five minutes.”

It was dif-fi-cult to re-fuse any of Sh-er-lock Holmes’ re-quests, for they
were al-ways so ex-ceed-ingly def-in-ite, and put for-ward with such a quiet
air of mas-tery. I felt, how-ever, that when Whit-ney was once con-fined in
the cab my mis-sion was prac-tic-ally ac-com-plished; and for the rest, I
could not wish any-thing bet-ter than to be as-so-ci-ated with my friend in
one of those sin-gu-lar ad-ven-tures which were the nor-mal con-di-tion of his
ex-ist-ence. In a few minutes I had writ-ten my note, paid Whit-ney’s bill,
led him out to the cab, and seen him driven through the dark-ness. In a
very short time a de-crepit fig-ure had emerged from the opium den, and I
was walk-ing down the street with Sh-er-lock Holmes. For two streets he
shuffled along with a bent back and an un-cer-tain foot. Then, glan-cing
quickly round, he straightened him-self out and burst into a hearty fit
of laughter.

“I sup-pose, Wat-son,” said he, “that you ima-gine that I have ad-ded
opium-smoking to co-caine in-jec-tions, and all the other little
weak-nesses on which you have fa-voured me with your med-ical views.”

“I was cer-tainly sur-prised to find you there.”

“But not more so than I to find you.”

“I came to find a friend.”

“And I to find an en-emy.”

“An en-emy?”

“Yes; one of my nat-ural en-emies, or, shall I say, my nat-ural prey.
Briefly, Wat-son, I am in the midst of a very re-mark-able in-quiry, and I
have hoped to find a clue in the in-co-her-ent ram-blings of these sots, as
I have done be-fore now. Had I been re-cog-nised in that den my life would
not have been worth an hour’s pur-chase; for I have used it be-fore now
for my own pur-poses, and the ras-cally Las-car who runs it has sworn to
have ven-geance upon me. There is a trap-door at the back of that
build-ing, near the corner of Paul’s Wharf, which could tell some
strange tales of what has passed through it upon the moon-less nights.”

“What! You do not mean bod-ies?”

“Ay, bod-ies, Wat-son. We should be rich men if we had £ 1000 for every
poor devil who has been done to death in that den. It is the vilest
murder-trap on the whole river-side, and I fear that Neville St. Clair
has entered it never to leave it more. But our trap should be here.” He
put his two fore-fingers between his teeth and whistled shrilly—a sig-nal
which was answered by a sim-ilar whistle from the dis-tance, fol-lowed
shortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses’ hoofs.

“Now, Wat-son,” said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through the
gloom, throw-ing out two golden tun-nels of yel-low light from its side
lan-terns. “You’ll come with me, won’t you?”

“If I can be of use.”

“Oh, a trusty com-rade is al-ways of use; and a chron-icler still more so.
My room at The Cedars is a double-bed-ded one.”

“The Cedars?”

“Yes; that is Mr. St. Clair’s house. I am stay-ing there while I con-duct
the in-quiry.”

“Where is it, then?”

“Near Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile drive be-fore us.”

“But I am all in the dark.”

“Of course you are. You’ll know all about it presently. Jump up here.
All right, John; we shall not need you. Here’s half a crown. Look out
for me to-mor-row, about el-even. Give her her head. So long, then!”

He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through the
end-less suc-ces-sion of sombre and deser-ted streets, which widened
gradu-ally, un-til we were fly-ing across a broad bal-us-traded bridge, with
the murky river flow-ing slug-gishly be-neath us. Bey-ond lay an-other dull
wil-der-ness of bricks and mor-tar, its si-lence broken only by the heavy,
reg-u-lar foot-fall of the po-lice-man, or the songs and shouts of some
be-lated party of rev-el-lers. A dull wrack was drift-ing slowly across the
sky, and a star or two twinkled dimly here and there through the rifts
of the clouds. Holmes drove in si-lence, with his head sunk upon his
breast, and the air of a man who is lost in thought, while I sat be-side
him, curi-ous to learn what this new quest might be which seemed to tax
his powers so sorely, and yet afraid to break in upon the cur-rent of
his thoughts. We had driven sev-eral miles, and were be-gin-ning to get to
the fringe of the belt of sub-urban vil-las, when he shook him-self,
shrugged his shoulders, and lit up his pipe with the air of a man who
has sat-is-fied him-self that he is act-ing for the best.

“You have a grand gift of si-lence, Wat-son,” said he. “It makes you
quite in-valu-able as a com-pan-ion. ’Pon my word, it is a great thing for
me to have someone to talk to, for my own thoughts are not
over-pleas-ant. I was won-der-ing what I should say to this dear little
wo-man to-night when she meets me at the door.”

“You for-get that I know noth-ing about it.”

“I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case be-fore we get
to Lee. It seems ab-surdly simple, and yet, some-how I can get noth-ing to
go upon. There’s plenty of thread, no doubt, but I can’t get the end of
it into my hand. Now, I’ll state the case clearly and con-cisely to you,
Wat-son, and maybe you can see a spark where all is dark to me.”

“Pro-ceed, then.”

“Some years ago—to be def-in-ite, in May, 1884—there came to Lee a
gen-tle-man, Neville St. Clair by name, who ap-peared to have plenty of
money. He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very nicely, and
lived gen-er-ally in good style. By de-grees he made friends in the
neigh-bour-hood, and in 1887 he mar-ried the daugh-ter of a local brewer,
by whom he now has two chil-dren. He had no oc-cu-pa-tion, but was
in-ter-ested in sev-eral com-pan-ies and went into town as a rule in the
morn-ing, re-turn-ing by the 5:14 from Can-non Street every night. Mr. St.
Clair is now thirty-seven years of age, is a man of tem-per-ate habits, a
good hus-band, a very af-fec-tion-ate father, and a man who is pop-u-lar with
all who know him. I may add that his whole debts at the present mo-ment,
as far as we have been able to as-cer-tain, amount to £ 88 10_s_., while
he has £ 220 stand-ing to his credit in the Cap-ital and Counties Bank.
There is no reason, there-fore, to think that money troubles have been
weigh-ing upon his mind.

“Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlier than
usual, re-mark-ing be-fore he star-ted that he had two im-port-ant
com-mis-sions to per-form, and that he would bring his little boy home a
box of bricks. Now, by the merest chance, his wife re-ceived a tele-gram
upon this same Monday, very shortly after his de-par-ture, to the ef-fect
that a small par-cel of con-sid-er-able value which she had been ex-pect-ing
was wait-ing for her at the of-fices of the Aber-deen Ship-ping Com-pany.
Now, if you are well up in your Lon-don, you will know that the of-fice
of the com-pany is in Fresno Street, which branches out of Up-per Swan-dam
Lane, where you found me to-night. Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch,
star-ted for the City, did some shop-ping, pro-ceeded to the com-pany’s
of-fice, got her packet, and found her-self at ex-actly 4:35 walk-ing
through Swan-dam Lane on her way back to the sta-tion. Have you fol-lowed
me so far?”

“It is very clear.”

“If you re-mem-ber, Monday was an ex-ceed-ingly hot day, and Mrs. St. Clair
walked slowly, glan-cing about in the hope of see-ing a cab, as she did
not like the neigh-bour-hood in which she found her-self. While she was
walk-ing in this way down Swan-dam Lane, she sud-denly heard an
ejac-u-la-tion or cry, and was struck cold to see her hus-band look-ing down
at her and, as it seemed to her, beck-on-ing to her from a second-floor
win-dow. The win-dow was open, and she dis-tinctly saw his face, which she
de-scribes as be-ing ter-ribly agit-ated. He waved his hands frantic-ally to
her, and then van-ished from the win-dow so sud-denly that it seemed to
her that he had been plucked back by some ir-res-ist-ible force from
be-hind. One sin-gu-lar point which struck her quick fem-in-ine eye was that
al-though he wore some dark coat, such as he had star-ted to town in, he
had on neither col-lar nor neck-tie.

“Con-vinced that some-thing was amiss with him, she rushed down the
steps—for the house was none other than the opium den in which you
found me to-night—and run-ning through the front room she at-temp-ted to
as-cend the stairs which led to the first floor. At the foot of the
stairs, how-ever, she met this Las-car scoun-drel of whom I have spoken,
who thrust her back and, aided by a Dane, who acts as as-sist-ant there,
pushed her out into the street. Filled with the most mad-den-ing doubts
and fears, she rushed down the lane and, by rare good-for-tune, met in
Fresno Street a num-ber of con-stables with an in-spector, all on their
way to their beat. The in-spector and two men ac-com-pan-ied her back, and
in spite of the con-tin-ued res-ist-ance of the pro-pri-etor, they made their
way to the room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen. There was no
sign of him there. In fact, in the whole of that floor there was no one
to be found save a crippled wretch of hideous as-pect, who, it seems,
made his home there. Both he and the Las-car stoutly swore that no one
else had been in the front room dur-ing the af-ter-noon. So de-term-ined was
their denial that the in-spector was staggered, and had al-most come to
be-lieve that Mrs. St. Clair had been de-luded when, with a cry, she
sprang at a small deal box which lay upon the table and tore the lid
from it. Out there fell a cas-cade of chil-dren’s bricks. It was the toy
which he had prom-ised to bring home.

“This dis-cov-ery, and the evid-ent con-fu-sion which the cripple showed,
made the in-spector real-ise that the mat-ter was ser-i-ous. The rooms were
care-fully ex-amined, and res-ults all poin-ted to an ab-om-in-able crime. The
front room was plainly fur-nished as a sit-ting-room and led into a small
bed-room, which looked out upon the back of one of the wharves. Between
the wharf and the bed-room win-dow is a nar-row strip, which is dry at low
tide but is covered at high tide with at least four and a half feet of
wa-ter. The bed-room win-dow was a broad one and opened from be-low. On
ex-am-in-a-tion traces of blood were to be seen upon the win-dowsill, and
sev-eral scattered drops were vis-ible upon the wooden floor of the
bed-room. Thrust away be-hind a cur-tain in the front room were all the
clothes of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with the ex-cep-tion of his coat. His
boots, his socks, his hat, and his watch—all were there. There were no
signs of vi-ol-ence upon any of these gar-ments, and there were no other
traces of Mr. Neville St. Clair. Out of the win-dow he must ap-par-ently
have gone for no other exit could be dis-covered, and the omin-ous
blood-stains upon the sill gave little prom-ise that he could save
him-self by swim-ming, for the tide was at its very highest at the mo-ment
of the tragedy.

“And now as to the vil-lains who seemed to be im-me-di-ately im-plic-ated in
the mat-ter. The Las-car was known to be a man of the vilest ante-cedents,
but as, by Mrs. St. Clair’s story, he was known to have been at the
foot of the stair within a very few seconds of her hus-band’s ap-pear-ance
at the win-dow, he could hardly have been more than an ac-cess-ory to the
crime. His de-fence was one of ab-so-lute ig-nor-ance, and he pro-tested that
he had no know-ledge as to the do-ings of Hugh Boone, his lodger, and
that he could not ac-count in any way for the pres-ence of the miss-ing
gen-tle-man’s clothes.

“So much for the Las-car man-ager. Now for the sin-is-ter cripple who lives
upon the second floor of the opium den, and who was cer-tainly the last
hu-man be-ing whose eyes res-ted upon Neville St. Clair. His name is Hugh
Boone, and his hideous face is one which is fa-mil-iar to every man who
goes much to the City. He is a pro-fes-sional beg-gar, though in or-der to
avoid the po-lice reg-u-la-tions he pre-tends to a small trade in wax
ves-tas. Some little dis-tance down Thread-needle Street, upon the
left-hand side, there is, as you may have re-marked, a small angle in
the wall. Here it is that this creature takes his daily seat,
cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and as he is a
piteous spec-tacle a small rain of char-ity des-cends into the greasy
leather cap which lies upon the pave-ment be-side him. I have watched the
fel-low more than once be-fore ever I thought of mak-ing his pro-fes-sional
ac-quaint-ance, and I have been sur-prised at the har-vest which he has
reaped in a short time. His ap-pear-ance, you see, is so re-mark-able that
no one can pass him without ob-serving him. A shock of or-ange hair, a
pale face dis-figured by a hor-rible scar, which, by its con-trac-tion, has
turned up the outer edge of his up-per lip, a bull-dog chin, and a pair
of very pen-et-rat-ing dark eyes, which present a sin-gu-lar con-trast to the
col-our of his hair, all mark him out from amid the com-mon crowd of
men-dic-ants and so, too, does his wit, for he is ever ready with a reply
to any piece of chaff which may be thrown at him by the pass-ers-by.
This is the man whom we now learn to have been the lodger at the opium
den, and to have been the last man to see the gen-tle-man of whom we are
in quest.”

“But a cripple!” said I. “What could he have done single-handed against
a man in the prime of life?”

“He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in other
re-spects he ap-pears to be a power-ful and well-nur-tured man. Surely your
med-ical ex-per-i-ence would tell you, Wat-son, that weak-ness in one limb is
of-ten com-pensated for by ex-cep-tional strength in the oth-ers.”

“Pray con-tinue your nar-rat-ive.”

“Mrs. St. Clair had fain-ted at the sight of the blood upon the win-dow,
and she was es-cor-ted home in a cab by the po-lice, as her pres-ence could
be of no help to them in their in-vest-ig-a-tions. In-spector Bar-ton, who
had charge of the case, made a very care-ful ex-am-in-a-tion of the
premises, but without find-ing any-thing which threw any light upon the
mat-ter. One mis-take had been made in not ar-rest-ing Boone in-stantly, as
he was al-lowed some few minutes dur-ing which he might have com-mu-nic-ated
with his friend the Las-car, but this fault was soon remedied, and he
was seized and searched, without any-thing be-ing found which could
in-crim-in-ate him. There were, it is true, some blood-stains upon his
right shirt-sleeve, but he poin-ted to his ring-fin-ger, which had been
cut near the nail, and ex-plained that the bleed-ing came from there,
adding that he had been to the win-dow not long be-fore, and that the
stains which had been ob-served there came doubt-less from the same
source. He denied strenu-ously hav-ing ever seen Mr. Neville St. Clair
and swore that the pres-ence of the clothes in his room was as much a
mys-tery to him as to the po-lice. As to Mrs. St. Clair’s as-ser-tion that
she had ac-tu-ally seen her hus-band at the win-dow, he de-clared that she
must have been either mad or dream-ing. He was re-moved, loudly
protest-ing, to the po-lice-sta-tion, while the in-spector re-mained upon
the premises in the hope that the ebbing tide might af-ford some fresh
clue.

“And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they had
feared to find. It was Neville St. Clair’s coat, and not Neville St.
Clair, which lay un-covered as the tide re-ceded. And what do you think
they found in the pock-ets?”

“I can-not ima-gine.”

“No, I don’t think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with pen-nies
and half-pen-nies—421 pen-nies and 270 half-pen-nies. It was no won-der
that it had not been swept away by the tide. But a hu-man body is a
dif-fer-ent mat-ter. There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and the
house. It seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had re-mained when
the stripped body had been sucked away into the river.”

“But I un-der-stand that all the other clothes were found in the room.
Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?”

“No, sir, but the facts might be met spe-ciously enough. Sup-pose that
this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the win-dow, there
is no hu-man eye which could have seen the deed. What would he do then?
It would of course in-stantly strike him that he must get rid of the
tell-tale gar-ments. He would seize the coat, then, and be in the act of
throw-ing it out, when it would oc-cur to him that it would swim and not
sink. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffle down-stairs when
the wife tried to force her way up, and per-haps he has already heard
from his Las-car con-fed-er-ate that the po-lice are hur-ry-ing up the street.
There is not an in-stant to be lost. He rushes to some secret hoard,
where he has ac-cu-mu-lated the fruits of his beg-gary, and he stuffs all
the coins upon which he can lay his hands into the pock-ets to make sure
of the coat’s sink-ing. He throws it out, and would have done the same
with the other gar-ments had not he heard the rush of steps be-low, and
only just had time to close the win-dow when the po-lice ap-peared.”

“It cer-tainly sounds feas-ible.”

“Well, we will take it as a work-ing hy-po-thesis for want of a bet-ter.
Boone, as I have told you, was ar-res-ted and taken to the sta-tion, but
it could not be shown that there had ever be-fore been any-thing against
him. He had for years been known as a pro-fes-sional beg-gar, but his life
ap-peared to have been a very quiet and in-no-cent one. There the mat-ter
stands at present, and the ques-tions which have to be solved—what
Neville St. Clair was do-ing in the opium den, what happened to him when
there, where is he now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with his
dis-ap-pear-ance—are all as far from a solu-tion as ever. I con-fess that I
can-not re-call any case within my ex-per-i-ence which looked at the first
glance so simple and yet which presen-ted such dif-fi-culties.”

While Sh-er-lock Holmes had been de-tail-ing this sin-gu-lar series of
events, we had been whirl-ing through the out-skirts of the great town
un-til the last strag-gling houses had been left be-hind, and we rattled
along with a coun-try hedge upon either side of us. Just as he fin-ished,
how-ever, we drove through two scattered vil-lages, where a few lights
still glimmered in the win-dows.

“We are on the out-skirts of Lee,” said my com-pan-ion. “We have touched
on three Eng-lish counties in our short drive, start-ing in Middle-sex,
passing over an angle of Sur-rey, and end-ing in Kent. See that light
among the trees? That is The Cedars, and be-side that lamp sits a wo-man
whose anxious ears have already, I have little doubt, caught the clink
of our horse’s feet.”

“But why are you not con-duct-ing the case from Baker Street?” I asked.

“Be-cause there are many in-quir-ies which must be made out here. Mrs. St.
Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my dis-posal, and you may rest
as-sured that she will have noth-ing but a wel-come for my friend and
col-league. I hate to meet her, Wat-son, when I have no news of her
hus-band. Here we are. Whoa, there, whoa!”

We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its own
grounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horse’s head, and spring-ing
down, I fol-lowed Holmes up the small, wind-ing gravel-drive which led to
the house. As we ap-proached, the door flew open, and a little blonde
wo-man stood in the open-ing, clad in some sort of light mous-seline de
soie, with a touch of fluffy pink chif-fon at her neck and wrists. She
stood with her fig-ure out-lined against the flood of light, one hand
upon the door, one half-raised in her eager-ness, her body slightly
bent, her head and face pro-truded, with eager eyes and par-ted lips, a
stand-ing ques-tion.

“Well?” she cried, “well?” And then, see-ing that there were two of us,
she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she saw that my
com-pan-ion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.

“No good news?”

“None.”

“No bad?”

“No.”

“Thank God for that. But come in. You must be weary, for you have had a
long day.”

“This is my friend, Dr. Wat-son. He has been of most vi-tal use to me in
sev-eral of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it pos-sible for me to
bring him out and as-so-ci-ate him with this in-vest-ig-a-tion.”

“I am de-lighted to see you,” said she, press-ing my hand warmly. “You
will, I am sure, for-give any-thing that may be want-ing in our
ar-range-ments, when you con-sider the blow which has come so sud-denly
upon us.”

“My dear madam,” said I, “I am an old cam-paigner, and if I were not I
can very well see that no apo-logy is needed. If I can be of any
as-sist-ance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall be in-deed
happy.”

“Now, Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes,” said the lady as we entered a well-lit
din-ing-room, upon the table of which a cold sup-per had been laid out,
“I should very much like to ask you one or two plain ques-tions, to
which I beg that you will give a plain an-swer.”

“Cer-tainly, madam.”

“Do not trouble about my feel-ings. I am not hys-ter-ical, nor given to
faint-ing. I simply wish to hear your real, real opin-ion.”

“Upon what point?”

“In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville is alive?”

Sh-er-lock Holmes seemed to be em-bar-rassed by the ques-tion. “Frankly,
now!” she re-peated, stand-ing upon the rug and look-ing keenly down at
him as he leaned back in a bas-ket-chair.

“Frankly, then, madam, I do not.”

“You think that he is dead?”

“I do.”

“Murdered?”

“I don’t say that. Per-haps.”

“And on what day did he meet his death?”

“On Monday.”

“Then per-haps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to ex-plain how it is
that I have re-ceived a let-ter from him to-day.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been gal-van-ised.

“What!” he roared.

“Yes, to-day.” She stood smil-ing, hold-ing up a little slip of pa-per in
the air.

“May I see it?”

“Cer-tainly.”

He snatched it from her in his eager-ness, and smooth-ing it out upon the
table he drew over the lamp and ex-amined it in-tently. I had left my
chair and was gaz-ing at it over his shoulder. The en-vel-ope was a very
coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend post-mark and with the
date of that very day, or rather of the day be-fore, for it was
con-sid-er-ably after mid-night.

“Coarse writ-ing,” mur-mured Holmes. “Surely this is not your hus-band’s
writ-ing, madam.”

“No, but the en-clos-ure is.”

“I per-ceive also that who-ever ad-dressed the en-vel-ope had to go and
in-quire as to the ad-dress.”

“How can you tell that?”

“The name, you see, is in per-fectly black ink, which has dried it-self.
The rest is of the grey-ish col-our, which shows that blot-ting-pa-per has
been used. If it had been writ-ten straight off, and then blot-ted, none
would be of a deep black shade. This man has writ-ten the name, and
there has then been a pause be-fore he wrote the ad-dress, which can only
mean that he was not fa-mil-iar with it. It is, of course, a trifle, but
there is noth-ing so im-port-ant as trifles. Let us now see the let-ter.
Ha! there has been an en-clos-ure here!”

“Yes, there was a ring. His signet-ring.”

“And you are sure that this is your hus-band’s hand?”

“One of his hands.”

“One?”

“His hand when he wrote hur-riedly. It is very un-like his usual writ-ing,
and yet I know it well.”

“‘Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. There is a huge
er-ror which it may take some little time to rec-tify. Wait in
pa-tience.—NEVILLE.’ Writ-ten in pen-cil upon the fly-leaf of a book,
octavo size, no wa-ter-mark. Hum! Pos-ted to-day in Gravesend by a man
with a dirty thumb. Ha! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not very
much in er-ror, by a per-son who had been chew-ing to-bacco. And you have
no doubt that it is your hus-band’s hand, madam?”

“None. Neville wrote those words.”

“And they were pos-ted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, the
clouds lighten, though I should not ven-ture to say that the danger is
over.”

“But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes.”

“Un-less this is a clever for-gery to put us on the wrong scent. The
ring, after all, proves noth-ing. It may have been taken from him.”

“No, no; it is, it is his very own writ-ing!”

“Very well. It may, how-ever, have been writ-ten on Monday and only
pos-ted to-day.”

“That is pos-sible.”

“If so, much may have happened between.”

“Oh, you must not dis-cour-age me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is well
with him. There is so keen a sym-pathy between us that I should know if
evil came upon him. On the very day that I saw him last he cut him-self
in the bed-room, and yet I in the din-ing-room rushed up-stairs in-stantly
with the ut-most cer-tainty that some-thing had happened. Do you think
that I would re-spond to such a trifle and yet be ig-nor-ant of his
death?”

“I have seen too much not to know that the im-pres-sion of a wo-man may be
more valu-able than the con-clu-sion of an ana-lyt-ical reasoner. And in
this let-ter you cer-tainly have a very strong piece of evid-ence to
cor-rob-or-ate your view. But if your hus-band is alive and able to write
let-ters, why should he re-main away from you?”

“I can-not ima-gine. It is un-think-able.”

“And on Monday he made no re-marks be-fore leav-ing you?”

“No.”

“And you were sur-prised to see him in Swan-dam Lane?”

“Very much so.”

“Was the win-dow open?”

“Yes.”

“Then he might have called to you?”

“He might.”

“He only, as I un-der-stand, gave an in-ar-tic-u-late cry?”

“Yes.”

“A call for help, you thought?”

“Yes. He waved his hands.”

“But it might have been a cry of sur-prise. Aston-ish-ment at the
un-ex-pec-ted sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?”

“It is pos-sible.”

“And you thought he was pulled back?”

“He dis-ap-peared so sud-denly.”

“He might have leaped back. You did not see any-one else in the room?”

“No, but this hor-rible man con-fessed to hav-ing been there, and the
Las-car was at the foot of the stairs.”

“Quite so. Your hus-band, as far as you could see, had his or-din-ary
clothes on?”

“But without his col-lar or tie. I dis-tinctly saw his bare throat.”

“Had he ever spoken of Swan-dam Lane?”

“Never.”

“Had he ever showed any signs of hav-ing taken opium?”

“Never.”

“Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the prin-cipal points about which
I wished to be ab-so-lutely clear. We shall now have a little sup-per and
then re-tire, for we may have a very busy day to-mor-row.”

A large and com-fort-able double-bed-ded room had been placed at our
dis-posal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary after
my night of ad-ven-ture. Sh-er-lock Holmes was a man, how-ever, who, when he
had an un-solved prob-lem upon his mind, would go for days, and even for
a week, without rest, turn-ing it over, re-arran-ging his facts, look-ing
at it from every point of view un-til he had either fathomed it or
con-vinced him-self that his data were in-suf-fi-cient. It was soon evid-ent
to me that he was now pre-par-ing for an all-night sit-ting. He took off
his coat and waist-coat, put on a large blue dress-ing-gown, and then
wandered about the room col-lect-ing pil-lows from his bed and cush-ions
from the sofa and arm-chairs. With these he con-struc-ted a sort of
Eastern di-van, upon which he perched him-self cross-legged, with an
ounce of shag to-bacco and a box of matches laid out in front of him. In
the dim light of the lamp I saw him sit-ting there, an old briar pipe
between his lips, his eyes fixed va-cantly upon the corner of the
ceil-ing, the blue smoke curl-ing up from him, si-lent, mo-tion-less, with
the light shin-ing upon his strong-set aquil-ine fea-tures. So he sat as I
dropped off to sleep, and so he sat when a sud-den ejac-u-la-tion caused me
to wake up, and I found the sum-mer sun shin-ing into the apart-ment. The
pipe was still between his lips, the smoke still curled up-ward, and the
room was full of a dense to-bacco haze, but noth-ing re-mained of the heap
of shag which I had seen upon the pre-vi-ous night.

“Awake, Wat-son?” he asked.

“Yes.”

“Game for a morn-ing drive?”

“Cer-tainly.”

“Then dress. No one is stir-ring yet, but I know where the stable-boy
sleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out.” He chuckled to him-self as
he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a dif-fer-ent man to the
sombre thinker of the pre-vi-ous night.

As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no won-der that no one was
stir-ring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. I had hardly fin-ished
when Holmes re-turned with the news that the boy was put-ting in the
horse.

“I want to test a little the-ory of mine,” said he, pulling on his
boots. “I think, Wat-son, that you are now stand-ing in the pres-ence of
one of the most ab-so-lute fools in Europe. I de-serve to be kicked from
here to Char-ing Cross. But I think I have the key of the af-fair now.”

“And where is it?” I asked, smil-ing.

“In the bath-room,” he answered. “Oh, yes, I am not jok-ing,” he
con-tin-ued, see-ing my look of in-credu-lity. “I have just been there, and
I have taken it out, and I have got it in this Glad-stone bag. Come on,
my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock.”

We made our way down-stairs as quietly as pos-sible, and out into the
bright morn-ing sun-shine. In the road stood our horse and trap, with the
half-clad stable-boy wait-ing at the head. We both sprang in, and away
we dashed down the Lon-don Road. A few coun-try carts were stir-ring,
bear-ing in ve-get-ables to the met-ro-polis, but the lines of vil-las on
either side were as si-lent and life-less as some city in a dream.

“It has been in some points a sin-gu-lar case,” said Holmes, flick-ing the
horse on into a gal-lop. “I con-fess that I have been as blind as a mole,
but it is bet-ter to learn wis-dom late than never to learn it at all.”

In town the earli-est risers were just be-gin-ning to look sleepily from
their win-dows as we drove through the streets of the Sur-rey side.
Passing down the Water-loo Bridge Road we crossed over the river, and
dash-ing up Wel-ling-ton Street wheeled sharply to the right and found
ourselves in Bow Street. Sh-er-lock Holmes was well known to the force,
and the two con-stables at the door sa-luted him. One of them held the
horse’s head while the other led us in.

“Who is on duty?” asked Holmes.

“In-spector Brad-street, sir.”

“Ah, Brad-street, how are you?” A tall, stout of-fi-cial had come down the
stone-flagged pas-sage, in a peaked cap and frogged jacket. “I wish to
have a quiet word with you, Brad-street.”

“Cer-tainly, Mr. Holmes. Step into my room here.”

It was a small, of-fice-like room, with a huge ledger upon the table,
and a tele-phone pro-ject-ing from the wall. The in-spector sat down at his
desk.

“What can I do for you, Mr. Holmes?”

“I called about that beg-gar-man, Boone—the one who was charged with
be-ing con-cerned in the dis-ap-pear-ance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee.”

“Yes. He was brought up and re-manded for fur-ther in-quir-ies.”

“So I heard. You have him here?”

“In the cells.”

“Is he quiet?”

“Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dirty scoun-drel.”

“Dirty?”

“Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face is
as black as a tinker’s. Well, when once his case has been settled, he
will have a reg-u-lar prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you would
agree with me that he needed it.”

“I should like to see him very much.”

“Would you? That is eas-ily done. Come this way. You can leave your
bag.”

“No, I think that I’ll take it.”

“Very good. Come this way, if you please.” He led us down a pas-sage,
opened a barred door, passed down a wind-ing stair, and brought us to a
white-washed cor-ridor with a line of doors on each side.

“The third on the right is his,” said the in-spector. “Here it is!” He
quietly shot back a panel in the up-per part of the door and glanced
through.

“He is asleep,” said he. “You can see him very well.”

We both put our eyes to the grat-ing. The pris-oner lay with his face
to-wards us, in a very deep sleep, breath-ing slowly and heav-ily. He was
a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as be-came his call-ing, with a
col-oured shirt pro-trud-ing through the rent in his tattered coat. He
was, as the in-spector had said, ex-tremely dirty, but the grime which
covered his face could not con-ceal its re-puls-ive ugli-ness. A broad
wheal from an old scar ran right across it from eye to chin, and by its
con-trac-tion had turned up one side of the up-per lip, so that three
teeth were ex-posed in a per-petual snarl. A shock of very bright red
hair grew low over his eyes and fore-head.

“He’s a beauty, isn’t he?” said the in-spector.

“He cer-tainly needs a wash,” re-marked Holmes. “I had an idea that he
might, and I took the liberty of bring-ing the tools with me.” He opened
the Glad-stone bag as he spoke, and took out, to my as-ton-ish-ment, a very
large bath-sponge.

“He! he! You are a funny one,” chuckled the in-spector.

“Now, if you will have the great good-ness to open that door very
quietly, we will soon make him cut a much more re-spect-able fig-ure.”

“Well, I don’t know why not,” said the in-spector. “He doesn’t look a
credit to the Bow Street cells, does he?” He slipped his key into the
lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The sleeper half
turned, and then settled down once more into a deep slum-ber. Holmes
stooped to the wa-ter-jug, moistened his sponge, and then rubbed it
twice vig-or-ously across and down the pris-oner’s face.

“Let me in-tro-duce you,” he shouted, “to Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee,
in the county of Kent.”

Never in my life have I seen such a sight. The man’s face peeled off
un-der the sponge like the bark from a tree. Gone was the coarse brown
tint! Gone, too, was the hor-rid scar which had seamed it across, and
the twis-ted lip which had given the re-puls-ive sneer to the face! A
twitch brought away the tangled red hair, and there, sit-ting up in his
bed, was a pale, sad-faced, re-fined-look-ing man, black-haired and
smooth-skinned, rub-bing his eyes and star-ing about him with sleepy
be-wil-der-ment. Then sud-denly real-ising the ex-pos-ure, he broke into a
scream and threw him-self down with his face to the pil-low.

“Great heav-ens!” cried the in-spector, “it is, in-deed, the miss-ing man.
I know him from the pho-to-graph.”

The pris-oner turned with the reck-less air of a man who aban-dons him-self
to his des-tiny. “Be it so,” said he. “And pray what am I charged with?”

“With mak-ing away with Mr. Neville St.— Oh, come, you can’t be charged
with that un-less they make a case of at-temp-ted sui-cide of it,” said the
in-spector with a grin. “Well, I have been twenty-seven years in the
force, but this really takes the cake.”

“If I am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is ob-vi-ous that no crime has
been com-mit-ted, and that, there-fore, I am il-leg-ally de-tained.”

“No crime, but a very great er-ror has been com-mit-ted,” said Holmes.
“You would have done bet-ter to have trus-ted your wife.”

“It was not the wife; it was the chil-dren,” groaned the pris-oner. “God
help me, I would not have them ashamed of their father. My God! What an
ex-pos-ure! What can I do?”

Sh-er-lock Holmes sat down be-side him on the couch and pat-ted him kindly
on the shoulder.

“If you leave it to a court of law to clear the mat-ter up,” said he,
“of course you can hardly avoid pub-li-city. On the other hand, if you
con-vince the po-lice au-thor-it-ies that there is no pos-sible case against
you, I do not know that there is any reason that the de-tails should
find their way into the pa-pers. In-spector Brad-street would, I am sure,
make notes upon any-thing which you might tell us and sub-mit it to the
proper au-thor-it-ies. The case would then never go into court at all.”

“God bless you!” cried the pris-oner pas-sion-ately. “I would have en-dured
im-pris-on-ment, ay, even ex-e-cu-tion, rather than have left my miser-able
secret as a fam-ily blot to my chil-dren.

“You are the first who have ever heard my story. My father was a
school-mas-ter in Chester-field, where I re-ceived an ex-cel-lent edu-ca-tion.
I trav-elled in my youth, took to the stage, and fi-nally be-came a
re-porter on an even-ing pa-per in Lon-don. One day my ed-itor wished to
have a series of art-icles upon beg-ging in the met-ro-polis, and I
vo-lun-teered to sup-ply them. There was the point from which all my
ad-ven-tures star-ted. It was only by try-ing beg-ging as an am-a-teur that I
could get the facts upon which to base my art-icles. When an actor I
had, of course, learned all the secrets of mak-ing up, and had been
fam-ous in the green-room for my skill. I took ad-vant-age now of my
at-tain-ments. I painted my face, and to make my-self as pi-ti-able as
pos-sible I made a good scar and fixed one side of my lip in a twist by
the aid of a small slip of flesh-col-oured plaster. Then with a red head
of hair, and an ap-pro-pri-ate dress, I took my sta-tion in the busi-ness
part of the city, os-tens-ibly as a match-seller but really as a beg-gar.
For seven hours I plied my trade, and when I re-turned home in the
even-ing I found to my sur-prise that I had re-ceived no less than 26_s_.
4_d_.

“I wrote my art-icles and thought little more of the mat-ter un-til, some
time later, I backed a bill for a friend and had a writ served upon me
for £ 25. I was at my wit’s end where to get the money, but a sud-den
idea came to me. I begged a fort-night’s grace from the cred-itor, asked
for a hol-i-day from my em-ploy-ers, and spent the time in beg-ging in the
City un-der my dis-guise. In ten days I had the money and had paid the
debt.

“Well, you can ima-gine how hard it was to settle down to ar-du-ous work
at £ 2 a week when I knew that I could earn as much in a day by
smear-ing my face with a little paint, lay-ing my cap on the ground, and
sit-ting still. It was a long fight between my pride and the money, but
the dol-lars won at last, and I threw up re-port-ing and sat day after day
in the corner which I had first chosen, in-spir-ing pity by my ghastly
face and filling my pock-ets with cop-pers. Only one man knew my secret.
He was the keeper of a low den in which I used to lodge in Swan-dam
Lane, where I could every morn-ing emerge as a squalid beg-gar and in the
even-ings trans-form my-self into a well-dressed man about town. This
fel-low, a Las-car, was well paid by me for his rooms, so that I knew
that my secret was safe in his pos-ses-sion.

“Well, very soon I found that I was sav-ing con-sid-er-able sums of money.
I do not mean that any beg-gar in the streets of Lon-don could earn £ 700
a year—which is less than my av-er-age tak-ings—but I had ex-cep-tional
ad-vant-ages in my power of mak-ing up, and also in a fa-cil-ity of
re-partee, which im-proved by prac-tice and made me quite a re-cog-nised
char-ac-ter in the City. All day a stream of pen-nies, var-ied by sil-ver,
poured in upon me, and it was a very bad day in which I failed to take
£ 2.

“As I grew richer I grew more am-bi-tious, took a house in the coun-try,
and even-tu-ally mar-ried, without any-one hav-ing a sus-pi-cion as to my real
oc-cu-pa-tion. My dear wife knew that I had busi-ness in the City. She
little knew what.

“Last Monday I had fin-ished for the day and was dress-ing in my room
above the opium den when I looked out of my win-dow and saw, to my
hor-ror and as-ton-ish-ment, that my wife was stand-ing in the street, with
her eyes fixed full upon me. I gave a cry of sur-prise, threw up my arms
to cover my face, and, rush-ing to my con-fid-ant, the Las-car, en-treated
him to pre-vent any-one from com-ing up to me. I heard her voice
down-stairs, but I knew that she could not as-cend. Swiftly I threw off
my clothes, pulled on those of a beg-gar, and put on my pig-ments and
wig. Even a wife’s eyes could not pierce so com-plete a dis-guise. But
then it oc-curred to me that there might be a search in the room, and
that the clothes might be-tray me. I threw open the win-dow, re-open-ing by
my vi-ol-ence a small cut which I had in-flic-ted upon my-self in the
bed-room that morn-ing. Then I seized my coat, which was weighted by the
cop-pers which I had just trans-ferred to it from the leather bag in
which I car-ried my tak-ings. I hurled it out of the win-dow, and it
dis-ap-peared into the Thames. The other clothes would have fol-lowed, but
at that mo-ment there was a rush of con-stables up the stair, and a few
minutes after I found, rather, I con-fess, to my re-lief, that in-stead of
be-ing iden-ti-fied as Mr. Neville St. Clair, I was ar-res-ted as his
mur-derer.

“I do not know that there is any-thing else for me to ex-plain. I was
de-term-ined to pre-serve my dis-guise as long as pos-sible, and hence my
pref-er-ence for a dirty face. Know-ing that my wife would be ter-ribly
anxious, I slipped off my ring and con-fided it to the Las-car at a
mo-ment when no con-stable was watch-ing me, to-gether with a hur-ried
scrawl, telling her that she had no cause to fear.”

“That note only reached her yes-ter-day,” said Holmes.

“Good God! What a week she must have spent!”

“The po-lice have watched this Las-car,” said In-spector Brad-street, “and
I can quite un-der-stand that he might find it dif-fi-cult to post a let-ter
un-ob-served. Prob-ably he handed it to some sailor cus-tomer of his, who
for-got all about it for some days.”

“That was it,” said Holmes, nod-ding ap-prov-ingly; “I have no doubt of
it. But have you never been pro-sec-uted for beg-ging?”

“Many times; but what was a fine to me?”

“It must stop here, how-ever,” said Brad-street. “If the po-lice are to
hush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone.”

“I have sworn it by the most sol-emn oaths which a man can take.”

“In that case I think that it is prob-able that no fur-ther steps may be
taken. But if you are found again, then all must come out. I am sure,
Mr. Holmes, that we are very much in-debted to you for hav-ing cleared
the mat-ter up. I wish I knew how you reach your res-ults.”

“I reached this one,” said my friend, “by sit-ting upon five pil-lows and
con-sum-ing an ounce of shag. I think, Wat-son, that if we drive to Baker
Street we shall just be in time for break-fast.”



VII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLE

I had called upon my friend Sh-er-lock Holmes upon the second morn-ing
after Christ-mas, with the in-ten-tion of wish-ing him the com-pli-ments of
the sea-son. He was loun-ging upon the sofa in a purple dress-ing-gown, a
pipe-rack within his reach upon the right, and a pile of crumpled
morn-ing pa-pers, evid-ently newly stud-ied, near at hand. Beside the couch
was a wooden chair, and on the angle of the back hung a very seedy and
dis-rep-ut-able hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked in
sev-eral places. A lens and a for-ceps ly-ing upon the seat of the chair
sug-ges-ted that the hat had been sus-pen-ded in this man-ner for the
pur-pose of ex-am-in-a-tion.

“You are en-gaged,” said I; “per-haps I in-ter-rupt you.”

“Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can dis-cuss my
res-ults. The mat-ter is a per-fectly trivial one”—he jerked his thumb in
the dir-ec-tion of the old hat—“but there are points in con-nec-tion with
it which are not en-tirely devoid of in-terest and even of in-struc-tion.”

I seated my-self in his arm-chair and warmed my hands be-fore his
crack-ling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the win-dows were
thick with the ice crys-tals. “I sup-pose,” I re-marked, “that, homely as
it looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on to it—that it is
the clue which will guide you in the solu-tion of some mys-tery and the
pun-ish-ment of some crime.”

“No, no. No crime,” said Sh-er-lock Holmes, laugh-ing. “Only one of those
whim-sical little in-cid-ents which will hap-pen when you have four mil-lion
hu-man be-ings all jost-ling each other within the space of a few square
miles. Amid the ac-tion and re-ac-tion of so dense a swarm of hu-man-ity,
every pos-sible com-bin-a-tion of events may be ex-pec-ted to take place, and
many a little prob-lem will be presen-ted which may be strik-ing and
bizarre without be-ing crim-inal. We have already had ex-per-i-ence of
such.”

“So much so,” I re-marked, “that of the last six cases which I have
ad-ded to my notes, three have been en-tirely free of any legal crime.”

“Pre-cisely. You al-lude to my at-tempt to re-cover the Irene Adler pa-pers,
to the sin-gu-lar case of Miss Mary Suth-er-land, and to the ad-ven-ture of
the man with the twis-ted lip. Well, I have no doubt that this small
mat-ter will fall into the same in-no-cent cat-egory. You know Peterson,
the com-mis-sion-aire?”

“Yes.”

“It is to him that this trophy be-longs.”

“It is his hat.”

“No, no, he found it. Its owner is un-known. I beg that you will look
upon it not as a battered bil-ly-cock but as an in-tel-lec-tual prob-lem.
And, first, as to how it came here. It ar-rived upon Christ-mas morn-ing,
in com-pany with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roast-ing
at this mo-ment in front of Peterson’s fire. The facts are these: about
four o’clock on Christ-mas morn-ing, Peterson, who, as you know, is a
very hon-est fel-low, was re-turn-ing from some small jol-li-fic-a-tion and was
mak-ing his way home-ward down Tot-ten-ham Court Road. In front of him he
saw, in the gas-light, a tallish man, walk-ing with a slight stag-ger, and
car-ry-ing a white goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached the
corner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger and a
little knot of roughs. One of the lat-ter knocked off the man’s hat, on
which he raised his stick to de-fend him-self and, swinging it over his
head, smashed the shop win-dow be-hind him. Peterson had rushed for-ward
to pro-tect the stranger from his as-sail-ants; but the man, shocked at
hav-ing broken the win-dow, and see-ing an of-fi-cial-look-ing per-son in
uni-form rush-ing to-wards him, dropped his goose, took to his heels, and
van-ished amid the labyrinth of small streets which lie at the back of
Tot-ten-ham Court Road. The roughs had also fled at the ap-pear-ance of
Peterson, so that he was left in pos-ses-sion of the field of battle, and
also of the spoils of vic-tory in the shape of this battered hat and a
most un-im-peach-able Christ-mas goose.”

“Which surely he re-stored to their owner?”

“My dear fel-low, there lies the prob-lem. It is true that ‘For Mrs.
Henry Baker’ was prin-ted upon a small card which was tied to the bird’s
left leg, and it is also true that the ini-tials ‘H. B.’ are legible
upon the lin-ing of this hat, but as there are some thou-sands of Bakers,
and some hun-dreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it is not easy
to re-store lost prop-erty to any one of them.”

“What, then, did Peterson do?”

“He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christ-mas morn-ing,
know-ing that even the smal-lest prob-lems are of in-terest to me. The
goose we re-tained un-til this morn-ing, when there were signs that, in
spite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eaten
without un-ne-ces-sary delay. Its finder has car-ried it off, there-fore, to
ful-fil the ul-ti-mate des-tiny of a goose, while I con-tinue to re-tain the
hat of the un-known gen-tle-man who lost his Christ-mas din-ner.”

“Did he not ad-vert-ise?”

“No.”

“Then, what clue could you have as to his iden-tity?”

“Only as much as we can de-duce.”

“From his hat?”

“Pre-cisely.”

“But you are jok-ing. What can you gather from this old battered felt?”

“Here is my lens. You know my meth-ods. What can you gather your-self as
to the in-di-vidu-al-ity of the man who has worn this art-icle?”

I took the tattered ob-ject in my hands and turned it over rather
rue-fully. It was a very or-din-ary black hat of the usual round shape,
hard and much the worse for wear. The lin-ing had been of red silk, but
was a good deal dis-col-oured. There was no maker’s name; but, as Holmes
had re-marked, the ini-tials “H. B.” were scrawled upon one side. It was
pierced in the brim for a hat-se-curer, but the elastic was miss-ing. For
the rest, it was cracked, ex-ceed-ingly dusty, and spot-ted in sev-eral
places, al-though there seemed to have been some at-tempt to hide the
dis-col-oured patches by smear-ing them with ink.

“I can see noth-ing,” said I, hand-ing it back to my friend.

“On the con-trary, Wat-son, you can see everything. You fail, how-ever, to
reason from what you see. You are too timid in draw-ing your
in-fer-ences.”

“Then, pray tell me what it is that you can in-fer from this hat?”

He picked it up and gazed at it in the pe-cu-liar in-tro-spect-ive fash-ion
which was char-ac-ter-istic of him. “It is per-haps less sug-gest-ive than it
might have been,” he re-marked, “and yet there are a few in-fer-ences
which are very dis-tinct, and a few oth-ers which rep-res-ent at least a
strong bal-ance of prob-ab-il-ity. That the man was highly in-tel-lec-tual is
of course ob-vi-ous upon the face of it, and also that he was fairly
well-to-do within the last three years, al-though he has now fallen upon
evil days. He had foresight, but has less now than formerly, point-ing
to a moral ret-ro-gres-sion, which, when taken with the de-cline of his
for-tunes, seems to in-dic-ate some evil in-flu-ence, prob-ably drink, at
work upon him. This may ac-count also for the ob-vi-ous fact that his wife
has ceased to love him.”

“My dear Holmes!”

“He has, how-ever, re-tained some de-gree of self-re-spect,” he con-tin-ued,
dis-reg-ard-ing my re-mon-strance. “He is a man who leads a sedent-ary life,
goes out little, is out of train-ing en-tirely, is middle-aged, has
grizzled hair which he has had cut within the last few days, and which
he anoints with lime-cream. These are the more pat-ent facts which are
to be de-duced from his hat. Also, by the way, that it is ex-tremely
im-prob-able that he has gas laid on in his house.”

“You are cer-tainly jok-ing, Holmes.”

“Not in the least. Is it pos-sible that even now, when I give you these
res-ults, you are un-able to see how they are at-tained?”

“I have no doubt that I am very stu-pid, but I must con-fess that I am
un-able to fol-low you. For ex-ample, how did you de-duce that this man was
in-tel-lec-tual?”

For an-swer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right over the
fore-head and settled upon the bridge of his nose. “It is a ques-tion of
cu-bic ca-pa-city,” said he; “a man with so large a brain must have
some-thing in it.”

“The de-cline of his for-tunes, then?”

“This hat is three years old. These flat brims curled at the edge came
in then. It is a hat of the very best qual-ity. Look at the band of
ribbed silk and the ex-cel-lent lin-ing. If this man could af-ford to buy
so ex-pens-ive a hat three years ago, and has had no hat since, then he
has as-suredly gone down in the world.”

“Well, that is clear enough, cer-tainly. But how about the foresight and
the moral ret-ro-gres-sion?”

Sh-er-lock Holmes laughed. “Here is the foresight,” said he put-ting his
fin-ger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-se-curer. “They are
never sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of a
cer-tain amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to take this
pre-cau-tion against the wind. But since we see that he has broken the
elastic and has not troubled to re-place it, it is ob-vi-ous that he has
less foresight now than formerly, which is a dis-tinct proof of a
weak-en-ing nature. On the other hand, he has en-deav-oured to con-ceal some
of these stains upon the felt by daub-ing them with ink, which is a sign
that he has not en-tirely lost his self-re-spect.”

“Your reas-on-ing is cer-tainly plaus-ible.”

“The fur-ther points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair is grizzled,
that it has been re-cently cut, and that he uses lime-cream, are all to
be gathered from a close ex-am-in-a-tion of the lower part of the lin-ing.
The lens dis-closes a large num-ber of hair-ends, clean cut by the
scis-sors of the barber. They all ap-pear to be ad-hes-ive, and there is a
dis-tinct odour of lime-cream. This dust, you will ob-serve, is not the
gritty, grey dust of the street but the fluffy brown dust of the house,
show-ing that it has been hung up in-doors most of the time, while the
marks of mois-ture upon the in-side are proof pos-it-ive that the wearer
per-spired very freely, and could there-fore, hardly be in the best of
train-ing.”

“But his wife—you said that she had ceased to love him.”

“This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dear
Wat-son, with a week’s ac-cu-mu-la-tion of dust upon your hat, and when your
wife al-lows you to go out in such a state, I shall fear that you also
have been un-for-tu-nate enough to lose your wife’s af-fec-tion.”

“But he might be a bach-elor.”

“Nay, he was bring-ing home the goose as a peace-of-fer-ing to his wife.
Re-mem-ber the card upon the bird’s leg.”

“You have an an-swer to everything. But how on earth do you de-duce that
the gas is not laid on in his house?”

“One tal-low stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when I see no
less than five, I think that there can be little doubt that the
in-di-vidual must be brought into fre-quent con-tact with burn-ing
tal-low—walks up-stairs at night prob-ably with his hat in one hand and a
gut-ter-ing candle in the other. Anyhow, he never got tal-low-stains from
a gas-jet. Are you sat-is-fied?”

“Well, it is very in-geni-ous,” said I, laugh-ing; “but since, as you said
just now, there has been no crime com-mit-ted, and no harm done save the
loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of en-ergy.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flew open,
and Peterson, the com-mis-sion-aire, rushed into the apart-ment with
flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed with as-ton-ish-ment.

“The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose, sir!” he gasped.

“Eh? What of it, then? Has it re-turned to life and flapped off through
the kit-chen win-dow?” Holmes twis-ted him-self round upon the sofa to get
a fairer view of the man’s ex-cited face.

“See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!” He held out his
hand and dis-played upon the centre of the palm a bril-liantly
scin-til-lat-ing blue stone, rather smal-ler than a bean in size, but of
such pur-ity and ra-di-ance that it twinkled like an elec-tric point in the
dark hol-low of his hand.

Sh-er-lock Holmes sat up with a whistle. “By Jove, Peterson!” said he,
“this is treas-ure trove in-deed. I sup-pose you know what you have got?”

“A dia-mond, sir? A pre-cious stone. It cuts into glass as though it were
putty.”

“It’s more than a pre-cious stone. It is _the_ pre-cious stone.”

“Not the Count-ess of Mor-car’s blue car-buncle!” I ejac-u-lated.

“Pre-cisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, see-ing that I have
read the ad-vert-ise-ment about it in _The Times_ every day lately. It is
ab-so-lutely unique, and its value can only be con-jec-tured, but the
re-ward offered of £ 1000 is cer-tainly not within a twen-ti-eth part of
the mar-ket price.”

“A thou-sand pounds! Great Lord of mercy!” The com-mis-sion-aire plumped
down into a chair and stared from one to the other of us.

“That is the re-ward, and I have reason to know that there are
sen-ti-mental con-sid-er-a-tions in the back-ground which would in-duce the
Count-ess to part with half her for-tune if she could but re-cover the
gem.”

“It was lost, if I re-mem-ber aright, at the Hotel Cos-mo-pol-itan,” I
re-marked.

“Pre-cisely so, on Decem-ber 22nd, just five days ago. John Horner, a
plumber, was ac-cused of hav-ing ab-strac-ted it from the lady’s
jewel-case. The evid-ence against him was so strong that the case has
been re-ferred to the Ass-izes. I have some ac-count of the mat-ter here, I
be-lieve.” He rum-maged amid his news-pa-pers, glan-cing over the dates,
un-til at last he smoothed one out, doubled it over, and read the
fol-low-ing para-graph:

“Hotel Cos-mo-pol-itan Jewel Rob-bery. John Horner, 26, plumber, was
brought up upon the charge of hav-ing upon the 22nd inst., ab-strac-ted
from the jewel-case of the Count-ess of Mor-car the valu-able gem known as
the blue car-buncle. James Ry-der, up-per-at-tend-ant at the hotel, gave his
evid-ence to the ef-fect that he had shown Horner up to the dress-ing-room
of the Count-ess of Mor-car upon the day of the rob-bery in or-der that he
might solder the second bar of the grate, which was loose. He had
re-mained with Horner some little time, but had fi-nally been called
away. On re-turn-ing, he found that Horner had dis-ap-peared, that the
bur-eau had been forced open, and that the small mo-rocco cas-ket in
which, as it af-ter-wards tran-spired, the Count-ess was ac-cus-tomed to keep
her jewel, was ly-ing empty upon the dress-ing-table. Ry-der in-stantly
gave the alarm, and Horner was ar-res-ted the same even-ing; but the stone
could not be found either upon his per-son or in his rooms. Cath-er-ine
Cu-sack, maid to the Count-ess, de-posed to hav-ing heard Ry-der’s cry of
dis-may on dis-cov-er-ing the rob-bery, and to hav-ing rushed into the room,
where she found mat-ters as de-scribed by the last wit-ness. In-spector
Brad-street, B di-vi-sion, gave evid-ence as to the ar-rest of Horner, who
struggled frantic-ally, and pro-tested his in-no-cence in the strongest
terms. Evid-ence of a pre-vi-ous con-vic-tion for rob-bery hav-ing been given
against the pris-oner, the ma-gis-trate re-fused to deal sum-mar-ily with the
of-fence, but re-ferred it to the Ass-izes. Horner, who had shown signs of
in-tense emo-tion dur-ing the pro-ceed-ings, fain-ted away at the con-clu-sion
and was car-ried out of court.”

“Hum! So much for the po-lice-court,” said Holmes thought-fully, toss-ing
aside the pa-per. “The ques-tion for us now to solve is the se-quence of
events lead-ing from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the crop of a
goose in Tot-ten-ham Court Road at the other. You see, Wat-son, our little
de-duc-tions have sud-denly as-sumed a much more im-port-ant and less
in-no-cent as-pect. Here is the stone; the stone came from the goose, and
the goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, the gen-tle-man with the bad hat and
all the other char-ac-ter-ist-ics with which I have bored you. So now we
must set ourselves very ser-i-ously to find-ing this gen-tle-man and
as-cer-tain-ing what part he has played in this little mys-tery. To do
this, we must try the simplest means first, and these lie un-doubtedly
in an ad-vert-ise-ment in all the even-ing pa-pers. If this fail, I shall
have re-course to other meth-ods.”

“What will you say?”

“Give me a pen-cil and that slip of pa-per. Now, then: ‘Found at the
corner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat. Mr. Henry Baker
can have the same by ap-ply-ing at 6:30 this even-ing at 221B, Baker
Street.’ That is clear and con-cise.”

“Very. But will he see it?”

“Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the pa-pers, since, to a poor man,
the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his mis-chance in
break-ing the win-dow and by the ap-proach of Peterson that he thought of
noth-ing but flight, but since then he must have bit-terly re-gret-ted the
im-pulse which caused him to drop his bird. Then, again, the
in-tro-duc-tion of his name will cause him to see it, for every-one who
knows him will dir-ect his at-ten-tion to it. Here you are, Peterson, run
down to the ad-vert-ising agency and have this put in the even-ing
pa-pers.”

“In which, sir?”

“Oh, in the _Globe_, _Star_, _Pall Mall_, _St. James’s Gaz-ette_,
_Even-ing News_, _Stand-ard_, _Echo_, and any oth-ers that oc-cur to you.”

“Very well, sir. And this stone?”

“Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Peterson, just
buy a goose on your way back and leave it here with me, for we must
have one to give to this gen-tle-man in place of the one which your
fam-ily is now de-vour-ing.”

When the com-mis-sion-aire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and held it
against the light. “It’s a bonny thing,” said he. “Just see how it
glints and sparkles. Of course it is a nuc-leus and fo-cus of crime.
Every good stone is. They are the devil’s pet baits. In the lar-ger and
older jew-els every fa-cet may stand for a bloody deed. This stone is not
yet twenty years old. It was found in the banks of the Amoy River in
south-ern Ch-ina and is re-mark-able in hav-ing every char-ac-ter-istic of the
car-buncle, save that it is blue in shade in-stead of ruby red. In spite
of its youth, it has already a sin-is-ter his-tory. There have been two
murders, a vit-riol-throw-ing, a sui-cide, and sev-eral rob-ber-ies brought
about for the sake of this forty-grain weight of crys-tal-lised char-coal.
Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a pur-veyor to the gal-lows
and the prison? I’ll lock it up in my strong box now and drop a line to
the Count-ess to say that we have it.”

“Do you think that this man Horner is in-no-cent?”

“I can-not tell.”

“Well, then, do you ima-gine that this other one, Henry Baker, had
any-thing to do with the mat-ter?”

“It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is an ab-so-lutely
in-no-cent man, who had no idea that the bird which he was car-ry-ing was
of con-sid-er-ably more value than if it were made of solid gold. That,
how-ever, I shall de-term-ine by a very simple test if we have an an-swer
to our ad-vert-ise-ment.”

“And you can do noth-ing un-til then?”

“Noth-ing.”

“In that case I shall con-tinue my pro-fes-sional round. But I shall come
back in the even-ing at the hour you have men-tioned, for I should like
to see the solu-tion of so tangled a busi-ness.”

“Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a wood-cock, I be-lieve.
By the way, in view of re-cent oc-cur-rences, per-haps I ought to ask Mrs.
Hud-son to ex-am-ine its crop.”

I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past six
when I found my-self in Baker Street once more. As I ap-proached the
house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bon-net with a coat which was
buttoned up to his chin wait-ing out-side in the bright semi-circle which
was thrown from the fan-light. Just as I ar-rived the door was opened,
and we were shown up to-gether to Holmes’ room.

“Mr. Henry Baker, I be-lieve,” said he, rising from his arm-chair and
greet-ing his vis-itor with the easy air of gen-i-al-ity which he could so
read-ily as-sume. “Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr. Baker. It is a
cold night, and I ob-serve that your cir-cu-la-tion is more ad-ap-ted for
sum-mer than for winter. Ah, Wat-son, you have just come at the right
time. Is that your hat, Mr. Baker?”

“Yes, sir, that is un-doubtedly my hat.”

He was a large man with roun-ded shoulders, a massive head, and a broad,
in-tel-li-gent face, slop-ing down to a poin-ted beard of grizzled brown. A
touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight tremor of his ex-ten-ded
hand, re-called Holmes’ sur-mise as to his habits. His rusty black
frock-coat was buttoned right up in front, with the col-lar turned up,
and his lank wrists pro-truded from his sleeves without a sign of cuff
or shirt. He spoke in a slow stac-cato fash-ion, choos-ing his words with
care, and gave the im-pres-sion gen-er-ally of a man of learn-ing and
let-ters who had had ill-us-age at the hands of for-tune.

“We have re-tained these things for some days,” said Holmes, “be-cause we
ex-pec-ted to see an ad-vert-ise-ment from you giv-ing your ad-dress. I am at
a loss to know now why you did not ad-vert-ise.”

Our vis-itor gave a rather shame-faced laugh. “Shillings have not been so
plen-ti-ful with me as they once were,” he re-marked. “I had no doubt that
the gang of roughs who as-saul-ted me had car-ried off both my hat and the
bird. I did not care to spend more money in a hope-less at-tempt at
re-cov-er-ing them.”

“Very nat-ur-ally. By the way, about the bird, we were com-pelled to eat
it.”

“To eat it!” Our vis-itor half rose from his chair in his ex-cite-ment.

“Yes, it would have been of no use to any-one had we not done so. But I
pre-sume that this other goose upon the side-board, which is about the
same weight and per-fectly fresh, will an-swer your pur-pose equally
well?”

“Oh, cer-tainly, cer-tainly,” answered Mr. Baker with a sigh of re-lief.

“Of course, we still have the feath-ers, legs, crop, and so on of your
own bird, so if you wish—”

The man burst into a hearty laugh. “They might be use-ful to me as
rel-ics of my ad-ven-ture,” said he, “but bey-ond that I can hardly see
what use the _dis-jecta mem-bra_ of my late ac-quaint-ance are go-ing to be
to me. No, sir, I think that, with your per-mis-sion, I will con-fine my
at-ten-tions to the ex-cel-lent bird which I per-ceive upon the side-board.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug of his
shoulders.

“There is your hat, then, and there your bird,” said he. “By the way,
would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I am
some-what of a fowl fan-cier, and I have sel-dom seen a bet-ter grown
goose.”

“Cer-tainly, sir,” said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newly gained
prop-erty un-der his arm. “There are a few of us who fre-quent the Alpha
Inn, near the Mu-seum—we are to be found in the Mu-seum it-self dur-ing the
day, you un-der-stand. This year our good host, Windig-ate by name,
in-sti-tuted a goose club, by which, on con-sid-er-a-tion of some few pence
every week, we were each to re-ceive a bird at Christ-mas. My pence were
duly paid, and the rest is fa-mil-iar to you. I am much in-debted to you,
sir, for a Scotch bon-net is fit-ted neither to my years nor my grav-ity.”
With a com-ical pom-pos-ity of man-ner he bowed sol-emnly to both of us and
strode off upon his way.

“So much for Mr. Henry Baker,” said Holmes when he had closed the door
be-hind him. “It is quite cer-tain that he knows noth-ing whatever about
the mat-ter. Are you hungry, Wat-son?”

“Not par-tic-u-larly.”

“Then I sug-gest that we turn our din-ner into a sup-per and fol-low up
this clue while it is still hot.”

“By all means.”

It was a bit-ter night, so we drew on our ul-sters and wrapped cravats
about our throats. Out-side, the stars were shin-ing coldly in a
cloud-less sky, and the breath of the pass-ers-by blew out into smoke
like so many pis-tol shots. Our foot-falls rang out crisply and loudly as
we swung through the doc-tors’ quarter, Wim-pole Street, Har-ley Street,
and so through Wig-more Street into Ox-ford Street. In a quarter of an
hour we were in Blooms-bury at the Alpha Inn, which is a small
pub-lic-house at the corner of one of the streets which runs down into
Hol-born. Holmes pushed open the door of the private bar and ordered two
glasses of beer from the ruddy-faced, white-ap-roned land-lord.

“Your beer should be ex-cel-lent if it is as good as your geese,” said
he.

“My geese!” The man seemed sur-prised.

“Yes. I was speak-ing only half an hour ago to Mr. Henry Baker, who was
a mem-ber of your goose club.”

“Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, them’s not _our_ geese.”

“Indeed! Whose, then?”

“Well, I got the two dozen from a sales-man in Covent Garden.”

“Indeed? I know some of them. Which was it?”

“Breck-in-ridge is his name.”

“Ah! I don’t know him. Well, here’s your good health land-lord, and
prosper-ity to your house. Good-night.”

“Now for Mr. Breck-in-ridge,” he con-tin-ued, but-ton-ing up his coat as we
came out into the frosty air. “Re-mem-ber, Wat-son that though we have so
homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at the
other a man who will cer-tainly get seven years’ penal ser-vitude un-less
we can es-tab-lish his in-no-cence. It is pos-sible that our in-quiry may but
con-firm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line of in-vest-ig-a-tion
which has been missed by the po-lice, and which a sin-gu-lar chance has
placed in our hands. Let us fol-low it out to the bit-ter end. Faces to
the south, then, and quick march!”

We passed across Hol-born, down Endell Street, and so through a zig-zag
of slums to Covent Garden Mar-ket. One of the largest stalls bore the
name of Breck-in-ridge upon it, and the pro-pri-etor a horsey-look-ing man,
with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers was help-ing a boy to put up
the shut-ters.

“Good-even-ing. It’s a cold night,” said Holmes.

The sales-man nod-ded and shot a ques-tion-ing glance at my com-pan-ion.

“Sold out of geese, I see,” con-tin-ued Holmes, point-ing at the bare
slabs of marble.

“Let you have five hun-dred to-mor-row morn-ing.”

“That’s no good.”

“Well, there are some on the stall with the gas-flare.”

“Ah, but I was re-com-men-ded to you.”

“Who by?”

“The land-lord of the Alpha.”

“Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen.”

“Fine birds they were, too. Now where did you get them from?”

To my sur-prise the ques-tion pro-voked a burst of an-ger from the
sales-man.

“Now, then, mis-ter,” said he, with his head cocked and his arms akimbo,
“what are you driv-ing at? Let’s have it straight, now.”

“It is straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the geese
which you sup-plied to the Alpha.”

“Well then, I shan’t tell you. So now!”

“Oh, it is a mat-ter of no im-port-ance; but I don’t know why you should
be so warm over such a trifle.”

“Warm! You’d be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. When I
pay good money for a good art-icle there should be an end of the
busi-ness; but it’s ‘Where are the geese?’ and ‘Who did you sell the
geese to?’ and ‘What will you take for the geese?’ One would think they
were the only geese in the world, to hear the fuss that is made over
them.”

“Well, I have no con-nec-tion with any other people who have been mak-ing
in-quir-ies,” said Holmes care-lessly. “If you won’t tell us the bet is
off, that is all. But I’m al-ways ready to back my opin-ion on a mat-ter
of fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate is coun-try
bred.”

“Well, then, you’ve lost your fiver, for it’s town bred,” snapped the
sales-man.

“It’s noth-ing of the kind.”

“I say it is.”

“I don’t be-lieve it.”

“D’you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled them
ever since I was a nip-per? I tell you, all those birds that went to the
Alpha were town bred.”

“You’ll never per-suade me to be-lieve that.”

“Will you bet, then?”

“It’s merely tak-ing your money, for I know that I am right. But I’ll
have a sov-er-eign on with you, just to teach you not to be ob-stin-ate.”

The sales-man chuckled grimly. “Bring me the books, Bill,” said he.

The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a great
greasy-backed one, lay-ing them out to-gether be-neath the hanging lamp.

“Now then, Mr. Cock-sure,” said the sales-man, “I thought that I was out
of geese, but be-fore I fin-ish you’ll find that there is still one left
in my shop. You see this little book?”

“Well?”

“That’s the list of the folk from whom I buy. D’you see? Well, then,
here on this page are the coun-try folk, and the num-bers after their
names are where their ac-counts are in the big ledger. Now, then! You
see this other page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my town
sup-pli-ers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out to me.”

“Mrs. Oak-shott, 117, Brix-ton Road—249,” read Holmes.

“Quite so. Now turn that up in the ledger.”

Holmes turned to the page in-dic-ated. “Here you are, ‘Mrs. Oak-shott,
117, Brix-ton Road, egg and poultry sup-plier.’”

“Now, then, what’s the last entry?”

“‘Decem-ber 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7_s_. 6_d_.’”

“Quite so. There you are. And un-der-neath?”

“‘Sold to Mr. Windig-ate of the Alpha, at 12_s_.’”

“What have you to say now?”

Sh-er-lock Holmes looked deeply chag-rined. He drew a sov-er-eign from his
pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turn-ing away with the air of a
man whose dis-gust is too deep for words. A few yards off he stopped
un-der a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noise-less fash-ion which
was pe-cu-liar to him.

“When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the ‘Pink ’un’
pro-trud-ing out of his pocket, you can al-ways draw him by a bet,” said
he. “I daresay that if I had put £ 100 down in front of him, that man
would not have given me such com-plete in-form-a-tion as was drawn from him
by the idea that he was do-ing me on a wager. Well, Wat-son, we are, I
fancy, near-ing the end of our quest, and the only point which re-mains
to be de-term-ined is whether we should go on to this Mrs. Oak-shott
to-night, or whether we should re-serve it for to-mor-row. It is clear
from what that surly fel-low said that there are oth-ers be-sides
ourselves who are anxious about the mat-ter, and I should—”

His re-marks were sud-denly cut short by a loud hub-bub which broke out
from the stall which we had just left. Turn-ing round we saw a little
rat-faced fel-low stand-ing in the centre of the circle of yel-low light
which was thrown by the swinging lamp, while Breck-in-ridge, the
sales-man, framed in the door of his stall, was shak-ing his fists
fiercely at the cringing fig-ure.

“I’ve had enough of you and your geese,” he shouted. “I wish you were
all at the devil to-gether. If you come pes-ter-ing me any more with your
silly talk I’ll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oak-shott here and
I’ll an-swer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geese
off you?”

“No; but one of them was mine all the same,” whined the little man.

“Well, then, ask Mrs. Oak-shott for it.”

“She told me to ask you.”

“Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I care. I’ve had enough
of it. Get out of this!” He rushed fiercely for-ward, and the in-quirer
flit-ted away into the dark-ness.

“Ha! this may save us a visit to Brix-ton Road,” whispered Holmes. “Come
with me, and we will see what is to be made of this fel-low.” Strid-ing
through the scattered knots of people who lounged round the flar-ing
stalls, my com-pan-ion speedily over-took the little man and touched him
upon the shoulder. He sprang round, and I could see in the gas-light
that every vestige of col-our had been driven from his face.

“Who are you, then? What do you want?” he asked in a quaver-ing voice.

“You will ex-cuse me,” said Holmes blandly, “but I could not help
over-hear-ing the ques-tions which you put to the sales-man just now. I
think that I could be of as-sist-ance to you.”

“You? Who are you? How could you know any-thing of the mat-ter?”

“My name is Sh-er-lock Holmes. It is my busi-ness to know what other
people don’t know.”

“But you can know noth-ing of this?”

“Ex-cuse me, I know everything of it. You are en-deav-our-ing to trace some
geese which were sold by Mrs. Oak-shott, of Brix-ton Road, to a sales-man
named Breck-in-ridge, by him in turn to Mr. Windig-ate, of the Alpha, and
by him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a mem-ber.”

“Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet,” cried the
little fel-low with out-stretched hands and quiv-er-ing fin-gers. “I can
hardly ex-plain to you how in-ter-ested I am in this mat-ter.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. “In that case
we had bet-ter dis-cuss it in a cosy room rather than in this wind-swept
mar-ket-place,” said he. “But pray tell me, be-fore we go farther, who it
is that I have the pleas-ure of as-sist-ing.”

The man hes-it-ated for an in-stant. “My name is John Robin-son,” he
answered with a side-long glance.

“No, no; the real name,” said Holmes sweetly. “It is al-ways awk-ward
do-ing busi-ness with an alias.”

A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. “Well then,” said
he, “my real name is James Ry-der.”

“Pre-cisely so. Head at-tend-ant at the Hotel Cos-mo-pol-itan. Pray step into
the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you everything which you
would wish to know.”

The little man stood glan-cing from one to the other of us with
half-frightened, half-hope-ful eyes, as one who is not sure whether he
is on the verge of a wind-fall or of a cata-strophe. Then he stepped into
the cab, and in half an hour we were back in the sit-ting-room at Baker
Street. Noth-ing had been said dur-ing our drive, but the high, thin
breath-ing of our new com-pan-ion, and the clasp-ings and un-clasp-ings of
his hands, spoke of the nervous ten-sion within him.

“Here we are!” said Holmes cheer-ily as we filed into the room. “The
fire looks very sea-son-able in this weather. You look cold, Mr. Ry-der.
Pray take the bas-ket-chair. I will just put on my slip-pers be-fore we
settle this little mat-ter of yours. Now, then! You want to know what
be-came of those geese?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, I ima-gine in which
you were in-ter-ested—white, with a black bar across the tail.”

Ry-der quivered with emo-tion. “Oh, sir,” he cried, “can you tell me
where it went to?”

“It came here.”

“Here?”

“Yes, and a most re-mark-able bird it proved. I don’t won-der that you
should take an in-terest in it. It laid an egg after it was dead—the
bon-ni-est, bright-est little blue egg that ever was seen. I have it here
in my mu-seum.”

Our vis-itor staggered to his feet and clutched the man-tel-piece with his
right hand. Holmes un-locked his strong-box and held up the blue
car-buncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold, bril-liant,
many-poin-ted ra-di-ance. Ry-der stood glar-ing with a drawn face, un-cer-tain
whether to claim or to dis-own it.

“The game’s up, Ry-der,” said Holmes quietly. “Hold up, man, or you’ll
be into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Wat-son. He’s not
got blood enough to go in for felony with im-pun-ity. Give him a dash of
brandy. So! Now he looks a little more hu-man. What a shrimp it is, to
be sure!”

For a mo-ment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandy brought
a tinge of col-our into his cheeks, and he sat star-ing with frightened
eyes at his ac-cuser.

“I have al-most every link in my hands, and all the proofs which I could
pos-sibly need, so there is little which you need tell me. Still, that
little may as well be cleared up to make the case com-plete. You had
heard, Ry-der, of this blue stone of the Count-ess of Mor-car’s?”

“It was Cath-er-ine Cu-sack who told me of it,” said he in a crack-ling
voice.

“I see—her lady-ship’s wait-ing-maid. Well, the tempta-tion of sud-den
wealth so eas-ily ac-quired was too much for you, as it has been for
bet-ter men be-fore you; but you were not very scru-pu-lous in the means
you used. It seems to me, Ry-der, that there is the mak-ing of a very
pretty vil-lain in you. You knew that this man Horner, the plumber, had
been con-cerned in some such mat-ter be-fore, and that sus-pi-cion would
rest the more read-ily upon him. What did you do, then? You made some
small job in my lady’s room—you and your con-fed-er-ate Cu-sack—and you
man-aged that he should be the man sent for. Then, when he had left, you
rifled the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this un-for-tu-nate man
ar-res-ted. You then—”

Ry-der threw him-self down sud-denly upon the rug and clutched at my
com-pan-ion’s knees. “For God’s sake, have mercy!” he shrieked. “Think of
my father! Of my mother! It would break their hearts. I never went
wrong be-fore! I never will again. I swear it. I’ll swear it on a Bible.
Oh, don’t bring it into court! For Christ’s sake, don’t!”

“Get back into your chair!” said Holmes sternly. “It is very well to
cringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this poor Horner
in the dock for a crime of which he knew noth-ing.”

“I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the coun-try, sir. Then the charge
against him will break down.”

“Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true ac-count of
the next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the goose
into the open mar-ket? Tell us the truth, for there lies your only hope
of safety.”

Ry-der passed his tongue over his parched lips. “I will tell you it just
as it happened, sir,” said he. “When Horner had been ar-res-ted, it
seemed to me that it would be best for me to get away with the stone at
once, for I did not know at what mo-ment the po-lice might not take it
into their heads to search me and my room. There was no place about the
hotel where it would be safe. I went out, as if on some com-mis-sion, and
I made for my sis-ter’s house. She had mar-ried a man named Oak-shott, and
lived in Brix-ton Road, where she fattened fowls for the mar-ket. All the
way there every man I met seemed to me to be a po-lice-man or a
de-tect-ive; and, for all that it was a cold night, the sweat was pour-ing
down my face be-fore I came to the Brix-ton Road. My sis-ter asked me what
was the mat-ter, and why I was so pale; but I told her that I had been
up-set by the jewel rob-bery at the hotel. Then I went into the back yard
and smoked a pipe and wondered what it would be best to do.

“I had a friend once called Maud-s-ley, who went to the bad, and has just
been serving his time in Penton-ville. One day he had met me, and fell
into talk about the ways of thieves, and how they could get rid of what
they stole. I knew that he would be true to me, for I knew one or two
things about him; so I made up my mind to go right on to Kil-burn, where
he lived, and take him into my con-fid-ence. He would show me how to turn
the stone into money. But how to get to him in safety? I thought of the
ag-on-ies I had gone through in com-ing from the hotel. I might at any
mo-ment be seized and searched, and there would be the stone in my
waist-coat pocket. I was lean-ing against the wall at the time and
look-ing at the geese which were wad-dling about round my feet, and
sud-denly an idea came into my head which showed me how I could beat the
best de-tect-ive that ever lived.

“My sis-ter had told me some weeks be-fore that I might have the pick of
her geese for a Christ-mas present, and I knew that she was al-ways as
good as her word. I would take my goose now, and in it I would carry my
stone to Kil-burn. There was a little shed in the yard, and be-hind this
I drove one of the birds—a fine big one, white, with a barred tail. I
caught it, and pry-ing its bill open, I thrust the stone down its throat
as far as my fin-ger could reach. The bird gave a gulp, and I felt the
stone pass along its gul-let and down into its crop. But the creature
flapped and struggled, and out came my sis-ter to know what was the
mat-ter. As I turned to speak to her the brute broke loose and fluttered
off among the oth-ers.

“‘Whatever were you do-ing with that bird, Jem?’ says she.

“‘Well,’ said I, ‘you said you’d give me one for Christ-mas, and I was
feel-ing which was the fat-test.’

“‘Oh,’ says she, ‘we’ve set yours aside for you—Jem’s bird, we call it.
It’s the big white one over yon-der. There’s twenty-six of them, which
makes one for you, and one for us, and two dozen for the mar-ket.’

“‘Thank you, Mag-gie,’ says I; ‘but if it is all the same to you, I’d
rather have that one I was hand-ling just now.’

“‘The other is a good three pound heav-ier,’ said she, ‘and we fattened
it ex-pressly for you.’

“‘Never mind. I’ll have the other, and I’ll take it now,’ said I.

“‘Oh, just as you like,’ said she, a little huffed. ‘Which is it you
want, then?’

“‘That white one with the barred tail, right in the middle of the
flock.’

“‘Oh, very well. Kill it and take it with you.’

“Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I car-ried the bird all the
way to Kil-burn. I told my pal what I had done, for he was a man that it
was easy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed un-til he choked, and
we got a knife and opened the goose. My heart turned to wa-ter, for
there was no sign of the stone, and I knew that some ter-rible mis-take
had oc-curred. I left the bird, rushed back to my sis-ter’s, and hur-ried
into the back yard. There was not a bird to be seen there.

“‘Where are they all, Mag-gie?’ I cried.

“‘Gone to the dealer’s, Jem.’

“‘Which dealer’s?’

“‘Breck-in-ridge, of Covent Garden.’

“‘But was there an-other with a barred tail?’ I asked, ‘the same as the
one I chose?’

“‘Yes, Jem; there were two barred-tailed ones, and I could never tell
them apart.’

“Well, then, of course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as my feet
would carry me to this man Breck-in-ridge; but he had sold the lot at
once, and not one word would he tell me as to where they had gone. You
heard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has al-ways answered me like
that. My sis-ter thinks that I am go-ing mad. So-me-times I think that I am
my-self. And now—and now I am my-self a branded thief, without ever
hav-ing touched the wealth for which I sold my char-ac-ter. God help me!
God help me!” He burst into con-vuls-ive sob-bing, with his face bur-ied in
his hands.

There was a long si-lence, broken only by his heavy breath-ing and by the
meas-ured tap-ping of Sh-er-lock Holmes’ fin-ger-tips upon the edge of the
table. Then my friend rose and threw open the door.

“Get out!” said he.

“What, sir! Oh, Heaven bless you!”

“No more words. Get out!”

And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clat-ter upon the
stairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of run-ning foot-falls
from the street.

“After all, Wat-son,” said Holmes, reach-ing up his hand for his clay
pipe, “I am not re-tained by the po-lice to sup-ply their de-fi-cien-cies. If
Horner were in danger it would be an-other thing; but this fel-low will
not ap-pear against him, and the case must col-lapse. I sup-pose that I am
com-mut-ing a felony, but it is just pos-sible that I am sav-ing a soul.
This fel-low will not go wrong again; he is too ter-ribly frightened.
Send him to gaol now, and you make him a gaol-bird for life. Besides,
it is the sea-son of for-give-ness. Chance has put in our way a most
sin-gu-lar and whim-sical prob-lem, and its solu-tion is its own re-ward. If
you will have the good-ness to touch the bell, Doc-tor, we will be-gin
an-other in-vest-ig-a-tion, in which, also a bird will be the chief
fea-ture.”



VIII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BAND

On glan-cing over my notes of the sev-enty odd cases in which I have
dur-ing the last eight years stud-ied the meth-ods of my friend Sh-er-lock
Holmes, I find many tra-gic, some comic, a large num-ber merely strange,
but none com-mon-place; for, work-ing as he did rather for the love of his
art than for the ac-quire-ment of wealth, he re-fused to as-so-ci-ate him-self
with any in-vest-ig-a-tion which did not tend to-wards the un-usual, and even
the fant-astic. Of all these var-ied cases, how-ever, I can-not re-call any
which presen-ted more sin-gu-lar fea-tures than that which was as-so-ci-ated
with the well-known Sur-rey fam-ily of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran. The
events in ques-tion oc-curred in the early days of my as-so-ci-ation with
Holmes, when we were shar-ing rooms as bach-el-ors in Baker Street. It is
pos-sible that I might have placed them upon re-cord be-fore, but a
prom-ise of secrecy was made at the time, from which I have only been
freed dur-ing the last month by the un-timely death of the lady to whom
the pledge was given. It is per-haps as well that the facts should now
come to light, for I have reas-ons to know that there are wide-spread
ru-mours as to the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the
mat-ter even more ter-rible than the truth.

It was early in April in the year ’83 that I woke one morn-ing to find
Sh-er-lock Holmes stand-ing, fully dressed, by the side of my bed. He was
a late riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the man-tel-piece showed me
that it was only a quarter-past seven, I blinked up at him in some
sur-prise, and per-haps just a little re-sent-ment, for I was my-self
reg-u-lar in my habits.

“Very sorry to knock you up, Wat-son,” said he, “but it’s the com-mon lot
this morn-ing. Mrs. Hud-son has been knocked up, she re-tor-ted upon me,
and I on you.”

“What is it, then—a fire?”

“No; a cli-ent. It seems that a young lady has ar-rived in a con-sid-er-able
state of ex-cite-ment, who in-sists upon see-ing me. She is wait-ing now in
the sit-ting-room. Now, when young ladies wander about the met-ro-polis at
this hour of the morn-ing, and knock sleepy people up out of their beds,
I pre-sume that it is some-thing very press-ing which they have to
com-mu-nic-ate. Should it prove to be an in-ter-est-ing case, you would, I am
sure, wish to fol-low it from the out-set. I thought, at any rate, that I
should call you and give you the chance.”

“My dear fel-low, I would not miss it for any-thing.”

I had no keener pleas-ure than in fol-low-ing Holmes in his pro-fes-sional
in-vest-ig-a-tions, and in ad-mir-ing the rapid de-duc-tions, as swift as
in-tu-itions, and yet al-ways foun-ded on a lo-gical basis with which he
un-rav-elled the prob-lems which were sub-mit-ted to him. I rap-idly threw on
my clothes and was ready in a few minutes to ac-com-pany my friend down
to the sit-ting-room. A lady dressed in black and heav-ily veiled, who
had been sit-ting in the win-dow, rose as we entered.

“Good-morn-ing, madam,” said Holmes cheer-ily. “My name is Sh-er-lock
Holmes. This is my in-tim-ate friend and as-so-ci-ate, Dr. Wat-son, be-fore
whom you can speak as freely as be-fore my-self. Ha! I am glad to see
that Mrs. Hud-son has had the good sense to light the fire. Pray draw up
to it, and I shall or-der you a cup of hot cof-fee, for I ob-serve that
you are shiv-er-ing.”

“It is not cold which makes me shiver,” said the wo-man in a low voice,
chan-ging her seat as re-ques-ted.

“What, then?”

“It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is ter-ror.” She raised her veil as she
spoke, and we could see that she was in-deed in a pi-ti-able state of
agit-a-tion, her face all drawn and grey, with rest-less frightened eyes,
like those of some hunted an-imal. Her fea-tures and fig-ure were those of
a wo-man of thirty, but her hair was shot with pre-ma-ture grey, and her
ex-pres-sion was weary and hag-gard. Sh-er-lock Holmes ran her over with one
of his quick, all-com-pre-hens-ive glances.

“You must not fear,” said he sooth-ingly, bend-ing for-ward and pat-ting
her fore-arm. “We shall soon set mat-ters right, I have no doubt. You
have come in by train this morn-ing, I see.”

“You know me, then?”

“No, but I ob-serve the second half of a re-turn ticket in the palm of
your left glove. You must have star-ted early, and yet you had a good
drive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, be-fore you reached the
sta-tion.”

The lady gave a vi-ol-ent start and stared in be-wil-der-ment at my
com-pan-ion.

“There is no mys-tery, my dear madam,” said he, smil-ing. “The left arm
of your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than seven places. The
marks are per-fectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a dog-cart which
throws up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the left-hand
side of the driver.”

“Whatever your reas-ons may be, you are per-fectly cor-rect,” said she. “I
star-ted from home be-fore six, reached Leath-er-head at twenty past, and
came in by the first train to Water-loo. Sir, I can stand this strain no
longer; I shall go mad if it con-tin-ues. I have no one to turn to—none,
save only one, who cares for me, and he, poor fel-low, can be of little
aid. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs.
Far-in-tosh, whom you helped in the hour of her sore need. It was from
her that I had your ad-dress. Oh, sir, do you not think that you could
help me, too, and at least throw a little light through the dense
dark-ness which sur-rounds me? At present it is out of my power to re-ward
you for your ser-vices, but in a month or six weeks I shall be mar-ried,
with the con-trol of my own in-come, and then at least you shall not find
me un-grate-ful.”

Holmes turned to his desk and, un-lock-ing it, drew out a small
case-book, which he con-sul-ted.

“Far-in-tosh,” said he. “Ah yes, I re-call the case; it was con-cerned with
an opal tiara. I think it was be-fore your time, Wat-son. I can only say,
madam, that I shall be happy to de-vote the same care to your case as I
did to that of your friend. As to re-ward, my pro-fes-sion is its own
re-ward; but you are at liberty to de-fray whatever ex-penses I may be put
to, at the time which suits you best. And now I beg that you will lay
be-fore us everything that may help us in form-ing an opin-ion upon the
mat-ter.”

“Alas!” replied our vis-itor, “the very hor-ror of my situ-ation lies in
the fact that my fears are so vague, and my sus-pi-cions de-pend so
en-tirely upon small points, which might seem trivial to an-other, that
even he to whom of all oth-ers I have a right to look for help and
ad-vice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fan-cies of a
nervous wo-man. He does not say so, but I can read it from his sooth-ing
an-swers and aver-ted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can
see deeply into the man-i-fold wicked-ness of the hu-man heart. You may
ad-vise me how to walk amid the dangers which en-com-pass me.”

“I am all at-ten-tion, madam.”

“My name is Helen Stoner, and I am liv-ing with my step-father, who is
the last sur-vivor of one of the old-est Saxon fam-il-ies in Eng-land, the
Roylotts of Stoke Moran, on the west-ern bor-der of Sur-rey.”

Holmes nod-ded his head. “The name is fa-mil-iar to me,” said he.

“The fam-ily was at one time among the richest in Eng-land, and the
es-tates ex-ten-ded over the bor-ders into Berkshire in the north, and
Hamp-shire in the west. In the last cen-tury, how-ever, four suc-cess-ive
heirs were of a dis-sol-ute and waste-ful dis-pos-i-tion, and the fam-ily ruin
was even-tu-ally com-pleted by a gam-bler in the days of the Re-gency.
Noth-ing was left save a few acres of ground, and the
two-hun-dred-year-old house, which is it-self crushed un-der a heavy
mort-gage. The last squire dragged out his ex-ist-ence there, liv-ing the
hor-rible life of an ar-is-to-cratic pau-per; but his only son, my
step-father, see-ing that he must ad-apt him-self to the new con-di-tions,
ob-tained an ad-vance from a re-l-at-ive, which en-abled him to take a
med-ical de-gree and went out to Cal-cutta, where, by his pro-fes-sional
skill and his force of char-ac-ter, he es-tab-lished a large prac-tice. In a
fit of an-ger, how-ever, caused by some rob-ber-ies which had been
per-pet-rated in the house, he beat his nat-ive but-ler to death and
nar-rowly es-caped a cap-ital sen-tence. As it was, he suffered a long term
of im-pris-on-ment and af-ter-wards re-turned to Eng-land a mor-ose and
dis-ap-poin-ted man.

“When Dr. Roylott was in In-dia he mar-ried my mother, Mrs. Stoner, the
young widow of Ma-jor-Gen-eral Stoner, of the Bengal Ar-til-lery. My sis-ter
Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at the time of
my mother’s re-mar-riage. She had a con-sid-er-able sum of money—not less
than £ 1000 a year—and this she be-queathed to Dr. Roylott en-tirely
while we resided with him, with a pro-vi-sion that a cer-tain an-nual sum
should be al-lowed to each of us in the event of our mar-riage. Shortly
after our re-turn to Eng-land my mother died—she was killed eight years
ago in a rail-way ac-ci-dent near Crewe. Dr. Roylott then aban-doned his
at-tempts to es-tab-lish him-self in prac-tice in Lon-don and took us to live
with him in the old an-ces-tral house at Stoke Moran. The money which my
mother had left was enough for all our wants, and there seemed to be no
obstacle to our hap-pi-ness.

“But a ter-rible change came over our step-father about this time.
In-stead of mak-ing friends and ex-chan-ging vis-its with our neigh-bours,
who had at first been over-joyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back in
the old fam-ily seat, he shut him-self up in his house and sel-dom came
out save to in-dulge in fe-ro-cious quar-rels with who-ever might cross his
path. Vi-olence of tem-per ap-proach-ing to mania has been hered-it-ary in
the men of the fam-ily, and in my step-father’s case it had, I be-lieve,
been in-tens-i-fied by his long res-id-ence in the trop-ics. A series of
dis-grace-ful brawls took place, two of which ended in the po-lice-court,
un-til at last he be-came the ter-ror of the vil-lage, and the folks would
fly at his ap-proach, for he is a man of im-mense strength, and
ab-so-lutely un-con-trol-lable in his an-ger.

“Last week he hurled the local black-smith over a para-pet into a stream,
and it was only by pay-ing over all the money which I could gather
to-gether that I was able to avert an-other pub-lic ex-pos-ure. He had no
friends at all save the wan-der-ing gip-sies, and he would give these
vag-a-bonds leave to en-camp upon the few acres of bramble-covered land
which rep-res-ent the fam-ily es-tate, and would ac-cept in re-turn the
hos-pit-al-ity of their tents, wan-der-ing away with them some-times for
weeks on end. He has a pas-sion also for In-dian an-im-als, which are sent
over to him by a cor-res-pond-ent, and he has at this mo-ment a chee-tah and
a ba-boon, which wander freely over his grounds and are feared by the
vil-la-gers al-most as much as their mas-ter.

“You can ima-gine from what I say that my poor sis-ter Julia and I had no
great pleas-ure in our lives. No ser-vant would stay with us, and for a
long time we did all the work of the house. She was but thirty at the
time of her death, and yet her hair had already be-gun to whiten, even
as mine has.”

“Your sis-ter is dead, then?”

“She died just two years ago, and it is of her death that I wish to
speak to you. You can un-der-stand that, liv-ing the life which I have
de-scribed, we were little likely to see any-one of our own age and
po-s-i-tion. We had, how-ever, an aunt, my mother’s maiden sis-ter, Miss
Honoria West-phail, who lives near Har-row, and we were oc-ca-sion-ally
al-lowed to pay short vis-its at this lady’s house. Julia went there at
Christ-mas two years ago, and met there a half-pay ma-jor of mar-ines, to
whom she be-came en-gaged. My step-father learned of the en-gage-ment when
my sis-ter re-turned and offered no ob-jec-tion to the mar-riage; but within
a fort-night of the day which had been fixed for the wed-ding, the
ter-rible event oc-curred which has de-prived me of my only com-pan-ion.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes had been lean-ing back in his chair with his eyes closed
and his head sunk in a cush-ion, but he half opened his lids now and
glanced across at his vis-itor.

“Pray be pre-cise as to de-tails,” said he.

“It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dread-ful time is
seared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said, very
old, and only one wing is now in-hab-ited. The bed-rooms in this wing are
on the ground floor, the sit-ting-rooms be-ing in the cent-ral block of
the build-ings. Of these bed-rooms the first is Dr. Roylott’s, the second
my sis-ter’s, and the third my own. There is no com-mu-nic-a-tion between
them, but they all open out into the same cor-ridor. Do I make my-self
plain?”

“Per-fectly so.”

“The win-dows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That fatal
night Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though we knew that he
had not re-tired to rest, for my sis-ter was troubled by the smell of the
strong In-dian ci-gars which it was his cus-tom to smoke. She left her
room, there-fore, and came into mine, where she sat for some time,
chat-ting about her ap-proach-ing wed-ding. At el-even o’clock she rose to
leave me, but she paused at the door and looked back.

“‘Tell me, Helen,’ said she, ‘have you ever heard any-one whistle in the
dead of the night?’

“‘Never,’ said I.

“‘I sup-pose that you could not pos-sibly whistle, your-self, in your
sleep?’

“‘Cer-tainly not. But why?’

“‘Be-cause dur-ing the last few nights I have al-ways, about three in the
morn-ing, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper, and it has
awakened me. I can-not tell where it came from—per-haps from the next
room, per-haps from the lawn. I thought that I would just ask you
whether you had heard it.’

“‘No, I have not. It must be those wretched gip-sies in the plant-a-tion.’

“‘Very likely. And yet if it were on the lawn, I won-der that you did
not hear it also.’

“‘Ah, but I sleep more heav-ily than you.’

“‘Well, it is of no great con-sequence, at any rate.’ She smiled back at
me, closed my door, and a few mo-ments later I heard her key turn in the
lock.”

“Indeed,” said Holmes. “Was it your cus-tom al-ways to lock yourselves in
at night?”

“Al-ways.”

“And why?”

“I think that I men-tioned to you that the Doc-tor kept a chee-tah and a
ba-boon. We had no feel-ing of se-cur-ity un-less our doors were locked.”

“Quite so. Pray pro-ceed with your state-ment.”

“I could not sleep that night. A vague feel-ing of im-pend-ing mis-for-tune
im-pressed me. My sis-ter and I, you will re-col-lect, were twins, and you
know how subtle are the links which bind two souls which are so closely
al-lied. It was a wild night. The wind was howl-ing out-side, and the rain
was beat-ing and splash-ing against the win-dows. Sud-denly, amid all the
hub-bub of the gale, there burst forth the wild scream of a ter-ri-fied
wo-man. I knew that it was my sis-ter’s voice. I sprang from my bed,
wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the cor-ridor. As I opened my
door I seemed to hear a low whistle, such as my sis-ter de-scribed, and a
few mo-ments later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen.
As I ran down the pas-sage, my sis-ter’s door was un-locked, and re-volved
slowly upon its hinges. I stared at it hor-ror-stricken, not know-ing
what was about to is-sue from it. By the light of the cor-ridor-lamp I
saw my sis-ter ap-pear at the open-ing, her face blanched with ter-ror, her
hands grop-ing for help, her whole fig-ure sway-ing to and fro like that
of a drunk-ard. I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at that
mo-ment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground. She
writhed as one who is in ter-rible pain, and her limbs were dread-fully
con-vulsed. At first I thought that she had not re-cog-nised me, but as I
bent over her she sud-denly shrieked out in a voice which I shall never
for-get, ‘Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled band!’ There
was some-thing else which she would fain have said, and she stabbed with
her fin-ger into the air in the dir-ec-tion of the Doc-tor’s room, but a
fresh con-vul-sion seized her and choked her words. I rushed out, call-ing
loudly for my step-father, and I met him hasten-ing from his room in his
dress-ing-gown. When he reached my sis-ter’s side she was un-con-scious,
and though he poured brandy down her throat and sent for med-ical aid
from the vil-lage, all ef-forts were in vain, for she slowly sank and
died without hav-ing re-covered her con-scious-ness. Such was the dread-ful
end of my be-loved sis-ter.”

“One mo-ment,” said Holmes, “are you sure about this whistle and
metal-lic sound? Could you swear to it?”

“That was what the county cor-oner asked me at the in-quiry. It is my
strong im-pres-sion that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of the gale
and the creak-ing of an old house, I may pos-sibly have been de-ceived.”

“Was your sis-ter dressed?”

“No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found the
charred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box.”

“Show-ing that she had struck a light and looked about her when the
alarm took place. That is im-port-ant. And what con-clu-sions did the
cor-oner come to?”

“He in-vest-ig-ated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott’s con-duct
had long been no-tori-ous in the county, but he was un-able to find any
sat-is-fact-ory cause of death. My evid-ence showed that the door had been
fastened upon the in-ner side, and the win-dows were blocked by
old-fash-ioned shut-ters with broad iron bars, which were se-cured every
night. The walls were care-fully soun-ded, and were shown to be quite
solid all round, and the floor-ing was also thor-oughly ex-amined, with
the same res-ult. The chim-ney is wide, but is barred up by four large
staples. It is cer-tain, there-fore, that my sis-ter was quite alone when
she met her end. Besides, there were no marks of any vi-ol-ence upon
her.”

“How about poison?”

“The doc-tors ex-amined her for it, but without suc-cess.”

“What do you think that this un-for-tu-nate lady died of, then?”

“It is my be-lief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, though
what it was that frightened her I can-not ima-gine.”

“Were there gip-sies in the plant-a-tion at the time?”

“Yes, there are nearly al-ways some there.”

“Ah, and what did you gather from this al-lu-sion to a band—a speckled
band?”

“So-me-times I have thought that it was merely the wild talk of de-li-rium,
some-times that it may have re-ferred to some band of people, per-haps to
these very gip-sies in the plant-a-tion. I do not know whether the spot-ted
handker-chiefs which so many of them wear over their heads might have
sug-ges-ted the strange ad-ject-ive which she used.”

Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from be-ing sat-is-fied.

“These are very deep wa-ters,” said he; “pray go on with your
nar-rat-ive.”

“Two years have passed since then, and my life has been un-til lately
lone-lier than ever. A month ago, how-ever, a dear friend, whom I have
known for many years, has done me the hon-our to ask my hand in
mar-riage. His name is Armit-age—Percy Armit-age—the second son of Mr.
Armit-age, of Crane Water, near Read-ing. My step-father has offered no
op-pos-i-tion to the match, and we are to be mar-ried in the course of the
spring. Two days ago some re-pairs were star-ted in the west wing of the
build-ing, and my bed-room wall has been pierced, so that I have had to
move into the cham-ber in which my sis-ter died, and to sleep in the very
bed in which she slept. Ima-gine, then, my thrill of ter-ror when last
night, as I lay awake, think-ing over her ter-rible fate, I sud-denly
heard in the si-lence of the night the low whistle which had been the
her-ald of her own death. I sprang up and lit the lamp, but noth-ing was
to be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed again, how-ever,
so I dressed, and as soon as it was day-light I slipped down, got a
dog-cart at the Crown Inn, which is op-pos-ite, and drove to Leath-er-head,
from whence I have come on this morn-ing with the one ob-ject of see-ing
you and ask-ing your ad-vice.”

“You have done wisely,” said my friend. “But have you told me all?”

“Yes, all.”

“Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screen-ing your step-father.”

“Why, what do you mean?”

For an-swer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed the
hand that lay upon our vis-itor’s knee. Five little livid spots, the
marks of four fin-gers and a thumb, were prin-ted upon the white wrist.

“You have been cruelly used,” said Holmes.

The lady col-oured deeply and covered over her in-jured wrist. “He is a
hard man,” she said, “and per-haps he hardly knows his own strength.”

There was a long si-lence, dur-ing which Holmes leaned his chin upon his
hands and stared into the crack-ling fire.

“This is a very deep busi-ness,” he said at last. “There are a thou-sand
de-tails which I should de-sire to know be-fore I de-cide upon our course
of ac-tion. Yet we have not a mo-ment to lose. If we were to come to
Stoke Moran to-day, would it be pos-sible for us to see over these rooms
without the know-ledge of your step-father?”

“As it hap-pens, he spoke of com-ing into town to-day upon some most
im-port-ant busi-ness. It is prob-able that he will be away all day, and
that there would be noth-ing to dis-turb you. We have a house-keeper now,
but she is old and fool-ish, and I could eas-ily get her out of the way.”

“Ex-cel-lent. You are not averse to this trip, Wat-son?”

“By no means.”

“Then we shall both come. What are you go-ing to do your-self?”

“I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I am in
town. But I shall re-turn by the twelve o’clock train, so as to be there
in time for your com-ing.”

“And you may ex-pect us early in the af-ter-noon. I have my-self some small
busi-ness mat-ters to at-tend to. Will you not wait and break-fast?”

“No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have con-fided my
trouble to you. I shall look for-ward to see-ing you again this
af-ter-noon.” She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glided
from the room.

“And what do you think of it all, Wat-son?” asked Sh-er-lock Holmes,
lean-ing back in his chair.

“It seems to me to be a most dark and sin-is-ter busi-ness.”

“Dark enough and sin-is-ter enough.”

“Yet if the lady is cor-rect in say-ing that the floor-ing and walls are
sound, and that the door, win-dow, and chim-ney are im-pass-able, then her
sis-ter must have been un-doubtedly alone when she met her mys-ter-i-ous
end.”

“What be-comes, then, of these noc-turnal whistles, and what of the very
pe-cu-liar words of the dy-ing wo-man?”

“I can-not think.”

“When you com-bine the ideas of whistles at night, the pres-ence of a
band of gip-sies who are on in-tim-ate terms with this old doc-tor, the
fact that we have every reason to be-lieve that the doc-tor has an
in-terest in pre-vent-ing his step-daugh-ter’s mar-riage, the dy-ing al-lu-sion
to a band, and, fi-nally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoner heard a
metal-lic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal bars
that se-cured the shut-ters fall-ing back into its place, I think that
there is good ground to think that the mys-tery may be cleared along
those lines.”

“But what, then, did the gip-sies do?”

“I can-not ima-gine.”

“I see many ob-jec-tions to any such the-ory.”

“And so do I. It is pre-cisely for that reason that we are go-ing to
Stoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the ob-jec-tions are fatal,
or if they may be ex-plained away. But what in the name of the devil!”

The ejac-u-la-tion had been drawn from my com-pan-ion by the fact that our
door had been sud-denly dashed open, and that a huge man had framed
him-self in the aper-ture. His cos-tume was a pe-cu-liar mix-ture of the
pro-fes-sional and of the ag-ri-cul-tural, hav-ing a black top-hat, a long
frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunt-ing-crop swinging in
his hand. So tall was he that his hat ac-tu-ally brushed the cross bar of
the door-way, and his breadth seemed to span it across from side to
side. A large face, seared with a thou-sand wrinkles, burned yel-low with
the sun, and marked with every evil pas-sion, was turned from one to the
other of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin,
flesh-less nose, gave him some-what the re-semb-lance to a fierce old bird
of prey.

“Which of you is Holmes?” asked this ap-par-i-tion.

“My name, sir; but you have the ad-vant-age of me,” said my com-pan-ion
quietly.

“I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran.”

“Indeed, Doc-tor,” said Holmes blandly. “Pray take a seat.”

“I will do noth-ing of the kind. My step-daugh-ter has been here. I have
traced her. What has she been say-ing to you?”

“It is a little cold for the time of the year,” said Holmes.

“What has she been say-ing to you?” screamed the old man furi-ously.

“But I have heard that the cro-cuses prom-ise well,” con-tin-ued my
com-pan-ion im-per-turb-ably.

“Ha! You put me off, do you?” said our new vis-itor, tak-ing a step
for-ward and shak-ing his hunt-ing-crop. “I know you, you scoun-drel! I
have heard of you be-fore. You are Holmes, the med-dler.”

My friend smiled.

“Holmes, the busy-body!”

His smile broadened.

“Holmes, the Scot-land Yard Jack-in-of-fice!”

Holmes chuckled heart-ily. “Your con-ver-sa-tion is most en-ter-tain-ing,”
said he. “When you go out close the door, for there is a de-cided
draught.”

“I will go when I have had my say. Don’t you dare to meddle with my
af-fairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I traced her! I am a
dan-ger-ous man to fall foul of! See here.” He stepped swiftly for-ward,
seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with his huge brown hands.

“See that you keep your-self out of my grip,” he snarled, and hurl-ing
the twis-ted poker into the fire-place he strode out of the room.

“He seems a very ami-able per-son,” said Holmes, laugh-ing. “I am not
quite so bulky, but if he had re-mained I might have shown him that my
grip was not much more feeble than his own.” As he spoke he picked up
the steel poker and, with a sud-den ef-fort, straightened it out again.

“Fancy his hav-ing the in-solence to con-found me with the of-fi-cial
de-tect-ive force! This in-cid-ent gives zest to our in-vest-ig-a-tion,
how-ever, and I only trust that our little friend will not suf-fer from
her im-prudence in al-low-ing this brute to trace her. And now, Wat-son, we
shall or-der break-fast, and af-ter-wards I shall walk down to Doc-tors’
Com-mons, where I hope to get some data which may help us in this
mat-ter.”

It was nearly one o’clock when Sh-er-lock Holmes re-turned from his
ex-cur-sion. He held in his hand a sheet of blue pa-per, scrawled over
with notes and fig-ures.

“I have seen the will of the de-ceased wife,” said he. “To de-term-ine its
ex-act mean-ing I have been ob-liged to work out the present prices of the
in-vest-ments with which it is con-cerned. The total in-come, which at the
time of the wife’s death was little short of £ 1,100, is now, through
the fall in ag-ri-cul-tural prices, not more than £ 750. Each daugh-ter can
claim an in-come of £ 250, in case of mar-riage. It is evid-ent,
there-fore, that if both girls had mar-ried, this beauty would have had a
mere pit-tance, while even one of them would cripple him to a very
ser-i-ous ex-tent. My morn-ing’s work has not been wasted, since it has
proved that he has the very strongest motives for stand-ing in the way
of any-thing of the sort. And now, Wat-son, this is too ser-i-ous for
dawdling, es-pe-cially as the old man is aware that we are in-ter-est-ing
ourselves in his af-fairs; so if you are ready, we shall call a cab and
drive to Water-loo. I should be very much ob-liged if you would slip your
re-volver into your pocket. An Eley’s No. 2 is an ex-cel-lent ar-gu-ment
with gen-tle-men who can twist steel pokers into knots. That and a
tooth-brush are, I think, all that we need.”

At Water-loo we were for-tu-nate in catch-ing a train for Leath-er-head,
where we hired a trap at the sta-tion inn and drove for four or five
miles through the lovely Sur-rey lanes. It was a per-fect day, with a
bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heav-ens. The trees and
way-side hedges were just throw-ing out their first green shoots, and the
air was full of the pleas-ant smell of the moist earth. To me at least
there was a strange con-trast between the sweet prom-ise of the spring
and this sin-is-ter quest upon which we were en-gaged. My com-pan-ion sat in
the front of the trap, his arms fol-ded, his hat pulled down over his
eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, bur-ied in the deep-est thought.
Sud-denly, how-ever, he star-ted, tapped me on the shoulder, and poin-ted
over the mead-ows.

“Look there!” said he.

A heav-ily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thick-en-ing into
a grove at the highest point. From amid the branches there jut-ted out
the grey gables and high roof-tree of a very old man-sion.

“Stoke Moran?” said he.

“Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott,” re-marked the
driver.

“There is some build-ing go-ing on there,” said Holmes; “that is where we
are go-ing.”

“There’s the vil-lage,” said the driver, point-ing to a cluster of roofs
some dis-tance to the left; “but if you want to get to the house, you’ll
find it shorter to get over this stile, and so by the foot-path over the
fields. There it is, where the lady is walk-ing.”

“And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner,” ob-served Holmes, shad-ing his
eyes. “Yes, I think we had bet-ter do as you sug-gest.”

We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its way to
Leath-er-head.

“I thought it as well,” said Holmes as we climbed the stile, “that this
fel-low should think we had come here as ar-chi-tects, or on some def-in-ite
busi-ness. It may stop his gos-sip. Good-af-ter-noon, Miss Stoner. You see
that we have been as good as our word.”

Our cli-ent of the morn-ing had hur-ried for-ward to meet us with a face
which spoke her joy. “I have been wait-ing so eagerly for you,” she
cried, shak-ing hands with us warmly. “All has turned out splen-didly.
Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is un-likely that he will be back
be-fore even-ing.”

“We have had the pleas-ure of mak-ing the Doc-tor’s ac-quaint-ance,” said
Holmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had oc-curred. Miss
Stoner turned white to the lips as she listened.

“Good heav-ens!” she cried, “he has fol-lowed me, then.”

“So it ap-pears.”

“He is so cun-ning that I never know when I am safe from him. What will
he say when he re-turns?”

“He must guard him-self, for he may find that there is someone more
cun-ning than him-self upon his track. You must lock your-self up from him
to-night. If he is vi-ol-ent, we shall take you away to your aunt’s at
Har-row. Now, we must make the best use of our time, so kindly take us
at once to the rooms which we are to ex-am-ine.”

The build-ing was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high cent-ral
por-tion and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab, thrown out on
each side. In one of these wings the win-dows were broken and blocked
with wooden boards, while the roof was partly caved in, a pic-ture of
ruin. The cent-ral por-tion was in little bet-ter re-pair, but the
right-hand block was com-par-at-ively mod-ern, and the blinds in the
win-dows, with the blue smoke curl-ing up from the chim-neys, showed that
this was where the fam-ily resided. Some scaf-fold-ing had been erec-ted
against the end wall, and the stone-work had been broken into, but
there were no signs of any work-men at the mo-ment of our visit. Holmes
walked slowly up and down the ill-trimmed lawn and ex-amined with deep
at-ten-tion the out-sides of the win-dows.

“This, I take it, be-longs to the room in which you used to sleep, the
centre one to your sis-ter’s, and the one next to the main build-ing to
Dr. Roylott’s cham-ber?”

“Ex-actly so. But I am now sleep-ing in the middle one.”

“Pend-ing the al-ter-a-tions, as I un-der-stand. By the way, there does not
seem to be any very press-ing need for re-pairs at that end wall.”

“There were none. I be-lieve that it was an ex-cuse to move me from my
room.”

“Ah! that is sug-gest-ive. Now, on the other side of this nar-row wing
runs the cor-ridor from which these three rooms open. There are win-dows
in it, of course?”

“Yes, but very small ones. Too nar-row for any-one to pass through.”

“As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were un-ap-proach-able
from that side. Now, would you have the kind-ness to go into your room
and bar your shut-ters?”

Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a care-ful ex-am-in-a-tion through the
open win-dow, en-deav-oured in every way to force the shut-ter open, but
without suc-cess. There was no slit through which a knife could be
passed to raise the bar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges, but
they were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive ma-sonry. “Hum!”
said he, scratch-ing his chin in some per-plex-ity, “my the-ory cer-tainly
presents some dif-fi-culties. No one could pass these shut-ters if they
were bolted. Well, we shall see if the in-side throws any light upon the
mat-ter.”

A small side door led into the white-washed cor-ridor from which the
three bed-rooms opened. Holmes re-fused to ex-am-ine the third cham-ber, so
we passed at once to the second, that in which Miss Stoner was now
sleep-ing, and in which her sis-ter had met with her fate. It was a
homely little room, with a low ceil-ing and a gap-ing fire-place, after
the fash-ion of old coun-try-houses. A brown chest of draw-ers stood in
one corner, a nar-row white-coun-ter-paned bed in an-other, and a
dress-ing-table on the left-hand side of the win-dow. These art-icles,
with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the fur-niture in the
room save for a square of Wilton car-pet in the centre. The boards round
and the pan-el-ling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so old
and dis-col-oured that it may have dated from the ori-ginal build-ing of
the house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat si-lent,
while his eyes trav-elled round and round and up and down, tak-ing in
every de-tail of the apart-ment.

“Where does that bell com-mu-nic-ate with?” he asked at last point-ing to a
thick bell-rope which hung down be-side the bed, the tas-sel ac-tu-ally
ly-ing upon the pil-low.

“It goes to the house-keeper’s room.”

“It looks newer than the other things?”

“Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago.”

“Your sis-ter asked for it, I sup-pose?”

“No, I never heard of her us-ing it. We used al-ways to get what we
wanted for ourselves.”

“Indeed, it seemed un-ne-ces-sary to put so nice a bell-pull there. You
will ex-cuse me for a few minutes while I sat-isfy my-self as to this
floor.” He threw him-self down upon his face with his lens in his hand
and crawled swiftly back-ward and for-ward, ex-amin-ing minutely the cracks
between the boards. Then he did the same with the wood-work with which
the cham-ber was pan-elled. Fin-ally he walked over to the bed and spent
some time in star-ing at it and in run-ning his eye up and down the wall.
Fin-ally he took the bell-rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug.

“Why, it’s a dummy,” said he.

“Won’t it ring?”

“No, it is not even at-tached to a wire. This is very in-ter-est-ing. You
can see now that it is fastened to a hook just above where the little
open-ing for the vent-il-ator is.”

“How very ab-surd! I never no-ticed that be-fore.”

“Very strange!” muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. “There are one or
two very sin-gu-lar points about this room. For ex-ample, what a fool a
builder must be to open a vent-il-ator into an-other room, when, with the
same trouble, he might have com-mu-nic-ated with the out-side air!”

“That is also quite mod-ern,” said the lady.

“Done about the same time as the bell-rope?” re-marked Holmes.

“Yes, there were sev-eral little changes car-ried out about that time.”

“They seem to have been of a most in-ter-est-ing char-ac-ter—dummy
bell-ropes, and vent-il-at-ors which do not vent-il-ate. With your
per-mis-sion, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our re-searches into the
in-ner apart-ment.”

Dr. Grimesby Roylott’s cham-ber was lar-ger than that of his
step-daugh-ter, but was as plainly fur-nished. A camp-bed, a small wooden
shelf full of books, mostly of a tech-nical char-ac-ter, an arm-chair
be-side the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, a round table,
and a large iron safe were the prin-cipal things which met the eye.
Holmes walked slowly round and ex-amined each and all of them with the
keen-est in-terest.

“What’s in here?” he asked, tap-ping the safe.

“My step-father’s busi-ness pa-pers.”

“Oh! you have seen in-side, then?”

“Only once, some years ago. I re-mem-ber that it was full of pa-pers.”

“There isn’t a cat in it, for ex-ample?”

“No. What a strange idea!”

“Well, look at this!” He took up a small sau-cer of milk which stood on
the top of it.

“No; we don’t keep a cat. But there is a chee-tah and a ba-boon.”

“Ah, yes, of course! Well, a chee-tah is just a big cat, and yet a
sau-cer of milk does not go very far in sat-is-fy-ing its wants, I daresay.
There is one point which I should wish to de-term-ine.” He squat-ted down
in front of the wooden chair and ex-amined the seat of it with the
greatest at-ten-tion.

“Thank you. That is quite settled,” said he, rising and put-ting his
lens in his pocket. “Hullo! Here is some-thing in-ter-est-ing!”

The ob-ject which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on one
corner of the bed. The lash, how-ever, was curled upon it-self and tied
so as to make a loop of whip-cord.

“What do you make of that, Wat-son?”

“It’s a com-mon enough lash. But I don’t know why it should be tied.”

“That is not quite so com-mon, is it? Ah, me! it’s a wicked world, and
when a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst of all. I
think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with your
per-mis-sion we shall walk out upon the lawn.”

I had never seen my friend’s face so grim or his brow so dark as it was
when we turned from the scene of this in-vest-ig-a-tion. We had walked
sev-eral times up and down the lawn, neither Miss Stoner nor my-self
lik-ing to break in upon his thoughts be-fore he roused him-self from his
rev-erie.

“It is very es-sen-tial, Miss Stoner,” said he, “that you should
ab-so-lutely fol-low my ad-vice in every re-spect.”

“I shall most cer-tainly do so.”

“The mat-ter is too ser-i-ous for any hes-it-a-tion. Your life may de-pend
upon your com-pli-ance.”

“I as-sure you that I am in your hands.”

“In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night in your
room.”

Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in as-ton-ish-ment.

“Yes, it must be so. Let me ex-plain. I be-lieve that that is the vil-lage
inn over there?”

“Yes, that is the Crown.”

“Very good. Your win-dows would be vis-ible from there?”

“Cer-tainly.”

“You must con-fine your-self to your room, on pre-tence of a head-ache,
when your step-father comes back. Then when you hear him re-tire for the
night, you must open the shut-ters of your win-dow, undo the hasp, put
your lamp there as a sig-nal to us, and then with-draw quietly with
everything which you are likely to want into the room which you used to
oc-cupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the re-pairs, you could man-age
there for one night.”

“Oh, yes, eas-ily.”

“The rest you will leave in our hands.”

“But what will you do?”

“We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall in-vest-ig-ate the
cause of this noise which has dis-turbed you.”

“I be-lieve, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind,” said
Miss Stoner, lay-ing her hand upon my com-pan-ion’s sleeve.

“Per-haps I have.”

“Then, for pity’s sake, tell me what was the cause of my sis-ter’s
death.”

“I should prefer to have clearer proofs be-fore I speak.”

“You can at least tell me whether my own thought is cor-rect, and if she
died from some sud-den fright.”

“No, I do not think so. I think that there was prob-ably some more
tan-gible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr.
Roylott re-turned and saw us our jour-ney would be in vain. Good-bye, and
be brave, for if you will do what I have told you, you may rest as-sured
that we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes and I had no dif-fi-culty in en-ga-ging a bed-room and
sit-ting-room at the Crown Inn. They were on the up-per floor, and from
our win-dow we could com-mand a view of the av-enue gate, and of the
in-hab-ited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw Dr. Grimesby
Roylott drive past, his huge form loom-ing up be-side the little fig-ure
of the lad who drove him. The boy had some slight dif-fi-culty in un-do-ing
the heavy iron gates, and we heard the hoarse roar of the Doc-tor’s
voice and saw the fury with which he shook his clinched fists at him.
The trap drove on, and a few minutes later we saw a sud-den light spring
up among the trees as the lamp was lit in one of the sit-ting-rooms.

“Do you know, Wat-son,” said Holmes as we sat to-gether in the gath-er-ing
dark-ness, “I have really some scruples as to tak-ing you to-night. There
is a dis-tinct ele-ment of danger.”

“Can I be of as-sist-ance?”

“Your pres-ence might be in-valu-able.”

“Then I shall cer-tainly come.”

“It is very kind of you.”

“You speak of danger. You have evid-ently seen more in these rooms than
was vis-ible to me.”

“No, but I fancy that I may have de-duced a little more. I ima-gine that
you saw all that I did.”

“I saw noth-ing re-mark-able save the bell-rope, and what pur-pose that
could an-swer I con-fess is more than I can ima-gine.”

“You saw the vent-il-ator, too?”

“Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very un-usual thing to have a
small open-ing between two rooms. It was so small that a rat could
hardly pass through.”

“I knew that we should find a vent-il-ator be-fore ever we came to Stoke
Moran.”

“My dear Holmes!”

“Oh, yes, I did. You re-mem-ber in her state-ment she said that her sis-ter
could smell Dr. Roylott’s ci-gar. Now, of course that sug-ges-ted at once
that there must be a com-mu-nic-a-tion between the two rooms. It could only
be a small one, or it would have been re-marked upon at the cor-oner’s
in-quiry. I de-duced a vent-il-ator.”

“But what harm can there be in that?”

“Well, there is at least a curi-ous co-in-cid-ence of dates. A vent-il-ator
is made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Does
not that strike you?”

“I can-not as yet see any con-nec-tion.”

“Did you ob-serve any-thing very pe-cu-liar about that bed?”

“No.”

“It was clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a bed fastened like that
be-fore?”

“I can-not say that I have.”

“The lady could not move her bed. It must al-ways be in the same
re-l-at-ive po-s-i-tion to the vent-il-ator and to the rope—or so we may call
it, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull.”

“Holmes,” I cried, “I seem to see dimly what you are hint-ing at. We are
only just in time to pre-vent some subtle and hor-rible crime.”

“Subtle enough and hor-rible enough. When a doc-tor does go wrong he is
the first of crim-in-als. He has nerve and he has know-ledge. Palmer and
Pritchard were among the heads of their pro-fes-sion. This man strikes
even deeper, but I think, Wat-son, that we shall be able to strike
deeper still. But we shall have hor-rors enough be-fore the night is
over; for good-ness’ sake let us have a quiet pipe and turn our minds
for a few hours to some-thing more cheer-ful.”

About nine o’clock the light among the trees was ex-tin-guished, and all
was dark in the dir-ec-tion of the Manor House. Two hours passed slowly
away, and then, sud-denly, just at the stroke of el-even, a single bright
light shone out right in front of us.

“That is our sig-nal,” said Holmes, spring-ing to his feet; “it comes
from the middle win-dow.”

As we passed out he ex-changed a few words with the land-lord, ex-plain-ing
that we were go-ing on a late visit to an ac-quaint-ance, and that it was
pos-sible that we might spend the night there. A mo-ment later we were
out on the dark road, a chill wind blow-ing in our faces, and one yel-low
light twink-ling in front of us through the gloom to guide us on our
sombre er-rand.

There was little dif-fi-culty in en-ter-ing the grounds, for un-re-paired
breaches gaped in the old park wall. Mak-ing our way among the trees, we
reached the lawn, crossed it, and were about to enter through the
win-dow when out from a clump of laurel bushes there dar-ted what seemed
to be a hideous and dis-tor-ted child, who threw it-self upon the grass
with writh-ing limbs and then ran swiftly across the lawn into the
dark-ness.

“My God!” I whispered; “did you see it?”

Holmes was for the mo-ment as startled as I. His hand closed like a vice
upon my wrist in his agit-a-tion. Then he broke into a low laugh and put
his lips to my ear.

“It is a nice house-hold,” he mur-mured. “That is the ba-boon.”

I had for-got-ten the strange pets which the Doc-tor af-fected. There was a
chee-tah, too; per-haps we might find it upon our shoulders at any
mo-ment. I con-fess that I felt easier in my mind when, after fol-low-ing
Holmes’ ex-ample and slip-ping off my shoes, I found my-self in-side the
bed-room. My com-pan-ion noise-lessly closed the shut-ters, moved the lamp
onto the table, and cast his eyes round the room. All was as we had
seen it in the day-time. Then creep-ing up to me and mak-ing a trum-pet of
his hand, he whispered into my ear again so gently that it was all that
I could do to dis-tin-guish the words:

“The least sound would be fatal to our plans.”

I nod-ded to show that I had heard.

“We must sit without light. He would see it through the vent-il-ator.”

I nod-ded again.

“Do not go asleep; your very life may de-pend upon it. Have your pis-tol
ready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of the bed, and
you in that chair.”

I took out my re-volver and laid it on the corner of the table.

Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon the bed
be-side him. By it he laid the box of matches and the stump of a candle.
Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left in dark-ness.

How shall I ever for-get that dread-ful vi-gil? I could not hear a sound,
not even the draw-ing of a breath, and yet I knew that my com-pan-ion sat
open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same state of nervous
ten-sion in which I was my-self. The shut-ters cut off the least ray of
light, and we waited in ab-so-lute dark-ness.

From out-side came the oc-ca-sional cry of a night-bird, and once at our
very win-dow a long drawn cat-like whine, which told us that the chee-tah
was in-deed at liberty. Far away we could hear the deep tones of the
par-ish clock, which boomed out every quarter of an hour. How long they
seemed, those quar-ters! Twelve struck, and one and two and three, and
still we sat wait-ing si-lently for whatever might be-fall.

Sud-denly there was the mo-ment-ary gleam of a light up in the dir-ec-tion
of the vent-il-ator, which van-ished im-me-di-ately, but was suc-ceeded by a
strong smell of burn-ing oil and heated metal. Someone in the next room
had lit a dark-lan-tern. I heard a gentle sound of move-ment, and then
all was si-lent once more, though the smell grew stronger. For half an
hour I sat with strain-ing ears. Then sud-denly an-other sound be-came
aud-ible—a very gentle, sooth-ing sound, like that of a small jet of
steam es-cap-ing con-tinu-ally from a kettle. The in-stant that we heard it,
Holmes sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed furi-ously with
his cane at the bell-pull.

“You see it, Wat-son?” he yelled. “You see it?”

But I saw noth-ing. At the mo-ment when Holmes struck the light I heard a
low, clear whistle, but the sud-den glare flash-ing into my weary eyes
made it im-possible for me to tell what it was at which my friend lashed
so sav-agely. I could, how-ever, see that his face was deadly pale and
filled with hor-ror and loath-ing. He had ceased to strike and was gaz-ing
up at the vent-il-ator when sud-denly there broke from the si-lence of the
night the most hor-rible cry to which I have ever listened. It swelled
up louder and louder, a hoarse yell of pain and fear and an-ger all
mingled in the one dread-ful shriek. They say that away down in the
vil-lage, and even in the dis-tant par-son-age, that cry raised the
sleep-ers from their beds. It struck cold to our hearts, and I stood
gaz-ing at Holmes, and he at me, un-til the last echoes of it had died
away into the si-lence from which it rose.

“What can it mean?” I gasped.

“It means that it is all over,” Holmes answered. “And per-haps, after
all, it is for the best. Take your pis-tol, and we will enter Dr.
Roylott’s room.”

With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the cor-ridor.
Twice he struck at the cham-ber door without any reply from within. Then
he turned the handle and entered, I at his heels, with the cocked
pis-tol in my hand.

It was a sin-gu-lar sight which met our eyes. On the table stood a
dark-lan-tern with the shut-ter half open, throw-ing a bril-liant beam of
light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar. Beside this
table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in a long
grey dress-ing-gown, his bare ankles pro-trud-ing be-neath, and his feet
thrust into red heel-less Turk-ish slip-pers. Across his lap lay the short
stock with the long lash which we had no-ticed dur-ing the day. His chin
was cocked up-ward and his eyes were fixed in a dread-ful, ri-gid stare at
the corner of the ceil-ing. Round his brow he had a pe-cu-liar yel-low
band, with brown-ish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly round
his head. As we entered he made neither sound nor mo-tion.

“The band! the speckled band!” whispered Holmes.

I took a step for-ward. In an in-stant his strange headgear began to
move, and there reared it-self from among his hair the squat
dia-mond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loath-some ser-pent.

“It is a swamp ad-der!” cried Holmes; “the dead-li-est snake in In-dia. He
has died within ten seconds of be-ing bit-ten. Vi-olence does, in truth,
re-coil upon the vi-ol-ent, and the schemer falls into the pit which he
digs for an-other. Let us thrust this creature back into its den, and we
can then re-move Miss Stoner to some place of shel-ter and let the county
po-lice know what has happened.”

As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man’s lap, and
throw-ing the noose round the rep-tile’s neck he drew it from its hor-rid
perch and, car-ry-ing it at arm’s length, threw it into the iron safe,
which he closed upon it.

Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke
Moran. It is not ne-ces-sary that I should pro-long a nar-rat-ive which has
already run to too great a length by telling how we broke the sad news
to the ter-ri-fied girl, how we con-veyed her by the morn-ing train to the
care of her good aunt at Har-row, of how the slow pro-cess of of-fi-cial
in-quiry came to the con-clu-sion that the doc-tor met his fate while
in-dis-creetly play-ing with a dan-ger-ous pet. The little which I had yet
to learn of the case was told me by Sh-er-lock Holmes as we trav-elled
back next day.

“I had,” said he, “come to an en-tirely er-ro-neous con-clu-sion which
shows, my dear Wat-son, how dan-ger-ous it al-ways is to reason from
in-suf-fi-cient data. The pres-ence of the gip-sies, and the use of the word
‘band,’ which was used by the poor girl, no doubt, to ex-plain the
ap-pear-ance which she had caught a hur-ried glimpse of by the light of
her match, were suf-fi-cient to put me upon an en-tirely wrong scent. I
can only claim the merit that I in-stantly re-con-sidered my po-s-i-tion
when, how-ever, it be-came clear to me that whatever danger threatened an
oc-cu-pant of the room could not come either from the win-dow or the door.
My at-ten-tion was speedily drawn, as I have already re-marked to you, to
this vent-il-ator, and to the bell-rope which hung down to the bed. The
dis-cov-ery that this was a dummy, and that the bed was clamped to the
floor, in-stantly gave rise to the sus-pi-cion that the rope was there as
a bridge for some-thing passing through the hole and com-ing to the bed.
The idea of a snake in-stantly oc-curred to me, and when I coupled it
with my know-ledge that the doc-tor was fur-nished with a sup-ply of
creatures from In-dia, I felt that I was prob-ably on the right track.
The idea of us-ing a form of poison which could not pos-sibly be
dis-covered by any chem-ical test was just such a one as would oc-cur to a
clever and ruth-less man who had had an Eastern train-ing. The rapid-ity
with which such a poison would take ef-fect would also, from his point
of view, be an ad-vant-age. It would be a sharp-eyed cor-oner, in-deed, who
could dis-tin-guish the two little dark punc-tures which would show where
the poison fangs had done their work. Then I thought of the whistle. Of
course he must re-call the snake be-fore the morn-ing light re-vealed it to
the vic-tim. He had trained it, prob-ably by the use of the milk which we
saw, to re-turn to him when summoned. He would put it through this
vent-il-ator at the hour that he thought best, with the cer-tainty that it
would crawl down the rope and land on the bed. It might or might not
bite the oc-cu-pant, per-haps she might es-cape every night for a week, but
sooner or later she must fall a vic-tim.

“I had come to these con-clu-sions be-fore ever I had entered his room. An
in-spec-tion of his chair showed me that he had been in the habit of
stand-ing on it, which of course would be ne-ces-sary in or-der that he
should reach the vent-il-ator. The sight of the safe, the sau-cer of milk,
and the loop of whip-cord were enough to fi-nally dis-pel any doubts which
may have re-mained. The metal-lic clang heard by Miss Stoner was
ob-vi-ously caused by her step-father hast-ily clos-ing the door of his safe
upon its ter-rible oc-cu-pant. Hav-ing once made up my mind, you know the
steps which I took in or-der to put the mat-ter to the proof. I heard the
creature hiss as I have no doubt that you did also, and I in-stantly lit
the light and at-tacked it.”

“With the res-ult of driv-ing it through the vent-il-ator.”

“And also with the res-ult of caus-ing it to turn upon its mas-ter at the
other side. Some of the blows of my cane came home and roused its
snakish tem-per, so that it flew upon the first per-son it saw. In this
way I am no doubt in-dir-ectly re-spons-ible for Dr. Grimesby Roylott’s
death, and I can-not say that it is likely to weigh very heav-ily upon my
con-science.”



IX. THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER’S THUMB

Of all the prob-lems which have been sub-mit-ted to my friend, Mr.
Sh-er-lock Holmes, for solu-tion dur-ing the years of our in-tim-acy, there
were only two which I was the means of in-tro-du-cing to his no-tice—that
of Mr. Hath-er-ley’s thumb, and that of Co-l-onel War-bur-ton’s mad-ness. Of
these the lat-ter may have af-forded a finer field for an acute and
ori-ginal ob-server, but the other was so strange in its in-cep-tion and so
dra-matic in its de-tails that it may be the more worthy of be-ing placed
upon re-cord, even if it gave my friend fewer open-ings for those
de-duct-ive meth-ods of reas-on-ing by which he achieved such re-mark-able
res-ults. The story has, I be-lieve, been told more than once in the
news-pa-pers, but, like all such nar-rat-ives, its ef-fect is much less
strik-ing when set forth _en bloc_ in a single half-column of print than
when the facts slowly evolve be-fore your own eyes, and the mys-tery
clears gradu-ally away as each new dis-cov-ery fur-nishes a step which
leads on to the com-plete truth. At the time the cir-cum-stances made a
deep im-pres-sion upon me, and the lapse of two years has hardly served
to weaken the ef-fect.

It was in the sum-mer of ’89, not long after my mar-riage, that the
events oc-curred which I am now about to sum-mar-ise. I had re-turned to
civil prac-tice and had fi-nally aban-doned Holmes in his Baker Street
rooms, al-though I con-tinu-ally vis-ited him and oc-ca-sion-ally even
per-suaded him to forgo his Bo-hemian habits so far as to come and visit
us. My prac-tice had stead-ily in-creased, and as I happened to live at no
very great dis-tance from Pad-ding-ton Sta-tion, I got a few pa-tients from
among the of-fi-cials. One of these, whom I had cured of a pain-ful and
linger-ing dis-ease, was never weary of ad-vert-ising my vir-tues and of
en-deav-our-ing to send me on every suf-ferer over whom he might have any
in-flu-ence.

One morn-ing, at a little be-fore seven o’clock, I was awakened by the
maid tap-ping at the door to an-nounce that two men had come from
Pad-ding-ton and were wait-ing in the con-sult-ing-room. I dressed
hur-riedly, for I knew by ex-per-i-ence that rail-way cases were sel-dom
trivial, and hastened down-stairs. As I des-cen-ded, my old ally, the
guard, came out of the room and closed the door tightly be-hind him.

“I’ve got him here,” he whispered, jerking his thumb over his shoulder;
“he’s all right.”

“What is it, then?” I asked, for his man-ner sug-ges-ted that it was some
strange creature which he had caged up in my room.

“It’s a new pa-tient,” he whispered. “I thought I’d bring him round
my-self; then he couldn’t slip away. There he is, all safe and sound. I
must go now, Doc-tor; I have my dooties, just the same as you.” And off
he went, this trusty tout, without even giv-ing me time to thank him.

I entered my con-sult-ing-room and found a gen-tle-man seated by the table.
He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with a soft cloth cap
which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of his hands he had a
handker-chief wrapped, which was mottled all over with blood-stains. He
was young, not more than five-and-twenty, I should say, with a strong,
mas-cu-line face; but he was ex-ceed-ingly pale and gave me the im-pres-sion
of a man who was suf-fer-ing from some strong agit-a-tion, which it took
all his strength of mind to con-trol.

“I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doc-tor,” said he, “but I have had
a very ser-i-ous ac-ci-dent dur-ing the night. I came in by train this
morn-ing, and on in-quir-ing at Pad-ding-ton as to where I might find a
doc-tor, a worthy fel-low very kindly es-cor-ted me here. I gave the maid a
card, but I see that she has left it upon the side-table.”

I took it up and glanced at it. “Mr. Victor Hath-er-ley, hy-draulic
en-gin-eer, 16A, Vict-oria Street (3rd floor).” That was the name, style,
and abode of my morn-ing vis-itor. “I re-gret that I have kept you
wait-ing,” said I, sit-ting down in my lib-rary-chair. “You are fresh from
a night jour-ney, I un-der-stand, which is in it-self a mono-ton-ous
oc-cu-pa-tion.”

“Oh, my night could not be called mono-ton-ous,” said he, and laughed. He
laughed very heart-ily, with a high, ringing note, lean-ing back in his
chair and shak-ing his sides. All my med-ical in-stincts rose up against
that laugh.

“Stop it!” I cried; “pull your-self to-gether!” and I poured out some
wa-ter from a caraffe.

It was use-less, how-ever. He was off in one of those hys-ter-ical
out-bursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis is
over and gone. Presently he came to him-self once more, very weary and
pale-look-ing.

“I have been mak-ing a fool of my-self,” he gasped.

“Not at all. Drink this.” I dashed some brandy into the wa-ter, and the
col-our began to come back to his blood-less cheeks.

“That’s bet-ter!” said he. “And now, Doc-tor, per-haps you would kindly
at-tend to my thumb, or rather to the place where my thumb used to be.”

He un-wound the handker-chief and held out his hand. It gave even my
hardened nerves a shud-der to look at it. There were four pro-trud-ing
fin-gers and a hor-rid red, spongy sur-face where the thumb should have
been. It had been hacked or torn right out from the roots.

“Good heav-ens!” I cried, “this is a ter-rible in-jury. It must have bled
con-sid-er-ably.”

“Yes, it did. I fain-ted when it was done, and I think that I must have
been sense-less for a long time. When I came to I found that it was
still bleed-ing, so I tied one end of my handker-chief very tightly round
the wrist and braced it up with a twig.”

“Ex-cel-lent! You should have been a sur-geon.”

“It is a ques-tion of hy-draul-ics, you see, and came within my own
province.”

“This has been done,” said I, ex-amin-ing the wound, “by a very heavy and
sharp in-stru-ment.”

“A thing like a cleaver,” said he.

“An ac-ci-dent, I pre-sume?”

“By no means.”

“What! a mur-der-ous at-tack?”

“Very mur-der-ous in-deed.”

“You hor-rify me.”

I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and fi-nally covered it
over with cot-ton wad-ding and car-bol-ised band-ages. He lay back without
win-cing, though he bit his lip from time to time.

“How is that?” I asked when I had fin-ished.

“Cap-ital! Between your brandy and your band-age, I feel a new man. I was
very weak, but I have had a good deal to go through.”

“Per-haps you had bet-ter not speak of the mat-ter. It is evid-ently try-ing
to your nerves.”

“Oh, no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the po-lice; but,
between ourselves, if it were not for the con-vin-cing evid-ence of this
wound of mine, I should be sur-prised if they be-lieved my state-ment, for
it is a very ex-traordin-ary one, and I have not much in the way of proof
with which to back it up; and, even if they be-lieve me, the clues which
I can give them are so vague that it is a ques-tion whether justice will
be done.”

“Ha!” cried I, “if it is any-thing in the nature of a prob-lem which you
de-sire to see solved, I should strongly re-com-mend you to come to my
friend, Mr. Sh-er-lock Holmes, be-fore you go to the of-fi-cial po-lice.”

“Oh, I have heard of that fel-low,” answered my vis-itor, “and I should
be very glad if he would take the mat-ter up, though of course I must
use the of-fi-cial po-lice as well. Would you give me an in-tro-duc-tion to
him?”

“I’ll do bet-ter. I’ll take you round to him my-self.”

“I should be im-mensely ob-liged to you.”

“We’ll call a cab and go to-gether. We shall just be in time to have a
little break-fast with him. Do you feel equal to it?”

“Yes; I shall not feel easy un-til I have told my story.”

“Then my ser-vant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in an
in-stant.” I rushed up-stairs, ex-plained the mat-ter shortly to my wife,
and in five minutes was in-side a hansom, driv-ing with my new
ac-quaint-ance to Baker Street.

Sh-er-lock Holmes was, as I ex-pec-ted, loun-ging about his sit-ting-room in
his dress-ing-gown, read-ing the agony column of _The Times_ and smoking
his be-fore-break-fast pipe, which was com-posed of all the plugs and
dottles left from his smokes of the day be-fore, all care-fully dried and
col-lec-ted on the corner of the man-tel-piece. He re-ceived us in his
quietly gen-ial fash-ion, ordered fresh rash-ers and eggs, and joined us
in a hearty meal. When it was con-cluded he settled our new ac-quaint-ance
upon the sofa, placed a pil-low be-neath his head, and laid a glass of
brandy and wa-ter within his reach.

“It is easy to see that your ex-per-i-ence has been no com-mon one, Mr.
Hath-er-ley,” said he. “Pray, lie down there and make your-self ab-so-lutely
at home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tired and keep up
your strength with a little stim-u-lant.”

“Thank you,” said my pa-tient, “but I have felt an-other man since the
doc-tor band-aged me, and I think that your break-fast has com-pleted the
cure. I shall take up as little of your valu-able time as pos-sible, so I
shall start at once upon my pe-cu-liar ex-per-i-ences.”

Holmes sat in his big arm-chair with the weary, heavy-lid-ded ex-pres-sion
which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat op-pos-ite to him,
and we listened in si-lence to the strange story which our vis-itor
de-tailed to us.

“You must know,” said he, “that I am an orphan and a bach-elor, resid-ing
alone in lodgings in Lon-don. By pro-fes-sion I am a hy-draulic en-gin-eer,
and I have had con-sid-er-able ex-per-i-ence of my work dur-ing the seven
years that I was ap-pren-ticed to Ven-ner & Matheson, the well-known firm,
of Green-wich. Two years ago, hav-ing served my time, and hav-ing also
come into a fair sum of money through my poor father’s death, I
de-term-ined to start in busi-ness for my-self and took pro-fes-sional
cham-bers in Vict-oria Street.

“I sup-pose that every-one finds his first in-de-pend-ent start in busi-ness
a dreary ex-per-i-ence. To me it has been ex-cep-tion-ally so. Dur-ing two
years I have had three con-sulta-tions and one small job, and that is
ab-so-lutely all that my pro-fes-sion has brought me. My gross tak-ings
amount to £ 27 10_s_. Every day, from nine in the morn-ing un-til four in
the af-ter-noon, I waited in my little den, un-til at last my heart began
to sink, and I came to be-lieve that I should never have any prac-tice at
all.

“Yes-ter-day, how-ever, just as I was think-ing of leav-ing the of-fice, my
clerk entered to say there was a gen-tle-man wait-ing who wished to see me
upon busi-ness. He brought up a card, too, with the name of ‘Co-l-onel
Lysander Stark’ en-graved upon it. Close at his heels came the col-onel
him-self, a man rather over the middle size, but of an ex-ceed-ing
thin-ness. I do not think that I have ever seen so thin a man. His whole
face sharpened away into nose and chin, and the skin of his cheeks was
drawn quite tense over his out-stand-ing bones. Yet this ema-ci-ation
seemed to be his nat-ural habit, and due to no dis-ease, for his eye was
bright, his step brisk, and his bear-ing as-sured. He was plainly but
neatly dressed, and his age, I should judge, would be nearer forty than
thirty.

“‘Mr. Hath-er-ley?’ said he, with some-thing of a Ger-man ac-cent. ‘You have
been re-com-men-ded to me, Mr. Hath-er-ley, as be-ing a man who is not only
pro-fi-cient in his pro-fes-sion but is also dis-creet and cap-able of
pre-serving a secret.’

“I bowed, feel-ing as flattered as any young man would at such an
ad-dress. ‘May I ask who it was who gave me so good a char-ac-ter?’

“‘Well, per-haps it is bet-ter that I should not tell you that just at
this mo-ment. I have it from the same source that you are both an orphan
and a bach-elor and are resid-ing alone in Lon-don.’

“‘That is quite cor-rect,’ I answered; ‘but you will ex-cuse me if I say
that I can-not see how all this bears upon my pro-fes-sional
qual-i-fic-a-tions. I un-der-stand that it was on a pro-fes-sional mat-ter that
you wished to speak to me?’

“‘Undoubtedly so. But you will find that all I say is really to the
point. I have a pro-fes-sional com-mis-sion for you, but ab-so-lute secrecy
is quite es-sen-tial—ab-so-lute secrecy, you un-der-stand, and of course we
may ex-pect that more from a man who is alone than from one who lives in
the bosom of his fam-ily.’

“‘If I prom-ise to keep a secret,’ said I, ‘you may ab-so-lutely de-pend
upon my do-ing so.’

“He looked very hard at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me that I had
never seen so sus-pi-cious and ques-tion-ing an eye.

“‘Do you prom-ise, then?’ said he at last.

“‘Yes, I prom-ise.’

“‘Ab-so-lute and com-plete si-lence be-fore, dur-ing, and after? No ref-er-ence
to the mat-ter at all, either in word or writ-ing?’

“‘I have already given you my word.’

“‘Very good.’ He sud-denly sprang up, and dart-ing like light-ning across
the room he flung open the door. The pas-sage out-side was empty.

“‘That’s all right,’ said he, com-ing back. ‘I know that clerks are
some-times curi-ous as to their mas-ter’s af-fairs. Now we can talk in
safety.’ He drew up his chair very close to mine and began to stare at
me again with the same ques-tion-ing and thought-ful look.

“A feel-ing of re-pul-sion, and of some-thing akin to fear had be-gun to
rise within me at the strange antics of this flesh-less man. Even my
dread of los-ing a cli-ent could not re-strain me from show-ing my
im-pa-tience.

“‘I beg that you will state your busi-ness, sir,’ said I; ‘my time is of
value.’ Heaven for-give me for that last sen-tence, but the words came to
my lips.

“‘How would fifty guineas for a night’s work suit you?’ he asked.

“‘Most ad-mir-ably.’

“‘I say a night’s work, but an hour’s would be nearer the mark. I
simply want your opin-ion about a hy-draulic stamp-ing ma-chine which has
got out of gear. If you show us what is wrong we shall soon set it
right ourselves. What do you think of such a com-mis-sion as that?’

“‘The work ap-pears to be light and the pay mu-ni-fi-cent.’

“‘Pre-cisely so. We shall want you to come to-night by the last train.’

“‘Where to?’

“‘To Ey-ford, in Berkshire. It is a little place near the bor-ders of
Ox-ford-shire, and within seven miles of Read-ing. There is a train from
Pad-ding-ton which would bring you there at about 11:15.’

“‘Very good.’

“‘I shall come down in a car-riage to meet you.’

“‘There is a drive, then?’

“‘Yes, our little place is quite out in the coun-try. It is a good seven
miles from Ey-ford Sta-tion.’

“‘Then we can hardly get there be-fore mid-night. I sup-pose there would
be no chance of a train back. I should be com-pelled to stop the night.’

“‘Yes, we could eas-ily give you a shake-down.’

“‘That is very awk-ward. Could I not come at some more con-veni-ent hour?’

“‘We have judged it best that you should come late. It is to re-com-pense
you for any in-con-veni-ence that we are pay-ing to you, a young and
un-known man, a fee which would buy an opin-ion from the very heads of
your pro-fes-sion. Still, of course, if you would like to draw out of the
busi-ness, there is plenty of time to do so.’

“I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how very use-ful they would be
to me. ‘Not at all,’ said I, ‘I shall be very happy to ac-com-mod-ate
my-self to your wishes. I should like, how-ever, to un-der-stand a little
more clearly what it is that you wish me to do.’

“‘Quite so. It is very nat-ural that the pledge of secrecy which we have
ex-ac-ted from you should have aroused your curi-os-ity. I have no wish to
com-mit you to any-thing without your hav-ing it all laid be-fore you. I
sup-pose that we are ab-so-lutely safe from eaves-drop-pers?’

“‘Entirely.’

“‘Then the mat-ter stands thus. You are prob-ably aware that
fuller’s-earth is a valu-able product, and that it is only found in one
or two places in Eng-land?’

“‘I have heard so.’

“‘Some little time ago I bought a small place—a very small place—within
ten miles of Read-ing. I was for-tu-nate enough to dis-cover that there was
a de-posit of fuller’s-earth in one of my fields. On ex-amin-ing it,
how-ever, I found that this de-posit was a com-par-at-ively small one, and
that it formed a link between two very much lar-ger ones upon the right
and left—both of them, how-ever, in the grounds of my neigh-bours. These
good people were ab-so-lutely ig-nor-ant that their land con-tained that
which was quite as valu-able as a gold-mine. Nat-ur-ally, it was to my
in-terest to buy their land be-fore they dis-covered its true value, but
un-for-tu-nately I had no cap-ital by which I could do this. I took a few
of my friends into the secret, how-ever, and they sug-ges-ted that we
should quietly and secretly work our own little de-posit and that in
this way we should earn the money which would en-able us to buy the
neigh-bour-ing fields. This we have now been do-ing for some time, and in
or-der to help us in our op-er-a-tions we erec-ted a hy-draulic press. This
press, as I have already ex-plained, has got out of or-der, and we wish
your ad-vice upon the sub-ject. We guard our secret very jeal-ously,
how-ever, and if it once be-came known that we had hy-draulic en-gin-eers
com-ing to our little house, it would soon rouse in-quiry, and then, if
the facts came out, it would be good-bye to any chance of get-ting these
fields and car-ry-ing out our plans. That is why I have made you prom-ise
me that you will not tell a hu-man be-ing that you are go-ing to Ey-ford
to-night. I hope that I make it all plain?’

“‘I quite fol-low you,’ said I. ‘The only point which I could not quite
un-der-stand was what use you could make of a hy-draulic press in
ex-cav-at-ing fuller’s-earth, which, as I un-der-stand, is dug out like
gravel from a pit.’

“‘Ah!’ said he care-lessly, ‘we have our own pro-cess. We com-press the
earth into bricks, so as to re-move them without re-veal-ing what they
are. But that is a mere de-tail. I have taken you fully into my
con-fid-ence now, Mr. Hath-er-ley, and I have shown you how I trust you.’
He rose as he spoke. ‘I shall ex-pect you, then, at Ey-ford at 11:15.’

“‘I shall cer-tainly be there.’

“‘And not a word to a soul.’ He looked at me with a last long,
ques-tion-ing gaze, and then, press-ing my hand in a cold, dank grasp, he
hur-ried from the room.

“Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was very much
as-ton-ished, as you may both think, at this sud-den com-mis-sion which had
been in-trus-ted to me. On the one hand, of course, I was glad, for the
fee was at least ten-fold what I should have asked had I set a price
upon my own ser-vices, and it was pos-sible that this or-der might lead to
other ones. On the other hand, the face and man-ner of my pat-ron had
made an un-pleas-ant im-pres-sion upon me, and I could not think that his
ex-plan-a-tion of the fuller’s-earth was suf-fi-cient to ex-plain the
ne-ces-sity for my com-ing at mid-night, and his ex-treme anxi-ety lest I
should tell any-one of my er-rand. However, I threw all fears to the
winds, ate a hearty sup-per, drove to Pad-ding-ton, and star-ted off,
hav-ing obeyed to the let-ter the in-junc-tion as to hold-ing my tongue.

“At Read-ing I had to change not only my car-riage but my sta-tion.
However, I was in time for the last train to Ey-ford, and I reached the
little dim-lit sta-tion after el-even o’clock. I was the only pas-sen-ger
who got out there, and there was no one upon the plat-form save a single
sleepy porter with a lan-tern. As I passed out through the wicket gate,
how-ever, I found my ac-quaint-ance of the morn-ing wait-ing in the shadow
upon the other side. Without a word he grasped my arm and hur-ried me
into a car-riage, the door of which was stand-ing open. He drew up the
win-dows on either side, tapped on the wood-work, and away we went as
fast as the horse could go.”

“One horse?” in-ter-jec-ted Holmes.

“Yes, only one.”

“Did you ob-serve the col-our?”

“Yes, I saw it by the side-lights when I was step-ping into the
car-riage. It was a chest-nut.”

“Tired-look-ing or fresh?”

“Oh, fresh and glossy.”

“Thank you. I am sorry to have in-ter-rup-ted you. Pray con-tinue your most
in-ter-est-ing state-ment.”

“Away we went then, and we drove for at least an hour. Co-l-onel Lysander
Stark had said that it was only seven miles, but I should think, from
the rate that we seemed to go, and from the time that we took, that it
must have been nearer twelve. He sat at my side in si-lence all the
time, and I was aware, more than once when I glanced in his dir-ec-tion,
that he was look-ing at me with great in-tens-ity. The coun-try roads seem
to be not very good in that part of the world, for we lurched and
jol-ted ter-ribly. I tried to look out of the win-dows to see some-thing of
where we were, but they were made of fros-ted glass, and I could make
out noth-ing save the oc-ca-sional bright blur of a passing light. Now and
then I haz-arded some re-mark to break the mono-tony of the jour-ney, but
the col-onel answered only in mono-syl-lables, and the con-ver-sa-tion soon
flagged. At last, how-ever, the bump-ing of the road was ex-changed for
the crisp smooth-ness of a gravel-drive, and the car-riage came to a
stand. Co-l-onel Lysander Stark sprang out, and, as I fol-lowed after him,
pulled me swiftly into a porch which gaped in front of us. We stepped,
as it were, right out of the car-riage and into the hall, so that I
failed to catch the most fleet-ing glance of the front of the house. The
in-stant that I had crossed the threshold the door slammed heav-ily
be-hind us, and I heard faintly the rattle of the wheels as the car-riage
drove away.

“It was pitch dark in-side the house, and the col-onel fumbled about
look-ing for matches and mut-ter-ing un-der his breath. Sud-denly a door
opened at the other end of the pas-sage, and a long, golden bar of light
shot out in our dir-ec-tion. It grew broader, and a wo-man ap-peared with a
lamp in her hand, which she held above her head, push-ing her face
for-ward and peer-ing at us. I could see that she was pretty, and from
the gloss with which the light shone upon her dark dress I knew that it
was a rich ma-ter-ial. She spoke a few words in a for-eign tongue in a
tone as though ask-ing a ques-tion, and when my com-pan-ion answered in a
gruff mono-syl-lable she gave such a start that the lamp nearly fell from
her hand. Co-l-onel Stark went up to her, whispered some-thing in her ear,
and then, push-ing her back into the room from whence she had come, he
walked to-wards me again with the lamp in his hand.

“‘Per-haps you will have the kind-ness to wait in this room for a few
minutes,’ said he, throw-ing open an-other door. It was a quiet, little,
plainly fur-nished room, with a round table in the centre, on which
sev-eral Ger-man books were scattered. Co-l-onel Stark laid down the lamp
on the top of a har-monium be-side the door. ‘I shall not keep you
wait-ing an in-stant,’ said he, and van-ished into the dark-ness.

“I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of my ig-nor-ance of
Ger-man I could see that two of them were treat-ises on sci-ence, the
oth-ers be-ing volumes of po-etry. Then I walked across to the win-dow,
hop-ing that I might catch some glimpse of the coun-try-side, but an oak
shut-ter, heav-ily barred, was fol-ded across it. It was a won-der-fully
si-lent house. There was an old clock tick-ing loudly some-where in the
pas-sage, but oth-er-wise everything was deadly still. A vague feel-ing of
un-eas-i-ness began to steal over me. Who were these Ger-man people, and
what were they do-ing liv-ing in this strange, out-of-the-way place? And
where was the place? I was ten miles or so from Ey-ford, that was all I
knew, but whether north, south, east, or west I had no idea. For that
mat-ter, Read-ing, and pos-sibly other large towns, were within that
ra-dius, so the place might not be so se-cluded, after all. Yet it was
quite cer-tain, from the ab-so-lute still-ness, that we were in the
coun-try. I paced up and down the room, hum-ming a tune un-der my breath
to keep up my spir-its and feel-ing that I was thor-oughly earn-ing my
fifty-guinea fee.

“Sud-denly, without any pre-lim-in-ary sound in the midst of the ut-ter
still-ness, the door of my room swung slowly open. The wo-man was
stand-ing in the aper-ture, the dark-ness of the hall be-hind her, the
yel-low light from my lamp beat-ing upon her eager and beau-ti-ful face. I
could see at a glance that she was sick with fear, and the sight sent a
chill to my own heart. She held up one shak-ing fin-ger to warn me to be
si-lent, and she shot a few whispered words of broken Eng-lish at me, her
eyes glan-cing back, like those of a frightened horse, into the gloom
be-hind her.

“‘I would go,’ said she, try-ing hard, as it seemed to me, to speak
calmly; ‘I would go. I should not stay here. There is no good for you
to do.’

“‘But, madam,’ said I, ‘I have not yet done what I came for. I can-not
pos-sibly leave un-til I have seen the ma-chine.’

“‘It is not worth your while to wait,’ she went on. ‘You can pass
through the door; no one hinders.’ And then, see-ing that I smiled and
shook my head, she sud-denly threw aside her con-straint and made a step
for-ward, with her hands wrung to-gether. ‘For the love of Heaven!’ she
whispered, ‘get away from here be-fore it is too late!’

“But I am some-what head-strong by nature, and the more ready to en-gage
in an af-fair when there is some obstacle in the way. I thought of my
fifty-guinea fee, of my wear-i-some jour-ney, and of the un-pleas-ant night
which seemed to be be-fore me. Was it all to go for noth-ing? Why should
I slink away without hav-ing car-ried out my com-mis-sion, and without the
pay-ment which was my due? This wo-man might, for all I knew, be a
mono-ma-niac. With a stout bear-ing, there-fore, though her man-ner had
shaken me more than I cared to con-fess, I still shook my head and
de-clared my in-ten-tion of re-main-ing where I was. She was about to re-new
her en-treat-ies when a door slammed over-head, and the sound of sev-eral
foot-steps was heard upon the stairs. She listened for an in-stant, threw
up her hands with a des-pair-ing ges-ture, and van-ished as sud-denly and as
noise-lessly as she had come.

“The new-comers were Co-l-onel Lysander Stark and a short thick man with a
chinchilla beard grow-ing out of the creases of his double chin, who was
in-tro-duced to me as Mr. Fer-guson.

“‘This is my sec-ret-ary and man-ager,’ said the col-onel. ‘By the way, I
was un-der the im-pres-sion that I left this door shut just now. I fear
that you have felt the draught.’

“‘On the con-trary,’ said I, ‘I opened the door my-self be-cause I felt
the room to be a little close.’

“He shot one of his sus-pi-cious looks at me. ‘Per-haps we had bet-ter
pro-ceed to busi-ness, then,’ said he. ‘Mr. Fer-guson and I will take you
up to see the ma-chine.’

“‘I had bet-ter put my hat on, I sup-pose.’

“‘Oh, no, it is in the house.’

“‘What, you dig fuller’s-earth in the house?’

“‘No, no. This is only where we com-press it. But never mind that. All
we wish you to do is to ex-am-ine the ma-chine and to let us know what is
wrong with it.’

“We went up-stairs to-gether, the col-onel first with the lamp, the fat
man-ager and I be-hind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house, with
cor-ridors, pas-sages, nar-row wind-ing stair-cases, and little low doors,
the thresholds of which were hol-lowed out by the gen-er-a-tions who had
crossed them. There were no car-pets and no signs of any fur-niture above
the ground floor, while the plaster was peel-ing off the walls, and the
damp was break-ing through in green, un-healthy blotches. I tried to put
on as un-con-cerned an air as pos-sible, but I had not for-got-ten the
warn-ings of the lady, even though I dis-reg-arded them, and I kept a keen
eye upon my two com-pan-ions. Fer-guson ap-peared to be a mor-ose and si-lent
man, but I could see from the little that he said that he was at least
a fel-low-coun-try-man.

“Co-l-onel Lysander Stark stopped at last be-fore a low door, which he
un-locked. Within was a small, square room, in which the three of us
could hardly get at one time. Fer-guson re-mained out-side, and the
col-onel ushered me in.

“‘We are now,’ said he, ‘ac-tu-ally within the hy-draulic press, and it
would be a par-tic-u-larly un-pleas-ant thing for us if any-one were to turn
it on. The ceil-ing of this small cham-ber is really the end of the
des-cend-ing pis-ton, and it comes down with the force of many tons upon
this metal floor. There are small lat-eral columns of wa-ter out-side
which re-ceive the force, and which trans-mit and mul-tiply it in the
man-ner which is fa-mil-iar to you. The ma-chine goes read-ily enough, but
there is some stiff-ness in the work-ing of it, and it has lost a little
of its force. Per-haps you will have the good-ness to look it over and to
show us how we can set it right.’

“I took the lamp from him, and I ex-amined the ma-chine very thor-oughly.
It was in-deed a gi-gantic one, and cap-able of ex-er-cising enorm-ous
pres-sure. When I passed out-side, how-ever, and pressed down the levers
which con-trolled it, I knew at once by the whish-ing sound that there
was a slight leak-age, which al-lowed a re-gur-git-a-tion of wa-ter through
one of the side cyl-in-ders. An ex-am-in-a-tion showed that one of the
in-dia-rub-ber bands which was round the head of a driv-ing-rod had shrunk
so as not quite to fill the socket along which it worked. This was
clearly the cause of the loss of power, and I poin-ted it out to my
com-pan-ions, who fol-lowed my re-marks very care-fully and asked sev-eral
prac-tical ques-tions as to how they should pro-ceed to set it right. When
I had made it clear to them, I re-turned to the main cham-ber of the
ma-chine and took a good look at it to sat-isfy my own curi-os-ity. It was
ob-vi-ous at a glance that the story of the fuller’s-earth was the merest
fab-ric-a-tion, for it would be ab-surd to sup-pose that so power-ful an
en-gine could be de-signed for so in-ad-equate a pur-pose. The walls were of
wood, but the floor con-sisted of a large iron trough, and when I came
to ex-am-ine it I could see a crust of metal-lic de-posit all over it. I
had stooped and was scrap-ing at this to see ex-actly what it was when I
heard a muttered ex-clam-a-tion in Ger-man and saw the ca-da-ver-ous face of
the col-onel look-ing down at me.

“‘What are you do-ing there?’ he asked.

“I felt angry at hav-ing been tricked by so elab-or-ate a story as that
which he had told me. ‘I was ad-mir-ing your fuller’s-earth,’ said I; ‘I
think that I should be bet-ter able to ad-vise you as to your ma-chine if
I knew what the ex-act pur-pose was for which it was used.’

“The in-stant that I uttered the words I re-gret-ted the rash-ness of my
speech. His face set hard, and a bale-ful light sprang up in his grey
eyes.

“‘Very well,’ said he, ‘you shall know all about the ma-chine.’ He took
a step back-ward, slammed the little door, and turned the key in the
lock. I rushed to-wards it and pulled at the handle, but it was quite
se-cure, and did not give in the least to my kicks and shoves. ‘Hullo!’
I yelled. ‘Hullo! Co-l-onel! Let me out!’

“And then sud-denly in the si-lence I heard a sound which sent my heart
into my mouth. It was the clank of the levers and the swish of the
leak-ing cyl-in-der. He had set the en-gine at work. The lamp still stood
upon the floor where I had placed it when ex-amin-ing the trough. By its
light I saw that the black ceil-ing was com-ing down upon me, slowly,
jerkily, but, as none knew bet-ter than my-self, with a force which must
within a minute grind me to a shape-less pulp. I threw my-self,
scream-ing, against the door, and dragged with my nails at the lock. I
im-plored the col-onel to let me out, but the re-morse-less clank-ing of the
levers drowned my cries. The ceil-ing was only a foot or two above my
head, and with my hand up-raised I could feel its hard, rough sur-face.
Then it flashed through my mind that the pain of my death would de-pend
very much upon the po-s-i-tion in which I met it. If I lay on my face the
weight would come upon my spine, and I shuddered to think of that
dread-ful snap. Easier the other way, per-haps; and yet, had I the nerve
to lie and look up at that deadly black shadow waver-ing down upon me?
Already I was un-able to stand erect, when my eye caught some-thing which
brought a gush of hope back to my heart.

“I have said that though the floor and ceil-ing were of iron, the walls
were of wood. As I gave a last hur-ried glance around, I saw a thin line
of yel-low light between two of the boards, which broadened and
broadened as a small panel was pushed back-ward. For an in-stant I could
hardly be-lieve that here was in-deed a door which led away from death.
The next in-stant I threw my-self through, and lay half-faint-ing upon the
other side. The panel had closed again be-hind me, but the crash of the
lamp, and a few mo-ments af-ter-wards the clang of the two slabs of metal,
told me how nar-row had been my es-cape.

“I was re-called to my-self by a frantic pluck-ing at my wrist, and I
found my-self ly-ing upon the stone floor of a nar-row cor-ridor, while a
wo-man bent over me and tugged at me with her left hand, while she held
a candle in her right. It was the same good friend whose warn-ing I had
so fool-ishly re-jec-ted.

“‘Come! come!’ she cried breath-lessly. ‘They will be here in a mo-ment.
They will see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste the so-pre-cious
time, but come!’

“This time, at least, I did not scorn her ad-vice. I staggered to my
feet and ran with her along the cor-ridor and down a wind-ing stair. The
lat-ter led to an-other broad pas-sage, and just as we reached it we heard
the sound of run-ning feet and the shout-ing of two voices, one an-swer-ing
the other from the floor on which  we were and from the one be-neath. My
guide stopped and looked about her like one  who is at her wit’s end.
Then she threw open a door which led into a bed-room, through the win-dow
of which the moon was shin-ing brightly.

“‘It is your only chance,’ said she. ‘It is high, but it may be that
you can jump it.’

“As she spoke a light sprang into view at the fur-ther end of the
pas-sage, and I saw the lean fig-ure of Co-l-onel Lysander Stark rush-ing
for-ward with a lan-tern in one hand and a weapon like a butcher’s
cleaver in the other. I rushed across the bed-room, flung open the
win-dow, and looked out. How quiet and sweet and whole-some the garden
looked in the moon-light, and it could not be more than thirty feet
down. I clambered out upon the sill, but I hes-it-ated to jump un-til I
should have heard what passed between my sa-viour and the ruf-fian who
pur-sued me. If she were ill-used, then at any risks I was de-term-ined to
go back to her as-sist-ance. The thought had hardly flashed through my
mind be-fore he was at the door, push-ing his way past her; but she threw
her arms round him and tried to hold him back.

“‘Fritz! Fritz!’ she cried in Eng-lish, ‘re-mem-ber your prom-ise after the
last time. You said it should not be again. He will be si-lent! Oh, he
will be si-lent!’

“‘You are mad, El-ise!’ he shouted, strug-gling to break away from her.
‘You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let me pass, I say!’
He dashed her to one side, and, rush-ing to the win-dow, cut at me with
his heavy weapon. I had let my-self go, and was hanging by the hands to
the sill, when his blow fell. I was con-scious of a dull pain, my grip
loosened, and I fell into the garden be-low.

“I was shaken but not hurt by the fall; so I picked my-self up and
rushed off among the bushes as hard as I could run, for I un-der-stood
that I was far from be-ing out of danger yet. Sud-denly, how-ever, as I
ran, a deadly dizzi-ness and sick-ness came over me. I glanced down at my
hand, which was throb-bing pain-fully, and then, for the first time, saw
that my thumb had been cut off and that the blood was pour-ing from my
wound. I en-deav-oured to tie my handker-chief round it, but there came a
sud-den buzz-ing in my ears, and next mo-ment I fell in a dead faint among
the rose-bushes.

“How long I re-mained un-con-scious I can-not tell. It must have been a
very long time, for the moon had sunk, and a bright morn-ing was
break-ing when I came to my-self. My clothes were all sod-den with dew,
and my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my wounded thumb. The
smart-ing of it re-called in an in-stant all the par-tic-u-lars of my night’s
ad-ven-ture, and I sprang to my feet with the feel-ing that I might hardly
yet be safe from my pur-suers. But to my as-ton-ish-ment, when I came to
look round me, neither house nor garden were to be seen. I had been
ly-ing in an angle of the hedge close by the highroad, and just a little
lower down was a long build-ing, which proved, upon my ap-proach-ing it,
to be the very sta-tion at which I had ar-rived upon the pre-vi-ous night.
Were it not for the ugly wound upon my hand, all that had passed dur-ing
those dread-ful hours might have been an evil dream.

“Half dazed, I went into the sta-tion and asked about the morn-ing train.
There would be one to Read-ing in less than an hour. The same porter was
on duty, I found, as had been there when I ar-rived. I in-quired of him
whether he had ever heard of Co-l-onel Lysander Stark. The name was
strange to him. Had he ob-served a car-riage the night be-fore wait-ing for
me? No, he had not. Was there a po-lice-sta-tion any-where near? There was
one about three miles off.

“It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I de-term-ined to
wait un-til I got back to town be-fore telling my story to the po-lice. It
was a little past six when I ar-rived, so I went first to have my wound
dressed, and then the doc-tor was kind enough to bring me along here. I
put the case into your hands and shall do ex-actly what you ad-vise.”

We both sat in si-lence for some little time after listen-ing to this
ex-traordin-ary nar-rat-ive. Then Sh-er-lock Holmes pulled down from the
shelf one of the pon-der-ous com-mon-place books in which he placed his
cut-tings.

“Here is an ad-vert-ise-ment which will in-terest you,” said he. “It
ap-peared in all the pa-pers about a year ago. Listen to this: ‘Lost, on
the 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, a hy-draulic
en-gin-eer. Left his lodgings at ten o’clock at night, and has not been
heard of since. Was dressed in,’ etc., etc. Ha! That rep-res-ents the
last time that the col-onel needed to have his ma-chine over-hauled, I
fancy.”

“Good heav-ens!” cried my pa-tient. “Then that ex-plains what the girl
said.”

“Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the col-onel was a cool and
des-per-ate man, who was ab-so-lutely de-term-ined that noth-ing should stand
in the way of his little game, like those out-and-out pir-ates who will
leave no sur-vivor from a cap-tured ship. Well, every mo-ment now is
pre-cious, so if you feel equal to it we shall go down to Scot-land Yard
at once as a pre-lim-in-ary to start-ing for Ey-ford.”

Some three hours or so af-ter-wards we were all in the train to-gether,
bound from Read-ing to the little Berkshire vil-lage. There were Sh-er-lock
Holmes, the hy-draulic en-gin-eer, In-spector Brad-street, of Scot-land Yard,
a plain-clothes man, and my-self. Brad-street had spread an ord-nance map
of the county out upon the seat and was busy with his com-passes draw-ing
a circle with Ey-ford for its centre.

“There you are,” said he. “That circle is drawn at a ra-dius of ten
miles from the vil-lage. The place we want must be some-where near that
line. You said ten miles, I think, sir.”

“It was an hour’s good drive.”

“And you think that they brought you back all that way when you were
un-con-scious?”

“They must have done so. I have a con-fused memory, too, of hav-ing been
lif-ted and con-veyed some-where.”

“What I can-not un-der-stand,” said I, “is why they should have spared you
when they found you ly-ing faint-ing in the garden. Per-haps the vil-lain
was softened by the wo-man’s en-treat-ies.”

“I hardly think that likely. I never saw a more in-ex-or-able face in my
life.”

“Oh, we shall soon clear up all that,” said Brad-street. “Well, I have
drawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point upon it the folk
that we are in search of are to be found.”

“I think I could lay my fin-ger on it,” said Holmes quietly.

“Really, now!” cried the in-spector, “you have formed your opin-ion!
Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it is south, for the
coun-try is more deser-ted there.”

“And I say east,” said my pa-tient.

“I am for west,” re-marked the plain-clothes man. “There are sev-eral
quiet little vil-lages up there.”

“And I am for north,” said I, “be-cause there are no hills there, and
our friend says that he did not no-tice the car-riage go up any.”

“Come,” cried the in-spector, laugh-ing; “it’s a very pretty di-versity of
opin-ion. We have boxed the com-pass among us. Who do you give your
cast-ing vote to?”

“You are all wrong.”

“But we can’t all be.”

“Oh, yes, you can. This is my point.” He placed his fin-ger in the
centre of the circle. “This is where we shall find them.”

“But the twelve-mile drive?” gasped Hath-er-ley.

“Six out and six back. Noth-ing sim-pler. You say your-self that the horse
was fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that if it had
gone twelve miles over heavy roads?”

“Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough,” ob-served Brad-street thought-fully.
“Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature of this gang.”

“None at all,” said Holmes. “They are coin-ers on a large scale, and
have used the ma-chine to form the am-al-gam which has taken the place of
sil-ver.”

“We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work,” said the
in-spector. “They have been turn-ing out half-crowns by the thou-sand. We
even traced them as far as Read-ing, but could get no farther, for they
had covered their traces in a way that showed that they were very old
hands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, I think that we have got
them right enough.”

But the in-spector was mis-taken, for those crim-in-als were not destined
to fall into the hands of justice. As we rolled into Ey-ford Sta-tion we
saw a gi-gantic column of smoke which streamed up from be-hind a small
clump of trees in the neigh-bour-hood and hung like an im-mense os-trich
feather over the land-scape.

“A house on fire?” asked Brad-street as the train steamed off again on
its way.

“Yes, sir!” said the sta-tion-mas-ter.

“When did it break out?”

“I hear that it was dur-ing the night, sir, but it has got worse, and
the whole place is in a blaze.”

“Whose house is it?”

“Dr. Becher’s.”

“Tell me,” broke in the en-gin-eer, “is Dr. Becher a Ger-man, very thin,
with a long, sharp nose?”

The sta-tion-mas-ter laughed heart-ily. “No, sir, Dr. Becher is an
Eng-lish-man, and there isn’t a man in the par-ish who has a bet-ter-lined
waist-coat. But he has a gen-tle-man stay-ing with him, a pa-tient, as I
un-der-stand, who is a for-eigner, and he looks as if a little good
Berkshire beef would do him no harm.”

The sta-tion-mas-ter had not fin-ished his speech be-fore we were all
hasten-ing in the dir-ec-tion of the fire. The road topped a low hill, and
there was a great wide-spread white-washed build-ing in front of us,
spout-ing fire at every chink and win-dow, while in the garden in front
three fire-en-gines were vainly striv-ing to keep the flames un-der.

“That’s it!” cried Hath-er-ley, in in-tense ex-cite-ment. “There is the
gravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay. That second
win-dow is the one that I jumped from.”

“Well, at least,” said Holmes, “you have had your re-venge upon them.
There can be no ques-tion that it was your oil-lamp which, when it was
crushed in the press, set fire to the wooden walls, though no doubt
they were too ex-cited in the chase after you to ob-serve it at the time.
Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of last night,
though I very much fear that they are a good hun-dred miles off by now.”

And Holmes’ fears came to be real-ised, for from that day to this no
word has ever been heard either of the beau-ti-ful wo-man, the sin-is-ter
Ger-man, or the mor-ose Eng-lish-man. Early that morn-ing a peas-ant had met
a cart con-tain-ing sev-eral people and some very bulky boxes driv-ing
rap-idly in the dir-ec-tion of Read-ing, but there all traces of the
fu-git-ives dis-ap-peared, and even Holmes’ in-genu-ity failed ever to
dis-cover the least clue as to their where-abouts.

The fire-men had been much per-turbed at the strange ar-range-ments which
they had found within, and still more so by dis-cov-er-ing a newly severed
hu-man thumb upon a win-dow-sill of the second floor. About sun-set,
how-ever, their ef-forts were at last suc-cess-ful, and they sub-dued the
flames, but not be-fore the roof had fallen in, and the whole place been
re-duced to such ab-so-lute ruin that, save some twis-ted cyl-in-ders and
iron pip-ing, not a trace re-mained of the ma-chinery which had cost our
un-for-tu-nate ac-quaint-ance so dearly. Large masses of nickel and of tin
were dis-covered stored in an out-house, but no coins were to be found,
which may have ex-plained the pres-ence of those bulky boxes which have
been already re-ferred to.

How our hy-draulic en-gin-eer had been con-veyed from the garden to the
spot where he re-covered his senses might have re-mained forever a
mys-tery were it not for the soft mould, which told us a very plain
tale. He had evid-ently been car-ried down by two per-sons, one of whom
had re-mark-ably small feet and the other un-usu-ally large ones. On the
whole, it was most prob-able that the si-lent Eng-lish-man, be-ing less bold
or less mur-der-ous than his com-pan-ion, had as-sisted the wo-man to bear
the un-con-scious man out of the way of danger.

“Well,” said our en-gin-eer rue-fully as we took our seats to re-turn once
more to Lon-don, “it has been a pretty busi-ness for me! I have lost my
thumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have I gained?”

“Ex-per-i-ence,” said Holmes, laugh-ing. “In-dir-ectly it may be of value,
you know; you have only to put it into words to gain the repu-ta-tion of
be-ing ex-cel-lent com-pany for the re-mainder of your ex-ist-ence.”



X. THE ADVENTURE OF THE NOBLE BACHELOR

The Lord St. Si-mon mar-riage, and its curi-ous ter-min-a-tion, have long
ceased to be a sub-ject of in-terest in those ex-al-ted circles in which
the un-for-tu-nate bride-groom moves. Fresh scan-dals have ec-lipsed it, and
their more pi-quant de-tails have drawn the gos-sips away from this
four-year-old drama. As I have reason to be-lieve, how-ever, that the
full facts have never been re-vealed to the gen-eral pub-lic, and as my
friend Sh-er-lock Holmes had a con-sid-er-able share in clear-ing the mat-ter
up, I feel that no mem-oir of him would be com-plete without some little
sketch of this re-mark-able epis-ode.

It was a few weeks be-fore my own mar-riage, dur-ing the days when I was
still shar-ing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he came home from
an af-ter-noon stroll to find a let-ter on the table wait-ing for him. I
had re-mained in-doors all day, for the weather had taken a sud-den turn
to rain, with high au-tum-nal winds, and the jezail bul-let which I had
brought back in one of my limbs as a relic of my Afghan cam-paign
throbbed with dull per-sist-ence. With my body in one easy-chair and my
legs upon an-other, I had sur-roun-ded my-self with a cloud of news-pa-pers
un-til at last, sat-ur-ated with the news of the day, I tossed them all
aside and lay list-less, watch-ing the huge crest and mono-gram upon the
en-vel-ope upon the table and won-der-ing lazily who my friend’s noble
cor-res-pond-ent could be.

“Here is a very fash-ion-able epistle,” I re-marked as he entered. “Your
morn-ing let-ters, if I re-mem-ber right, were from a fish-mon-ger and a
tide-waiter.”

“Yes, my cor-res-pond-ence has cer-tainly the charm of vari-ety,” he
answered, smil-ing, “and the hum-bler are usu-ally the more in-ter-est-ing.
This looks like one of those un-wel-come so-cial sum-monses which call upon
a man either to be bored or to lie.”

He broke the seal and glanced over the con-tents.

“Oh, come, it may prove to be some-thing of in-terest, after all.”

“Not so-cial, then?”

“No, dis-tinctly pro-fes-sional.”

“And from a noble cli-ent?”

“One of the highest in Eng-land.”

“My dear fel-low, I con-grat-u-late you.”

“I as-sure you, Wat-son, without af-fect-a-tion, that the status of my
cli-ent is a mat-ter of less mo-ment to me than the in-terest of his case.
It is just pos-sible, how-ever, that that also may not be want-ing in this
new in-vest-ig-a-tion. You have been read-ing the pa-pers di-li-gently of late,
have you not?”

“It looks like it,” said I rue-fully, point-ing to a huge bundle in the
corner. “I have had noth-ing else to do.”

“It is for-tu-nate, for you will per-haps be able to post me up. I read
noth-ing ex-cept the crim-inal news and the agony column. The lat-ter is
al-ways in-struct-ive. But if you have fol-lowed re-cent events so closely
you must have read about Lord St. Si-mon and his wed-ding?”

“Oh, yes, with the deep-est in-terest.”

“That is well. The let-ter which I hold in my hand is from Lord St.
Si-mon. I will read it to you, and in re-turn you must turn over these
pa-pers and let me have whatever bears upon the mat-ter. This is what he
says:

    “‘MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,—Lord Back-wa-ter tells me that I may
    place im-pli-cit re-li-ance upon your judg-ment and dis-cre-tion. I have
    de-term-ined, there-fore, to call upon you and to con-sult you in
    ref-er-ence to the very pain-ful event which has oc-curred in
    con-nec-tion with my wed-ding. Mr. Lestrade, of Scot-land Yard, is
    act-ing already in the mat-ter, but he as-sures me that he sees no
    ob-jec-tion to your co-op-er-a-tion, and that he even thinks that it
    might be of some as-sist-ance. I will call at four o’clock in the
    af-ter-noon, and, should you have any other en-gage-ment at that time,
    I hope that you will post-pone it, as this mat-ter is of para-mount
    im-port-ance. Yours faith-fully,


    “‘ROBERT ST. SIMON.’


“It is dated from Gros-venor Man-sions, writ-ten with a quill pen, and the
noble lord has had the mis-for-tune to get a smear of ink upon the outer
side of his right little fin-ger,” re-marked Holmes as he fol-ded up the
epistle.

“He says four o’clock. It is three now. He will be here in an hour.”

“Then I have just time, with your as-sist-ance, to get clear upon the
sub-ject. Turn over those pa-pers and ar-range the ex-tracts in their or-der
of time, while I take a glance as to who our cli-ent is.” He picked a
red-covered volume from a line of books of ref-er-ence be-side the
man-tel-piece. “Here he is,” said he, sit-ting down and flat-ten-ing it out
upon his knee. “‘Lord Robert Walsing-ham de Vere St. Si-mon, second son
of the Duke of Bal-moral.’ Hum! ‘Arms: Azure, three cal-trops in chief
over a fess sable. Born in 1846.’ He’s forty-one years of age, which is
ma-ture for mar-riage. Was Under-Sec-ret-ary for the colon-ies in a late
ad-min-is-tra-tion. The Duke, his father, was at one time Sec-ret-ary for
For-eign Af-fairs. They in-herit Plant-a-genet blood by dir-ect des-cent, and
Tu-dor on the dis-taff side. Ha! Well, there is noth-ing very in-struct-ive
in all this. I think that I must turn to you Wat-son, for some-thing more
solid.”

“I have very little dif-fi-culty in find-ing what I want,” said I, “for
the facts are quite re-cent, and the mat-ter struck me as re-mark-able. I
feared to refer them to you, how-ever, as I knew that you had an in-quiry
on hand and that you dis-liked the in-tru-sion of other mat-ters.”

“Oh, you mean the little prob-lem of the Gros-venor Square fur-niture van.
That is quite cleared up now—though, in-deed, it was ob-vi-ous from the
first. Pray give me the res-ults of your news-pa-per se-lec-tions.”

“Here is the first no-tice which I can find. It is in the per-sonal
column of the _Morn-ing Post_, and dates, as you see, some weeks back:
‘A mar-riage has been ar-ranged,’ it says, ‘and will, if ru-mour is
cor-rect, very shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Si-mon, second
son of the Duke of Bal-moral, and Miss Hatty Doran, the only daugh-ter of
Aloysius Doran. Esq., of San Fran-cisco, Cal., U.S.A.’ That is all.”

“Terse and to the point,” re-marked Holmes, stretch-ing his long, thin
legs to-wards the fire.

“There was a para-graph amp-li-fy-ing this in one of the so-ci-ety pa-pers of
the same week. Ah, here it is: ‘There will soon be a call for
pro-tec-tion in the mar-riage  mar-ket, for the present free-trade
prin-ciple ap-pears to tell heav-ily against our home product. One by one
the man-age-ment of the noble houses of Great Bri-tain is passing into the
hands of our fair cous-ins from across the At-lantic. An im-port-ant
ad-di-tion has been made dur-ing the last week to the list of the prizes
which have been borne away by these charm-ing in-vaders. Lord St. Si-mon,
who has shown him-self for over twenty years proof against the little
god’s ar-rows, has now def-in-itely an-nounced his ap-proach-ing mar-riage
with Miss Hatty Doran, the fas-cin-at-ing daugh-ter of a Cali-for-nia
mil-lion-aire. Miss Doran, whose grace-ful fig-ure and strik-ing face
at-trac-ted much at-ten-tion at the West-bury House fest-iv-it-ies, is an only
child, and it is cur-rently re-por-ted that her dowry will run to
con-sid-er-ably over the six fig-ures, with ex-pect-an-cies for the fu-ture. As
it is an open secret that the Duke of Bal-moral has been com-pelled to
sell his pic-tures within the last few years, and as Lord St. Si-mon has
no prop-erty of his own save the small es-tate of Birch-moor, it is
ob-vi-ous that the Cali-for-nian heir-ess is not the only gainer by an
al-li-ance which will en-able her to make the easy and com-mon trans-ition
from a Re-pub-lican lady to a Brit-ish peeress.’”

“Anything else?” asked Holmes, yawn-ing.

“Oh, yes; plenty. Then there is an-other note in the _Morn-ing Post_ to
say that the mar-riage would be an ab-so-lutely quiet one, that it would
be at St. Ge-orge’s, Han-over Square, that only half a dozen in-tim-ate
friends would be in-vited, and that the party would re-turn to the
fur-nished house at Lan-caster Gate which has been taken by Mr. Aloysius
Doran. Two days later—that is, on Wed-nes-day last—there is a curt
an-nounce-ment that the wed-ding had taken place, and that the hon-ey-moon
would be passed at Lord Back-wa-ter’s place, near Petersfield. Those are
all the no-tices which ap-peared be-fore the dis-ap-pear-ance of the bride.”

“Be-fore the what?” asked Holmes with a start.

“The van-ish-ing of the lady.”

“When did she van-ish, then?”

“At the wed-ding break-fast.”

“Indeed. This is more in-ter-est-ing than it prom-ised to be; quite
dra-matic, in fact.”

“Yes; it struck me as be-ing a little out of the com-mon.”

“They of-ten van-ish be-fore the ce-re-mony, and oc-ca-sion-ally dur-ing the
hon-ey-moon; but I can-not call to mind any-thing quite so prompt as this.
Pray let me have the de-tails.”

“I warn you that they are very in-com-plete.”

“Per-haps we may make them less so.”

“Such as they are, they are set forth in a single art-icle of a morn-ing
pa-per of yes-ter-day, which I will read to you. It is headed, ‘Sin-gu-lar
Oc-cur-rence at a Fash-ion-able Wed-ding’:

“‘The fam-ily of Lord Robert St. Si-mon has been thrown into the greatest
con-sterna-tion by the strange and pain-ful epis-odes which have taken
place in con-nec-tion with his wed-ding. The ce-re-mony, as shortly
an-nounced in the pa-pers of yes-ter-day, oc-curred on the pre-vi-ous morn-ing;
but it is only now that it has been pos-sible to con-firm the strange
ru-mours which have been so per-sist-ently float-ing about. In spite of the
at-tempts of the friends to hush the mat-ter up, so much pub-lic at-ten-tion
has now been drawn to it that no good pur-pose can be served by
af-fect-ing to dis-reg-ard what is a com-mon sub-ject for con-ver-sa-tion.

“‘The ce-re-mony, which was per-formed at St. Ge-orge’s, Han-over Square,
was a very quiet one, no one be-ing present save the father of the
bride, Mr. Aloysius Doran, the Duchess of Bal-moral, Lord Back-wa-ter,
Lord Eus-tace and Lady Clara St. Si-mon (the younger brother and sis-ter
of the bride-groom), and Lady Ali-cia Whit-ting-ton. The whole party
pro-ceeded af-ter-wards to the house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at Lan-caster
Gate, where break-fast had been pre-pared. It ap-pears that some little
trouble was caused by a wo-man, whose name has not been as-cer-tained, who
en-deav-oured to force her way into the house after the bridal party,
al-leging that she had some claim upon Lord St. Si-mon. It was only after
a pain-ful and pro-longed scene that she was ejec-ted by the but-ler and
the foot-man. The bride, who had for-tu-nately entered the house be-fore
this un-pleas-ant in-ter-rup-tion, had sat down to break-fast with the rest,
when she com-plained of a sud-den in-dis-pos-i-tion and re-tired to her room.
Her pro-longed ab-sence hav-ing caused some com-ment, her father fol-lowed
her, but learned from her maid that she had only come up to her cham-ber
for an in-stant, caught up an ul-ster and bon-net, and hur-ried down to the
pas-sage. One of the foot-men de-clared that he had seen a lady leave the
house thus ap-par-elled, but had re-fused to credit that it was his
mis-tress, be-liev-ing her to be with the com-pany. On as-cer-tain-ing that
his daugh-ter had dis-ap-peared, Mr. Aloysius Doran, in con-junc-tion with
the bride-groom, in-stantly put them-selves in com-mu-nic-a-tion with the
po-lice, and very en-er-getic in-quir-ies are be-ing made, which will
prob-ably res-ult in a speedy clear-ing up of this very sin-gu-lar busi-ness.
Up to a late hour last night, how-ever, noth-ing had tran-spired as to the
where-abouts of the miss-ing lady. There are ru-mours of foul play in the
mat-ter, and it is said that the po-lice have caused the ar-rest of the
wo-man who had caused the ori-ginal dis-turb-ance, in the be-lief that, from
jeal-ousy or some other motive, she may have been con-cerned in the
strange dis-ap-pear-ance of the bride.’”

“And is that all?”

“Only one little item in an-other of the morn-ing pa-pers, but it is a
sug-gest-ive one.”

“And it is—”

“That Miss Flora Mil-lar, the lady who had caused the dis-turb-ance, has
ac-tu-ally been ar-res-ted. It ap-pears that she was formerly a _dan-seuse_
at the Al-legro, and that she has known the bride-groom for some years.
There are no fur-ther par-tic-u-lars, and the whole case is in your hands
now—so far as it has been set forth in the pub-lic press.”

“And an ex-ceed-ingly in-ter-est-ing case it ap-pears to be. I would not have
missed it for worlds. But there is a ring at the bell, Wat-son, and as
the clock makes it a few minutes after four, I have no doubt that this
will prove to be our noble cli-ent. Do not dream of go-ing, Wat-son, for I
very much prefer hav-ing a wit-ness, if only as a check to my own
memory.”

“Lord Robert St. Si-mon,” an-nounced our page-boy, throw-ing open the
door. A gen-tle-man entered, with a pleas-ant, cul-tured face, high-nosed
and pale, with some-thing per-haps of petu-lance about the mouth, and with
the steady, well-opened eye of a man whose pleas-ant lot it had ever
been to com-mand and to be obeyed. His man-ner was brisk, and yet his
gen-eral ap-pear-ance gave an un-due im-pres-sion of age, for he had a slight
for-ward stoop and a little bend of the knees as he walked. His hair,
too, as he swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled round the
edges and thin upon the top. As to his dress, it was care-ful to the
verge of fop-pish-ness, with high col-lar, black frock-coat, white
waist-coat, yel-low gloves, pat-ent-leather shoes, and light-col-oured
gaiters. He ad-vanced slowly into the room, turn-ing his head from left
to right, and swinging in his right hand the cord which held his golden
eye-glasses.

“Good-day, Lord St. Si-mon,” said Holmes, rising and bow-ing. “Pray take
the bas-ket-chair. This is my friend and col-league, Dr. Wat-son. Draw up
a little to the fire, and we will talk this mat-ter over.”

“A most pain-ful mat-ter to me, as you can most read-ily ima-gine, Mr.
Holmes. I have been cut to the quick. I un-der-stand that you have
already man-aged sev-eral del-ic-ate cases of this sort, sir, though I
pre-sume that they were hardly from the same class of so-ci-ety.”

“No, I am des-cend-ing.”

“I beg par-don.”

“My last cli-ent of the sort was a king.”

“Oh, really! I had no idea. And which king?”

“The King of Scand-inavia.”

“What! Had he lost his wife?”

“You can un-der-stand,” said Holmes suavely, “that I ex-tend to the
af-fairs of my other cli-ents the same secrecy which I prom-ise to you in
yours.”

“Of course! Very right! very right! I’m sure I beg par-don. As to my own
case, I am ready to give you any in-form-a-tion which may as-sist you in
form-ing an opin-ion.”

“Thank you. I have already learned all that is in the pub-lic prints,
noth-ing more. I pre-sume that I may take it as cor-rect—this art-icle, for
ex-ample, as to the dis-ap-pear-ance of the bride.”

Lord St. Si-mon glanced over it. “Yes, it is cor-rect, as far as it
goes.”

“But it needs a great deal of sup-ple-ment-ing be-fore any-one could of-fer
an opin-ion. I think that I may ar-rive at my facts most dir-ectly by
ques-tion-ing you.”

“Pray do so.”

“When did you first meet Miss Hatty Doran?”

“In San Fran-cisco, a year ago.”

“You were trav-el-ling in the States?”

“Yes.”

“Did you be-come en-gaged then?”

“No.”

“But you were on a friendly foot-ing?”

“I was amused by her so-ci-ety, and she could see that I was amused.”

“Her father is very rich?”

“He is said to be the richest man on the Pa-cific slope.”

“And how did he make his money?”

“In min-ing. He had noth-ing a few years ago. Then he struck gold,
in-ves-ted it, and came up by leaps and bounds.”

“Now, what is your own im-pres-sion as to the young lady’s—your wife’s
char-ac-ter?”

The no-ble-man swung his glasses a little faster and stared down into the
fire. “You see, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “my wife was twenty be-fore her
father be-came a rich man. Dur-ing that time she ran free in a min-ing
camp and wandered through woods or moun-tains, so that her edu-ca-tion has
come from Nature rather than from the school-mas-ter. She is what we call
in Eng-land a tom-boy, with a strong nature, wild and free, un-fettered by
any sort of tra-di-tions. She is im-petu-ous—vol-canic, I was about to say.
She is swift in mak-ing up her mind and fear-less in car-ry-ing out her
res-ol-u-tions. On the other hand, I would not have given her the name
which I have the hon-our to bear”—he gave a little stately cough—“had I
not thought her to be at bot-tom a noble wo-man. I be-lieve that she is
cap-able of heroic self-sac-ri-fice and that any-thing dis-hon-our-able would
be re-pug-nant to her.”

“Have you her pho-to-graph?”

“I brought this with me.” He opened a locket and showed us the full
face of a very lovely wo-man. It was not a pho-to-graph but an ivory
mini-ature, and the artist had brought out the full ef-fect of the
lus-trous black hair, the large dark eyes, and the ex-quis-ite mouth.
Holmes gazed long and earn-estly at it. Then he closed the locket and
handed it back to Lord St. Si-mon.

“The young lady came to Lon-don, then, and you re-newed your
ac-quaint-ance?”

“Yes, her father brought her over for this last Lon-don sea-son. I met
her sev-eral times, be-came en-gaged to her, and have now mar-ried her.”

“She brought, I un-der-stand, a con-sid-er-able dowry?”

“A fair dowry. Not more than is usual in my fam-ily.”

“And this, of course, re-mains to you, since the mar-riage is a _fait
ac-com-pli_?”

“I really have made no in-quir-ies on the sub-ject.”

“Very nat-ur-ally not. Did you see Miss Doran on the day be-fore the
wed-ding?”

“Yes.”

“Was she in good spir-its?”

“Never bet-ter. She kept talk-ing of what we should do in our fu-ture
lives.”

“Indeed! That is very in-ter-est-ing. And on the morn-ing of the wed-ding?”

“She was as bright as pos-sible—at least un-til after the ce-re-mony.”

“And did you ob-serve any change in her then?”

“Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I had ever
seen that her tem-per was just a little sharp. The in-cid-ent how-ever, was
too trivial to re-late and can have no pos-sible bear-ing upon the case.”

“Pray let us have it, for all that.”

“Oh, it is child-ish. She dropped her bou-quet as we went to-wards the
vestry. She was passing the front pew at the time, and it fell over
into the pew. There was a mo-ment’s delay, but the gen-tle-man in the pew
handed it up to her again, and it did not ap-pear to be the worse for
the fall. Yet when I spoke to her of the mat-ter, she answered me
ab-ruptly; and in the car-riage, on our way home, she seemed ab-surdly
agit-ated over this tri-fling cause.”

“Indeed! You say that there was a gen-tle-man in the pew. Some of the
gen-eral pub-lic were present, then?”

“Oh, yes. It is im-possible to ex-clude them when the church is open.”

“This gen-tle-man was not one of your wife’s friends?”

“No, no; I call him a gen-tle-man by cour-tesy, but he was quite a
com-mon-look-ing per-son. I hardly no-ticed his ap-pear-ance. But really I
think that we are wan-der-ing rather far from the point.”

“Lady St. Si-mon, then, re-turned from the wed-ding in a less cheer-ful
frame of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do on re-en-ter-ing
her father’s house?”

“I saw her in con-ver-sa-tion with her maid.”

“And who is her maid?”

“Alice is her name. She is an Amer-ican and came from Cali-for-nia with
her.”

“A con-fid-en-tial ser-vant?”

“A little too much so. It seemed to me that her mis-tress al-lowed her to
take great liber-ties. Still, of course, in Amer-ica they look upon these
things in a dif-fer-ent way.”

“How long did she speak to this Alice?”

“Oh, a few minutes. I had some-thing else to think of.”

“You did not over-hear what they said?”

“Lady St. Si-mon said some-thing about ‘jump-ing a claim.’ She was
ac-cus-tomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idea what she meant.”

“Amer-ican slang is very ex-press-ive some-times. And what did your wife do
when she fin-ished speak-ing to her maid?”

“She walked into the break-fast-room.”

“On your arm?”

“No, alone. She was very in-de-pend-ent in little mat-ters like that. Then,
after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose hur-riedly,
muttered some words of apo-logy, and left the room. She never came
back.”

“But this maid, Alice, as I un-der-stand, de-poses that she went to her
room, covered her bride’s dress with a long ul-ster, put on a bon-net,
and went out.”

“Quite so. And she was af-ter-wards seen walk-ing into Hyde Park in
com-pany with Flora Mil-lar, a wo-man who is now in cus-tody, and who had
already made a dis-turb-ance at Mr. Doran’s house that morn-ing.”

“Ah, yes. I should like a few par-tic-u-lars as to this young lady, and
your re-la-tions to her.”

Lord St. Si-mon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eye-brows. “We have
been on a friendly foot-ing for some years—I may say on a _very_
friendly foot-ing. She used to be at the Al-legro. I have not treated her
un-gen-er-ously, and she had no just cause of com-plaint against me, but
you know what wo-men are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear little thing, but
ex-ceed-ingly hot-headed and de-votedly at-tached to me. She wrote me
dread-ful let-ters when she heard that I was about to be mar-ried, and, to
tell the truth, the reason why I had the mar-riage cel-eb-rated so quietly
was that I feared lest there might be a scan-dal in the church. She came
to Mr. Doran’s door just after we re-turned, and she en-deav-oured to push
her way in, ut-ter-ing very ab-us-ive ex-pres-sions to-wards my wife, and even
threat-en-ing her, but I had fore-seen the pos-sib-il-ity of some-thing of the
sort, and I had two po-lice fel-lows there in private clothes, who soon
pushed her out again. She was quiet when she saw that there was no good
in mak-ing a row.”

“Did your wife hear all this?”

“No, thank good-ness, she did not.”

“And she was seen walk-ing with this very wo-man af-ter-wards?”

“Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scot-land Yard, looks upon as so
ser-i-ous. It is thought that Flora de-coyed my wife out and laid some
ter-rible trap for her.”

“Well, it is a pos-sible sup-pos-i-tion.”

“You think so, too?”

“I did not say a prob-able one. But you do not your-self look upon this
as likely?”

“I do not think Flora would hurt a fly.”

“Still, jeal-ousy is a strange trans-former of char-ac-ters. Pray what is
your own the-ory as to what took place?”

“Well, really, I came to seek a the-ory, not to pro-pound one. I have
given you all the facts. Since you ask me, how-ever, I may say that it
has oc-curred to me as pos-sible that the ex-cite-ment of this af-fair, the
con-scious-ness that she had made so im-mense a so-cial stride, had the
ef-fect of caus-ing some little nervous dis-turb-ance in my wife.”

“In short, that she had be-come sud-denly de-ranged?”

“Well, really, when I con-sider that she has turned her back—I will not
say upon me, but upon so much that many have as-pired to without
suc-cess—I can hardly ex-plain it in any other fash-ion.”

“Well, cer-tainly that is also a con-ceiv-able hy-po-thesis,” said Holmes,
smil-ing. “And now, Lord St. Si-mon, I think that I have nearly all my
data. May I ask whether you were seated at the break-fast-table so that
you could see out of the win-dow?”

“We could see the other side of the road and the Park.”

“Quite so. Then I do not think that I need to de-tain you longer. I
shall com-mu-nic-ate with you.”

“Should you be for-tu-nate enough to solve this prob-lem,” said our
cli-ent, rising.

“I have solved it.”

“Eh? What was that?”

“I say that I have solved it.”

“Where, then, is my wife?”

“That is a de-tail which I shall speedily sup-ply.”

Lord St. Si-mon shook his head. “I am afraid that it will take wiser
heads than yours or mine,” he re-marked, and bow-ing in a stately,
old-fash-ioned man-ner he de-par-ted.

“It is very good of Lord St. Si-mon to hon-our my head by put-ting it on a
level with his own,” said Sh-er-lock Holmes, laugh-ing. “I think that I
shall have a whisky and soda and a ci-gar after all this
cross-ques-tion-ing. I had formed my con-clu-sions as to the case be-fore
our cli-ent came into the room.”

“My dear Holmes!”

“I have notes of sev-eral sim-ilar cases, though none, as I re-marked
be-fore, which were quite as prompt. My whole ex-am-in-a-tion served to turn
my con-jec-ture into a cer-tainty. Cir-cum-stan-tial evid-ence is oc-ca-sion-ally
very con-vin-cing, as when you find a trout in the milk, to quote
Thor-eau’s ex-ample.”

“But I have heard all that you have heard.”

“Without, how-ever, the know-ledge of pre-ex-ist-ing cases which serves me
so well. There was a par-al-lel in-stance in Aber-deen some years back, and
some-thing on very much the same lines at Mu-nich the year after the
Franco-Prus-sian War. It is one of these cases—but, hullo, here is
Lestrade! Good-af-ter-noon, Lestrade! You will find an ex-tra tum-bler upon
the side-board, and there are ci-gars in the box.”

The of-fi-cial de-tect-ive was at-tired in a pea-jacket and cravat, which
gave him a de-cidedly naut-ical ap-pear-ance, and he car-ried a black can-vas
bag in his hand. With a short greet-ing he seated him-self and lit the
ci-gar which had been offered to him.

“What’s up, then?” asked Holmes with a twinkle in his eye. “You look
dis-sat-is-fied.”

“And I feel dis-sat-is-fied. It is this in-fernal St. Si-mon mar-riage case.
I can make neither head nor tail of the busi-ness.”

“Really! You sur-prise me.”

“Who ever heard of such a mixed af-fair? Every clue seems to slip
through my fin-gers. I have been at work upon it all day.”

“And very wet it seems to have made you,” said Holmes lay-ing his hand
upon the arm of the pea-jacket.

“Yes, I have been drag-ging the Ser-pent-ine.”

“In Heaven’s name, what for?”

“In search of the body of Lady St. Si-mon.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heart-ily.

“Have you dragged the basin of Tra-fal-gar Square foun-tain?” he asked.

“Why? What do you mean?”

“Be-cause you have just as good a chance of find-ing this lady in the one
as in the other.”

Lestrade shot an angry glance at my com-pan-ion. “I sup-pose you know all
about it,” he snarled.

“Well, I have only just heard the facts, but my mind is made up.”

“Oh, in-deed! Then you think that the Ser-pent-ine plays no part in the
mat-ter?”

“I think it very un-likely.”

“Then per-haps you will kindly ex-plain how it is that we found this in
it?” He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto the floor a
wed-ding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin shoes and a
bride’s wreath and veil, all dis-col-oured and soaked in wa-ter. “There,”
said he, put-ting a new wed-ding-ring upon the top of the pile. “There is
a little nut for you to crack, Master Holmes.”

“Oh, in-deed!” said my friend, blow-ing blue rings into the air. “You
dragged them from the Ser-pent-ine?”

“No. They were found float-ing near the mar-gin by a park-keeper. They
have been iden-ti-fied as her clothes, and it seemed to me that if the
clothes were there the body would not be far off.”

“By the same bril-liant reas-on-ing, every man’s body is to be found in
the neigh-bour-hood of his ward-robe. And pray what did you hope to ar-rive
at through this?”

“At some evid-ence im-plic-at-ing Flora Mil-lar in the dis-ap-pear-ance.”

“I am afraid that you will find it dif-fi-cult.”

“Are you, in-deed, now?” cried Lestrade with some bit-ter-ness. “I am
afraid, Holmes, that you are not very prac-tical with your de-duc-tions
and your in-fer-ences. You have made two blun-ders in as many minutes.
This dress does im-plic-ate Miss Flora Mil-lar.”

“And how?”

“In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In the
card-case is a note. And here is the very note.” He slapped it down
upon the table in front of him. “Listen to this: ‘You will see me when
all is ready. Come at once. F. H. M.’ Now my the-ory all along has been
that Lady St. Si-mon was de-coyed away by Flora Mil-lar, and that she,
with con-fed-er-ates, no doubt, was re-spons-ible for her dis-ap-pear-ance.
Here, signed with her ini-tials, is the very note which was no doubt
quietly slipped into her hand at the door and which lured her within
their reach.”

“Very good, Lestrade,” said Holmes, laugh-ing. “You really are very fine
in-deed. Let me see it.” He took up the pa-per in a list-less way, but his
at-ten-tion in-stantly be-came riv-eted, and he gave a little cry of
sat-is-fac-tion. “This is in-deed im-port-ant,” said he.

“Ha! you find it so?”

“Ex-tremely so. I con-grat-u-late you warmly.”

Lestrade rose in his tri-umph and bent his head to look. “Why,” he
shrieked, “you’re look-ing at the wrong side!”

“On the con-trary, this is the right side.”

“The right side? You’re mad! Here is the note writ-ten in pen-cil over
here.”

“And over here is what ap-pears to be the frag-ment of a hotel bill,
which in-terests me deeply.”

“There’s noth-ing in it. I looked at it be-fore,” said Lestrade. “‘Oct.
4th, rooms 8_s_., break-fast 2_s_. 6_d_., cock-tail 1_s_., lunch 2_s_.
6_d_., glass sherry, 8_d_.’ I see noth-ing in that.”

“Very likely not. It is most im-port-ant, all the same. As to the note,
it is im-port-ant also, or at least the ini-tials are, so I con-grat-u-late
you again.”

“I’ve wasted time enough,” said Lestrade, rising. “I be-lieve in hard
work and not in sit-ting by the fire spin-ning fine the-or-ies. Good-day,
Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bot-tom of the mat-ter
first.” He gathered up the gar-ments, thrust them into the bag, and made
for the door.

“Just one hint to you, Lestrade,” drawled Holmes be-fore his rival
van-ished; “I will tell you the true solu-tion of the mat-ter. Lady St.
Si-mon is a myth. There is not, and there never has been, any such
per-son.”

Lestrade looked sadly at my com-pan-ion. Then he turned to me, tapped his
fore-head three times, shook his head sol-emnly, and hur-ried away.

He had hardly shut the door be-hind him when Holmes rose to put on his
over-coat. “There is some-thing in what the fel-low says about out-door
work,” he re-marked, “so I think, Wat-son, that I must leave you to your
pa-pers for a little.”

It was after five o’clock when Sh-er-lock Holmes left me, but I had no
time to be lonely, for within an hour there ar-rived a con-fec-tioner’s
man with a very large flat box. This he un-packed with the help of a
youth whom he had brought with him, and presently, to my very great
as-ton-ish-ment, a quite epi-cur-ean little cold sup-per began to be laid out
upon our humble lodging-house ma-hogany. There were a couple of brace of
cold wood-cock, a pheas-ant, a _pâté de foie gras_ pie with a group of
an-cient and cob-webby bottles. Hav-ing laid out all these lux-ur-ies, my
two vis-it-ors van-ished away, like the genii of the Ar-a-bian Nights, with
no ex-plan-a-tion save that the things had been paid for and were ordered
to this ad-dress.

Just be-fore nine o’clock Sh-er-lock Holmes stepped briskly into the room.
His fea-tures were gravely set, but there was a light in his eye which
made me think that he had not been dis-ap-poin-ted in his con-clu-sions.

“They have laid the sup-per, then,” he said, rub-bing his hands.

“You seem to ex-pect com-pany. They have laid for five.”

“Yes, I fancy we may have some com-pany drop-ping in,” said he. “I am
sur-prised that Lord St. Si-mon has not already ar-rived. Ha! I fancy that
I hear his step now upon the stairs.”

It was in-deed our vis-itor of the af-ter-noon who came bust-ling in,
dangling his glasses more vig-or-ously than ever, and with a very
per-turbed ex-pres-sion upon his ar-is-to-cratic fea-tures.

“My mes-sen-ger reached you, then?” asked Holmes.

“Yes, and I con-fess that the con-tents startled me bey-ond meas-ure. Have
you good au-thor-ity for what you say?”

“The best pos-sible.”

Lord St. Si-mon sank into a chair and passed his hand over his fore-head.

“What will the Duke say,” he mur-mured, “when he hears that one of the
fam-ily has been sub-jec-ted to such hu-mi-li-ation?”

“It is the purest ac-ci-dent. I can-not al-low that there is any
hu-mi-li-ation.”

“Ah, you look on these things from an-other stand-point.”

“I fail to see that any-one is to blame. I can hardly see how the lady
could have ac-ted oth-er-wise, though her ab-rupt method of do-ing it was
un-doubtedly to be re-gret-ted. Hav-ing no mother, she had no one to ad-vise
her at such a crisis.”

“It was a slight, sir, a pub-lic slight,” said Lord St. Si-mon, tap-ping
his fin-gers upon the table.

“You must make al-low-ance for this poor girl, placed in so un-pre-ced-en-ted
a po-s-i-tion.”

“I will make no al-low-ance. I am very angry in-deed, and I have been
shame-fully used.”

“I think that I heard a ring,” said Holmes. “Yes, there are steps on
the land-ing. If I can-not per-suade you to take a le-ni-ent view of the
mat-ter, Lord St. Si-mon, I have brought an ad-voc-ate here who may be more
suc-cess-ful.” He opened the door and ushered in a lady and gen-tle-man.
“Lord St. Si-mon,” said he “al-low me to in-tro-duce you to Mr. and Mrs.
Fran-cis Hay Moulton. The lady, I think, you have already met.”

At the sight of these new-comers our cli-ent had sprung from his seat and
stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand thrust into the
breast of his frock-coat, a pic-ture of of-fen-ded dig-nity. The lady had
taken a quick step for-ward and had held out her hand to him, but he
still re-fused to raise his eyes. It was as well for his res-ol-u-tion,
per-haps, for her plead-ing face was one which it was hard to res-ist.

“You’re angry, Robert,” said she. “Well, I guess you have every cause
to be.”

“Pray make no apo-logy to me,” said Lord St. Si-mon bit-terly.

“Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that I should
have spoken to you be-fore I went; but I was kind of rattled, and from
the time when I saw Frank here again I just didn’t know what I was
do-ing or say-ing. I only won-der I didn’t fall down and do a faint right
there be-fore the al-tar.”

“Per-haps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave the
room while you ex-plain this mat-ter?”

“If I may give an opin-ion,” re-marked the strange gen-tle-man, “we’ve had
just a little too much secrecy over this busi-ness already. For my part,
I should like all Europe and Amer-ica to hear the rights of it.” He was
a small, wiry, sun-burnt man, clean-shaven, with a sharp face and alert
man-ner.

“Then I’ll tell our story right away,” said the lady. “Frank here and I
met in ’84, in McQuire’s camp, near the Rock-ies, where Pa was work-ing a
claim. We were en-gaged to each other, Frank and I; but then one day
father struck a rich pocket and made a pile, while poor Frank here had
a claim that petered out and came to noth-ing. The richer Pa grew the
poorer was Frank; so at last Pa wouldn’t hear of our en-gage-ment last-ing
any longer, and he took me away to ’Frisco. Frank wouldn’t throw up his
hand, though; so he fol-lowed me there, and he saw me without Pa know-ing
any-thing about it. It would only have made him mad to know, so we just
fixed it all up for ourselves. Frank said that he would go and make his
pile, too, and never come back to claim me un-til he had as much as Pa.
So then I prom-ised to wait for him to the end of time and pledged
my-self not to marry any-one else while he lived. ‘Why shouldn’t we be
mar-ried right away, then,’ said he, ‘and then I will feel sure of you;
and I won’t claim to be your hus-band un-til I come back?’ Well, we
talked it over, and he had fixed it all up so nicely, with a cler-gy-man
all ready in wait-ing, that we just did it right there; and then Frank
went off to seek his for-tune, and I went back to Pa.

“The next I heard of Frank was that he was in Montana, and then he went
pro-spect-ing in Ari-zona, and then I heard of him from New Mex-ico. After
that came a long news-pa-per story about how a miners’ camp had been
at-tacked by Apache In-di-ans, and there was my Frank’s name among the
killed. I fain-ted dead away, and I was very sick for months after. Pa
thought I had a de-cline and took me to half the doc-tors in ’Frisco. Not
a word of news came for a year and more, so that I never doubted that
Frank was really dead. Then Lord St. Si-mon came to ’Frisco, and we came
to Lon-don, and a mar-riage was ar-ranged, and Pa was very pleased, but I
felt all the time that no man on this earth would ever take the place
in my heart that had been given to my poor Frank.

“Still, if I had mar-ried Lord St. Si-mon, of course I’d have done my
duty by him. We can’t com-mand our love, but we can our ac-tions. I went
to the al-tar with him with the in-ten-tion to make him just as good a
wife as it was in me to be. But you may ima-gine what I felt when, just
as I came to the al-tar rails, I glanced back and saw Frank stand-ing and
look-ing at me out of the first pew. I thought it was his ghost at
first; but when I looked again there he was still, with a kind of
ques-tion in his eyes, as if to ask me whether I were glad or sorry to
see him. I won-der I didn’t drop. I know that everything was turn-ing
round, and the words of the cler-gy-man were just like the buzz of a bee
in my ear. I didn’t know what to do. Should I stop the ser-vice and make
a scene in the church? I glanced at him again, and he seemed to know
what I was think-ing, for he raised his fin-ger to his lips to tell me to
be still. Then I saw him scribble on a piece of pa-per, and I knew that
he was writ-ing me a note. As I passed his pew on the way out I dropped
my bou-quet over to him, and he slipped the note into my hand when he
re-turned me the flowers. It was only a line ask-ing me to join him when
he made the sign to me to do so. Of course I never doubted for a mo-ment
that my first duty was now to him, and I de-term-ined to do just whatever
he might dir-ect.

“When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in Cali-for-nia, and
had al-ways been his friend. I ordered her to say noth-ing, but to get a
few things packed and my ul-ster ready. I know I ought to have spoken to
Lord St. Si-mon, but it was dread-ful hard be-fore his mother and all
those great people. I just made up my mind to run away and ex-plain
af-ter-wards. I hadn’t been at the table ten minutes be-fore I saw Frank
out of the win-dow at the other side of the road. He beckoned to me and
then began walk-ing into the Park. I slipped out, put on my things, and
fol-lowed him. Some wo-man came talk-ing some-thing or other about Lord St.
Si-mon to me—seemed to me from the little I heard as if he had a little
secret of his own be-fore mar-riage also—but I man-aged to get away from
her and soon over-took Frank. We got into a cab to-gether, and away we
drove to some lodgings he had taken in Gor-don Square, and that was my
true wed-ding after all those years of wait-ing. Frank had been a
pris-oner among the Apaches, had es-caped, came on to ’Frisco, found that
I had given him up for dead and had gone to Eng-land, fol-lowed me there,
and had come upon me at last on the very morn-ing of my second wed-ding.”

“I saw it in a pa-per,” ex-plained the Amer-ican. “It gave the name and
the church but not where the lady lived.”

“Then we had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank was all for
open-ness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I should
like to van-ish away and never see any of them again—just send-ing a line
to Pa, per-haps, to show him that I was alive. It was aw-ful to me to
think of all those lords and ladies sit-ting round that break-fast-table
and wait-ing for me to come back. So Frank took my wed-ding-clothes and
things and made a bundle of them, so that I should not be traced, and
dropped them away some-where where no one could find them. It is likely
that we should have gone on to Paris to-mor-row, only that this good
gen-tle-man, Mr. Holmes, came round to us this even-ing, though how he
found us is more than I can think, and he showed us very clearly and
kindly that I was wrong and that Frank was right, and that we should be
put-ting ourselves in the wrong if we were so secret. Then he offered to
give us a chance of talk-ing to Lord St. Si-mon alone, and so we came
right away round to his rooms at once. Now, Robert, you have heard it
all, and I am very sorry if I have given you pain, and I hope that you
do not think very meanly of me.”

Lord St. Si-mon had by no means re-laxed his ri-gid at-ti-tude, but had
listened with a frown-ing brow and a com-pressed lip to this long
nar-rat-ive.

“Ex-cuse me,” he said, “but it is not my cus-tom to dis-cuss my most
in-tim-ate per-sonal af-fairs in this pub-lic man-ner.”

“Then you won’t for-give me? You won’t shake hands be-fore I go?”

“Oh, cer-tainly, if it would give you any pleas-ure.” He put out his hand
and coldly grasped that which she ex-ten-ded to him.

“I had hoped,” sug-ges-ted Holmes, “that you would have joined us in a
friendly sup-per.”

“I think that there you ask a little too much,” re-spon-ded his Lord-ship.
“I may be forced to ac-qui-esce in these re-cent de-vel-op-ments, but I can
hardly be ex-pec-ted to make merry over them. I think that with your
per-mis-sion I will now wish you all a very good-night.” He in-cluded us
all in a sweep-ing bow and stalked out of the room.

“Then I trust that you at least will hon-our me with your com-pany,” said
Sh-er-lock Holmes. “It is al-ways a joy to meet an Amer-ican, Mr. Moulton,
for I am one of those who be-lieve that the folly of a mon-arch and the
blun-der-ing of a min-is-ter in far-gone years will not pre-vent our
chil-dren from be-ing some day cit-izens of the same world-wide coun-try
un-der a flag which shall be a quar-ter-ing of the Union Jack with the
Stars and Stripes.”

“The case has been an in-ter-est-ing one,” re-marked Holmes when our
vis-it-ors had left us, “be-cause it serves to show very clearly how
simple the ex-plan-a-tion may be of an af-fair which at first sight seems
to be al-most in-ex-plic-able. Noth-ing could be more nat-ural than the
se-quence of events as nar-rated by this lady, and noth-ing stranger than
the res-ult when viewed, for in-stance, by Mr. Lestrade of Scot-land
Yard.”

“You were not your-self at fault at all, then?”

“From the first, two facts were very ob-vi-ous to me, the one that the
lady had been quite will-ing to un-dergo the wed-ding ce-re-mony, the other
that she had re-pen-ted of it within a few minutes of re-turn-ing home.
Ob-vi-ously some-thing had oc-curred dur-ing the morn-ing, then, to cause her
to change her mind. What could that some-thing be? She could not have
spoken to any-one when she was out, for she had been in the com-pany of
the bride-groom. Had she seen someone, then? If she had, it must be
someone from Amer-ica be-cause she had spent so short a time in this
coun-try that she could hardly have al-lowed any-one to ac-quire so deep an
in-flu-ence over her that the mere sight of him would in-duce her to
change her plans so com-pletely. You see we have already ar-rived, by a
pro-cess of ex-clu-sion, at the idea that she might have seen an Amer-ican.
Then who could this Amer-ican be, and why should he pos-sess so much
in-flu-ence over her? It might be a lover; it might be a hus-band. Her
young wo-man-hood had, I knew, been spent in rough scenes and un-der
strange con-di-tions. So far I had got be-fore I ever heard Lord St.
Si-mon’s nar-rat-ive. When he told us of a man in a pew, of the change in
the bride’s man-ner, of so trans-par-ent a device for ob-tain-ing a note as
the drop-ping of a bou-quet, of her re-sort to her con-fid-en-tial maid, and
of her very sig-ni-fic-ant al-lu-sion to claim-jump-ing—which in miners’
par-lance means tak-ing pos-ses-sion of that which an-other per-son has a
prior claim to—the whole situ-ation be-came ab-so-lutely clear. She had
gone off with a man, and the man was either a lover or was a pre-vi-ous
hus-band—the chances be-ing in fa-vour of the lat-ter.”

“And how in the world did you find them?”

“It might have been dif-fi-cult, but friend Lestrade held in-form-a-tion in
his hands the value of which he did not him-self know. The ini-tials
were, of course, of the highest im-port-ance, but more valu-able still was
it to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of the
most se-lect Lon-don ho-tels.”

“How did you de-duce the se-lect?”

“By the se-lect prices. Eight shil-lings for a bed and eight-pence for a
glass of sherry poin-ted to one of the most ex-pens-ive ho-tels. There are
not many in Lon-don which charge at that rate. In the second one which I
vis-ited in Northum-ber-land Av-enue, I learned by an in-spec-tion of the
book that Fran-cis H. Moulton, an Amer-ican gen-tle-man, had left only the
day be-fore, and on look-ing over the entries against him, I came upon
the very items which I had seen in the du-plic-ate bill. His let-ters were
to be for-war-ded to 226 Gor-don Square; so thither I trav-elled, and be-ing
for-tu-nate enough to find the lov-ing couple at home, I ven-tured to give
them some pa-ternal ad-vice and to point out to them that it would be
bet-ter in every way that they should make their po-s-i-tion a little
clearer both to the gen-eral pub-lic and to Lord St. Si-mon in par-tic-u-lar.
I in-vited them to meet him here, and, as you see, I made him keep the
ap-point-ment.”

“But with no very good res-ult,” I re-marked. “His con-duct was cer-tainly
not very gra-cious.”

“Ah, Wat-son,” said Holmes, smil-ing, “per-haps you would not be very
gra-cious either, if, after all the trouble of woo-ing and wed-ding, you
found your-self de-prived in an in-stant of wife and of for-tune. I think
that we may judge Lord St. Si-mon very mer-ci-fully and thank our stars
that we are never likely to find ourselves in the same po-s-i-tion. Draw
your chair up and hand me my vi-olin, for the only prob-lem we have still
to solve is how to while away these bleak au-tum-nal even-ings.”



XI. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET

“Holmes,” said I as I stood one morn-ing in our bow-win-dow look-ing down
the street, “here is a mad-man com-ing along. It seems rather sad that
his re-l-at-ives should al-low him to come out alone.”

My friend rose lazily from his arm-chair and stood with his hands in the
pock-ets of his dress-ing-gown, look-ing over my shoulder. It was a
bright, crisp Febru-ary morn-ing, and the snow of the day be-fore still
lay deep upon the ground, shim-mer-ing brightly in the wintry sun. Down
the centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumbly
band by the traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges of
the foot-paths it still lay as white as when it fell. The grey pave-ment
had been cleaned and scraped, but was still dan-ger-ously slip-pery, so
that there were fewer pas-sen-gers than usual. Indeed, from the dir-ec-tion
of the Met-ro-pol-itan Sta-tion no one was com-ing save the single gen-tle-man
whose ec-cent-ric con-duct had drawn my at-ten-tion.

He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly, and im-pos-ing, with a
massive, strongly marked face and a com-mand-ing fig-ure. He was dressed
in a sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shin-ing hat, neat
brown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-grey trousers. Yet his ac-tions were
in ab-surd con-trast to the dig-nity of his dress and fea-tures, for he was
run-ning hard, with oc-ca-sional little springs, such as a weary man gives
who is little ac-cus-tomed to set any tax upon his legs. As he ran he
jerked his hands up and down, waggled his head, and writhed his face
into the most ex-traordin-ary con-tor-tions.

“What on earth can be the mat-ter with him?” I asked. “He is look-ing up
at the num-bers of the houses.”

“I be-lieve that he is com-ing here,” said Holmes, rub-bing his hands.

“Here?”

“Yes; I rather think he is com-ing to con-sult me pro-fes-sion-ally. I think
that I re-cog-nise the symp-toms. Ha! did I not tell you?” As he spoke,
the man, puff-ing and blow-ing, rushed at our door and pulled at our bell
un-til the whole house re-soun-ded with the clanging.

A few mo-ments later he was in our room, still puff-ing, still
ges-tic-u-lat-ing, but with so fixed a look of grief and des-pair in his
eyes that our smiles were turned in an in-stant to hor-ror and pity. For
a while he could not get his words out, but swayed his body and plucked
at his hair like one who has been driven to the ex-treme lim-its of his
reason. Then, sud-denly spring-ing to his feet, he beat his head against
the wall with such force that we both rushed upon him and tore him away
to the centre of the room. Sh-er-lock Holmes pushed him down into the
easy-chair and, sit-ting be-side him, pat-ted his hand and chat-ted with
him in the easy, sooth-ing tones which he knew so well how to em-ploy.

“You have come to me to tell your story, have you not?” said he. “You
are fa-tigued with your haste. Pray wait un-til you have re-covered
your-self, and then I shall be most happy to look into any little
prob-lem which you may sub-mit to me.”

The man sat for a minute or more with a heav-ing chest, fight-ing against
his emo-tion. Then he passed his handker-chief over his brow, set his
lips tight, and turned his face to-wards us.

“No doubt you think me mad?” said he.

“I see that you have had some great trouble,” re-spon-ded Holmes.

“God knows I have!—a trouble which is enough to un-seat my reason, so
sud-den and so ter-rible is it. Public dis-grace I might have faced,
al-though I am a man whose char-ac-ter has never yet borne a stain.
Priv-ate af-flic-tion also is the lot of every man; but the two com-ing
to-gether, and in so fright-ful a form, have been enough to shake my very
soul. Besides, it is not I alone. The very noblest in the land may
suf-fer un-less some way be found out of this hor-rible af-fair.”

“Pray com-pose your-self, sir,” said Holmes, “and let me have a clear
ac-count of who you are and what it is that has be-fallen you.”

“My name,” answered our vis-itor, “is prob-ably fa-mil-iar to your ears. I
am Al-ex-an-der Holder, of the bank-ing firm of Holder & Steven-son, of
Thread-needle Street.”

The name was in-deed well known to us as be-long-ing to the senior part-ner
in the second largest private bank-ing con-cern in the City of Lon-don.
What could have happened, then, to bring one of the fore-most cit-izens
of Lon-don to this most pi-ti-able pass? We waited, all curi-os-ity, un-til
with an-other ef-fort he braced him-self to tell his story.

“I feel that time is of value,” said he; “that is why I hastened here
when the po-lice in-spector sug-ges-ted that I should se-cure your
co-op-er-a-tion. I came to Baker Street by the Under-ground and hur-ried
from there on foot, for the cabs go slowly through this snow. That is
why I was so out of breath, for I am a man who takes very little
ex-er-cise. I feel bet-ter now, and I will put the facts be-fore you as
shortly and yet as clearly as I can.

“It is, of course, well known to you that in a suc-cess-ful bank-ing
busi-ness as much de-pends upon our be-ing able to find re-mu-ner-at-ive
in-vest-ments for our funds as upon our in-creas-ing our con-nec-tion and the
num-ber of our de-pos-it-ors. One of our most luc-rat-ive means of lay-ing out
money is in the shape of loans, where the se-cur-ity is un-im-peach-able. We
have done a good deal in this dir-ec-tion dur-ing the last few years, and
there are many noble fam-il-ies to whom we have ad-vanced large sums upon
the se-cur-ity of their pic-tures, lib-rar-ies, or plate.

“Yes-ter-day morn-ing I was seated in my of-fice at the bank when a card
was brought in to me by one of the clerks. I star-ted when I saw the
name, for it was that of none other than—well, per-haps even to you I
had bet-ter say no more than that it was a name which is a house-hold
word all over the earth—one of the highest, noblest, most ex-al-ted names
in Eng-land. I was over-whelmed by the hon-our and at-temp-ted, when he
entered, to say so, but he plunged at once into busi-ness with the air
of a man who wishes to hurry quickly through a dis-agree-able task.

“‘Mr. Holder,’ said he, ‘I have been in-formed that you are in the habit
of ad-van-cing money.’

“‘The firm does so when the se-cur-ity is good.’ I answered.

“‘It is ab-so-lutely es-sen-tial to me,’ said he, ‘that I should have £
50,000 at once. I could, of course, bor-row so tri-fling a sum ten times
over from my friends, but I much prefer to make it a mat-ter of busi-ness
and to carry out that busi-ness my-self. In my po-s-i-tion you can read-ily
un-der-stand that it is un-wise to place one’s self un-der ob-lig-a-tions.’

“‘For how long, may I ask, do you want this sum?’ I asked.

“‘Next Monday I have a large sum due to me, and I shall then most
cer-tainly re-pay what you ad-vance, with whatever in-terest you think it
right to charge. But it is very es-sen-tial to me that the money should
be paid at once.’

“‘I should be happy to ad-vance it without fur-ther par-ley from my own
private purse,’ said I, ‘were it not that the strain would be rather
more than it could bear. If, on the other hand, I am to do it in the
name of the firm, then in justice to my part-ner I must in-sist that,
even in your case, every busi-ness-like pre-cau-tion should be taken.’

“‘I should much prefer to have it so,’ said he, rais-ing up a square,
black mo-rocco case which he had laid be-side his chair. ‘You have
doubt-less heard of the Beryl Cor-onet?’

“‘One of the most pre-cious pub-lic pos-ses-sions of the em-pire,’ said I.

“‘Pre-cisely.’ He opened the case, and there, im-bed-ded in soft,
flesh-col-oured vel-vet, lay the mag-ni-fi-cent piece of jew-ellery which he
had named. ‘There are thirty-nine enorm-ous beryls,’ said he, ‘and the
price of the gold chas-ing is in-cal-cul-able. The low-est es-tim-ate would
put the worth of the cor-onet at double the sum which I have asked. I am
pre-pared to leave it with you as my se-cur-ity.’

“I took the pre-cious case into my hands and looked in some per-plex-ity
from it to my il-lus-tri-ous cli-ent.

“‘You doubt its value?’ he asked.

“‘Not at all. I only doubt—’

“‘The pro-pri-ety of my leav-ing it. You may set your mind at rest about
that. I should not dream of do-ing so were it not ab-so-lutely cer-tain
that I should be able in four days to re-claim it. It is a pure mat-ter
of form. Is the se-cur-ity suf-fi-cient?’

“‘Ample.’

“‘You un-der-stand, Mr. Holder, that I am giv-ing you a strong proof of
the con-fid-ence which I have in you, foun-ded upon all that I have heard
of you. I rely upon you not only to be dis-creet and to re-frain from all
gos-sip upon the mat-ter but, above all, to pre-serve this cor-onet with
every pos-sible pre-cau-tion be-cause I need not say that a great pub-lic
scan-dal would be caused if any harm were to be-fall it. Any in-jury to it
would be al-most as ser-i-ous as its com-plete loss, for there are no
beryls in the world to match these, and it would be im-possible to
re-place them. I leave it with you, how-ever, with every con-fid-ence, and
I shall call for it in per-son on Monday morn-ing.’

“See-ing that my cli-ent was anxious to leave, I said no more but,
call-ing for my cash-ier, I ordered him to pay over fifty £ 1000 notes.
When I was alone once more, how-ever, with the pre-cious case ly-ing upon
the table in front of me, I could not but think with some mis-giv-ings of
the im-mense re-spons-ib-il-ity which it en-tailed upon me. There could be no
doubt that, as it was a na-tional pos-ses-sion, a hor-rible scan-dal would
en-sue if any mis-for-tune should oc-cur to it. I already re-gret-ted hav-ing
ever con-sen-ted to take charge of it. However, it was too late to al-ter
the mat-ter now, so I locked it up in my private safe and turned once
more to my work.

“When even-ing came I felt that it would be an im-prudence to leave so
pre-cious a thing in the of-fice be-hind me. Bankers’ safes had been
forced be-fore now, and why should not mine be? If so, how ter-rible
would be the po-s-i-tion in which I should find my-self! I de-term-ined,
there-fore, that for the next few days I would al-ways carry the case
back-ward and for-ward with me, so that it might never be really out of
my reach. With this in-ten-tion, I called a cab and drove out to my house
at Streatham, car-ry-ing the jewel with me. I did not breathe freely
un-til I had taken it up-stairs and locked it in the bur-eau of my
dress-ing-room.

“And now a word as to my house-hold, Mr. Holmes, for I wish you to
thor-oughly un-der-stand the situ-ation. My groom and my page sleep out of
the house, and may be set aside al-to-gether. I have three maid-ser-vants
who have been with me a num-ber of years and whose ab-so-lute re-li-ab-il-ity
is quite above sus-pi-cion. Another, Lucy Parr, the second wait-ing-maid,
has only been in my ser-vice a few months. She came with an ex-cel-lent
char-ac-ter, how-ever, and has al-ways given me sat-is-fac-tion. She is a very
pretty girl and has at-trac-ted ad-mirers who have oc-ca-sion-ally hung about
the place. That is the only draw-back which we have found to her, but we
be-lieve her to be a thor-oughly good girl in every way.

“So much for the ser-vants. My fam-ily it-self is so small that it will
not take me long to de-scribe it. I am a wid-ower and have an only son,
Ar-thur. He has been a dis-ap-point-ment to me, Mr. Holmes—a griev-ous
dis-ap-point-ment. I have no doubt that I am my-self to blame. People tell
me that I have spoiled him. Very likely I have. When my dear wife died
I felt that he was all I had to love. I could not bear to see the smile
fade even for a mo-ment from his face. I have never denied him a wish.
Per-haps it would have been bet-ter for both of us had I been sterner,
but I meant it for the best.

“It was nat-ur-ally my in-ten-tion that he should suc-ceed me in my
busi-ness, but he was not of a busi-ness turn. He was wild, way-ward, and,
to speak the truth, I could not trust him in the hand-ling of large sums
of money. When he was young he be-came a mem-ber of an ar-is-to-cratic club,
and there, hav-ing charm-ing man-ners, he was soon the in-tim-ate of a
num-ber of men with long purses and ex-pens-ive habits. He learned to play
heav-ily at cards and to squander money on the turf, un-til he had again
and again to come to me and im-plore me to give him an ad-vance upon his
al-low-ance, that he might settle his debts of hon-our. He tried more than
once to break away from the dan-ger-ous com-pany which he was keep-ing, but
each time the in-flu-ence of his friend, Sir Ge-orge Burn-well, was enough
to draw him back again.

“And, in-deed, I could not won-der that such a man as Sir Ge-orge Burn-well
should gain an in-flu-ence over him, for he has fre-quently brought him to
my house, and I have found my-self that I could hardly res-ist the
fas-cin-a-tion of his man-ner. He is older than Ar-thur, a man of the world
to his fin-ger-tips, one who had been every-where, seen everything, a
bril-liant talker, and a man of great per-sonal beauty. Yet when I think
of him in cold blood, far away from the glam-our of his pres-ence, I am
con-vinced from his cyn-ical speech and the look which I have caught in
his eyes that he is one who should be deeply dis-trus-ted. So I think,
and so, too, thinks my little Mary, who has a wo-man’s quick in-sight
into char-ac-ter.

“And now there is only she to be de-scribed. She is my niece; but when
my brother died five years ago and left her alone in the world I
ad-op-ted her, and have looked upon her ever since as my daugh-ter. She is
a sun-beam in my house—sweet, lov-ing, beau-ti-ful, a won-der-ful man-ager and
house-keeper, yet as tender and quiet and gentle as a wo-man could be.
She is my right hand. I do not know what I could do without her. In
only one mat-ter has she ever gone against my wishes. Twice my boy has
asked her to marry him, for he loves her de-votedly, but each time she
has re-fused him. I think that if any-one could have drawn him into the
right path it would have been she, and that his mar-riage might have
changed his whole life; but now, alas! it is too late—forever too late!

“Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who live un-der my roof, and I
shall con-tinue with my miser-able story.

“When we were tak-ing cof-fee in the draw-ing-room that night after
din-ner, I told Ar-thur and Mary my ex-per-i-ence, and of the pre-cious
treas-ure which we had un-der our roof, sup-press-ing only the name of my
cli-ent. Lucy Parr, who had brought in the cof-fee, had, I am sure, left
the room; but I can-not swear that the door was closed. Mary and Ar-thur
were much in-ter-ested and wished to see the fam-ous cor-onet, but I
thought it bet-ter not to dis-turb it.

“‘Where have you put it?’ asked Ar-thur.

“‘In my own bur-eau.’

“‘Well, I hope to good-ness the house won’t be burgled dur-ing the
night.’ said he.

“‘It is locked up,’ I answered.

“‘Oh, any old key will fit that bur-eau. When I was a young-ster I have
opened it my-self with the key of the box-room cup-board.’

“He of-ten had a wild way of talk-ing, so that I thought little of what
he said. He fol-lowed me to my room, how-ever, that night with a very
grave face.

“‘Look here, dad,’ said he with his eyes cast down, ‘can you let me
have £ 200?’

“‘No, I can-not!’ I answered sharply. ‘I have been far too gen-er-ous with
you in money mat-ters.’

“‘You have been very kind,’ said he, ‘but I must have this money, or
else I can never show my face in-side the club again.’

“‘And a very good thing, too!’ I cried.

“‘Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dis-hon-oured man,’ said he.
‘I could not bear the dis-grace. I must raise the money in some way, and
if you will not let me have it, then I must try other means.’

“I was very angry, for this was the third de-mand dur-ing the month. ‘You
shall not have a farth-ing from me,’ I cried, on which he bowed and left
the room without an-other word.

“When he was gone I un-locked my bur-eau, made sure that my treas-ure was
safe, and locked it again. Then I star-ted to go round the house to see
that all was se-cure—a duty which I usu-ally leave to Mary but which I
thought it well to per-form my-self that night. As I came down the stairs
I saw Mary her-self at the side win-dow of the hall, which she closed and
fastened as I ap-proached.

“‘Tell me, dad,’ said she, look-ing, I thought, a little dis-turbed, ‘did
you give Lucy, the maid, leave to go out to-night?’

“‘Cer-tainly not.’

“‘She came in just now by the back door. I have no doubt that she has
only been to the side gate to see someone, but I think that it is
hardly safe and should be stopped.’

“‘You must speak to her in the morn-ing, or I will if you prefer it. Are
you sure that everything is fastened?’

“‘Quite sure, dad.’

“‘Then, good-night.’ I kissed her and went up to my bed-room again,
where I was soon asleep.

“I am en-deav-our-ing to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may have
any bear-ing upon the case, but I beg that you will ques-tion me upon any
point which I do not make clear.”

“On the con-trary, your state-ment is sin-gu-larly lu-cid.”

“I come to a part of my story now in which I should wish to be
par-tic-u-larly so. I am not a very heavy sleeper, and the anxi-ety in my
mind ten-ded, no doubt, to make me even less so than usual. About two in
the morn-ing, then, I was awakened by some sound in the house. It had
ceased ere I was wide awake, but it had left an im-pres-sion be-hind it as
though a win-dow had gently closed some-where. I lay listen-ing with all
my ears. Sud-denly, to my hor-ror, there was a dis-tinct sound of
foot-steps mov-ing softly in the next room. I slipped out of bed, all
pal-pit-at-ing with fear, and peeped round the corner of my dress-ing-room
door.

“‘Ar-thur!’ I screamed, ‘you vil-lain! you thief! How dare you touch that
cor-onet?’

“The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my un-happy boy, dressed
only in his shirt and trousers, was stand-ing be-side the light, hold-ing
the cor-onet in his hands. He ap-peared to be wrench-ing at it, or bend-ing
it with all his strength. At my cry he dropped it from his grasp and
turned as pale as death. I snatched it up and ex-amined it. One of the
gold corners, with three of the beryls in it, was miss-ing.

“‘You black-guard!’ I shouted, be-side my-self with rage. ‘You have
des-troyed it! You have dis-hon-oured me forever! Where are the jew-els
which you have stolen?’

“‘Stolen!’ he cried.

“‘Yes, thief!’ I roared, shak-ing him by the shoulder.

“‘There are none miss-ing. There can-not be any miss-ing,’ said he.

“‘There are three miss-ing. And you know where they are. Must I call you
a liar as well as a thief? Did I not see you try-ing to tear off an-other
piece?’

“‘You have called me names enough,’ said he, ‘I will not stand it any
longer. I shall not say an-other word about this busi-ness, since you
have chosen to in-sult me. I will leave your house in the morn-ing and
make my own way in the world.’

“‘You shall leave it in the hands of the po-lice!’ I cried half-mad with
grief and rage. ‘I shall have this mat-ter probed to the bot-tom.’

“‘You shall learn noth-ing from me,’ said he with a pas-sion such as I
should not have thought was in his nature. ‘If you choose to call the
po-lice, let the po-lice find what they can.’

“By this time the whole house was astir, for I had raised my voice in
my an-ger. Mary was the first to rush into my room, and, at the sight of
the cor-onet and of Ar-thur’s face, she read the whole story and, with a
scream, fell down sense-less on the ground. I sent the house-maid for the
po-lice and put the in-vest-ig-a-tion into their hands at once. When the
in-spector and a con-stable entered the house, Ar-thur, who had stood
sul-lenly with his arms fol-ded, asked me whether it was my in-ten-tion to
charge him with theft. I answered that it had ceased to be a private
mat-ter, but had be-come a pub-lic one, since the ruined cor-onet was
na-tional prop-erty. I was de-term-ined that the law should have its way in
everything.

“‘At least,’ said he, ‘you will not have me ar-res-ted at once. It would
be to your ad-vant-age as well as mine if I might leave the house for
five minutes.’

“‘That you may get away, or per-haps that you may con-ceal what you have
stolen,’ said I. And then, real-ising the dread-ful po-s-i-tion in which I
was placed, I im-plored him to re-mem-ber that not only my hon-our but that
of one who was far greater than I was at stake; and that he threatened
to raise a scan-dal which would con-vulse the na-tion. He might avert it
all if he would but tell me what he had done with the three miss-ing
stones.

“‘You may as well face the mat-ter,’ said I; ‘you have been caught in
the act, and no con-fes-sion could make your guilt more hein-ous. If you
but make such re-par-a-tion as is in your power, by telling us where the
beryls are, all shall be for-given and for-got-ten.’

“‘Keep your for-give-ness for those who ask for it,’ he answered, turn-ing
away from me with a sneer. I saw that he was too hardened for any words
of mine to in-flu-ence him. There was but one way for it. I called in the
in-spector and gave him into cus-tody. A search was made at once not only
of his per-son but of his room and of every por-tion of the house where
he could pos-sibly have con-cealed the gems; but no trace of them could
be found, nor would the wretched boy open his mouth for all our
per-sua-sions and our threats. This morn-ing he was re-moved to a cell, and
I, after go-ing through all the po-lice form-al-it-ies, have hur-ried round
to you to im-plore you to use your skill in un-rav-el-ling the mat-ter. The
po-lice have openly con-fessed that they can at present make noth-ing of
it. You may go to any ex-pense which you think ne-ces-sary. I have already
offered a re-ward of £ 1000. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my
hon-our, my gems, and my son in one night. Oh, what shall I do!”

He put a hand on either side of his head and rocked him-self to and fro,
dron-ing to him-self like a child whose grief has got bey-ond words.

Sh-er-lock Holmes sat si-lent for some few minutes, with his brows knit-ted
and his eyes fixed upon the fire.

“Do you re-ceive much com-pany?” he asked.

“None save my part-ner with his fam-ily and an oc-ca-sional friend of
Ar-thur’s. Sir Ge-orge Burn-well has been sev-eral times lately. No one
else, I think.”

“Do you go out much in so-ci-ety?”

“Ar-thur does. Mary and I stay at home. We neither of us care for it.”

“That is un-usual in a young girl.”

“She is of a quiet nature. Besides, she is not so very young. She is
four-and-twenty.”

“This mat-ter, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to her
also.”

“Ter-rible! She is even more af-fected than I.”

“You have neither of you any doubt as to your son’s guilt?”

“How can we have when I saw him with my own eyes with the cor-onet in
his hands.”

“I hardly con-sider that a con-clus-ive proof. Was the re-mainder of the
cor-onet at all in-jured?”

“Yes, it was twis-ted.”

“Do you not think, then, that he might have been try-ing to straighten
it?”

“God bless you! You are do-ing what you can for him and for me. But it
is too heavy a task. What was he do-ing there at all? If his pur-pose
were in-no-cent, why did he not say so?”

“Pre-cisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not in-vent a lie? His
si-lence ap-pears to me to cut both ways. There are sev-eral sin-gu-lar
points about the case. What did the po-lice think of the noise which
awoke you from your sleep?”

“They con-sidered that it might be caused by Ar-thur’s clos-ing his
bed-room door.”

“A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door so as
to wake a house-hold. What did they say, then, of the dis-ap-pear-ance of
these gems?”

“They are still sound-ing the plank-ing and prob-ing the fur-niture in the
hope of find-ing them.”

“Have they thought of look-ing out-side the house?”

“Yes, they have shown ex-traordin-ary en-ergy. The whole garden has
already been minutely ex-amined.”

“Now, my dear sir,” said Holmes, “is it not ob-vi-ous to you now that
this mat-ter really strikes very much deeper than either you or the
po-lice were at first in-clined to think? It ap-peared to you to be a
simple case; to me it seems ex-ceed-ingly com-plex. Con-sider what is
in-volved by your the-ory. You sup-pose that your son came down from his
bed, went, at great risk, to your dress-ing-room, opened your bur-eau,
took out your cor-onet, broke off by main force a small por-tion of it,
went off to some other place, con-cealed three gems out of the
thirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and then
re-turned with the other thirty-six into the room in which he ex-posed
him-self to the greatest danger of be-ing dis-covered. I ask you now, is
such a the-ory ten-able?”

“But what other is there?” cried the banker with a ges-ture of des-pair.
“If his motives were in-no-cent, why does he not ex-plain them?”

“It is our task to find that out,” replied Holmes; “so now, if you
please, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham to-gether, and de-vote
an hour to glan-cing a little more closely into de-tails.”

My friend in-sisted upon my ac-com-pa-ny-ing them in their ex-ped-i-tion, which
I was eager enough to do, for my curi-os-ity and sym-pathy were deeply
stirred by the story to which we had listened. I con-fess that the guilt
of the banker’s son ap-peared to me to be as ob-vi-ous as it did to his
un-happy father, but still I had such faith in Holmes’ judg-ment that I
felt that there must be some grounds for hope as long as he was
dis-sat-is-fied with the ac-cep-ted ex-plan-a-tion. He hardly spoke a word the
whole way out to the south-ern sub-urb, but sat with his chin upon his
breast and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the deep-est thought.
Our cli-ent ap-peared to have taken fresh heart at the little glimpse of
hope which had been presen-ted to him, and he even broke into a
des-ultory chat with me over his busi-ness af-fairs. A short rail-way
jour-ney and a shorter walk brought us to Fairb-ank, the mod-est res-id-ence
of the great fin-an-cier.

Fairb-ank was a good-sized square house of white stone, stand-ing back a
little from the road. A double car-riage-sweep, with a snow-clad lawn,
stretched down in front to two large iron gates which closed the
en-trance. On the right side was a small wooden thicket, which led into
a nar-row path between two neat hedges stretch-ing from the road to the
kit-chen door, and form-ing the trades-men’s en-trance. On the left ran a
lane which led to the stables, and was not it-self within the grounds at
all, be-ing a pub-lic, though little used, thor-ough-fare. Holmes left us
stand-ing at the door and walked slowly all round the house, across the
front, down the trades-men’s path, and so round by the garden be-hind
into the stable lane. So long was he that Mr. Holder and I went into
the din-ing-room and waited by the fire un-til he should re-turn. We were
sit-ting there in si-lence when the door opened and a young lady came in.
She was rather above the middle height, slim, with dark hair and eyes,
which seemed the darker against the ab-so-lute pal-lor of her skin. I do
not think that I have ever seen such deadly pale-ness in a wo-man’s face.
Her lips, too, were blood-less, but her eyes were flushed with cry-ing.
As she swept si-lently into the room she im-pressed me with a greater
sense of grief than the banker had done in the morn-ing, and it was the
more strik-ing in her as she was evid-ently a wo-man of strong char-ac-ter,
with im-mense ca-pa-city for self-re-straint. Dis-reg-ard-ing my pres-ence, she
went straight to her uncle and passed her hand over his head with a
sweet wo-manly caress.

“You have given or-ders that Ar-thur should be lib-er-ated, have you not,
dad?” she asked.

“No, no, my girl, the mat-ter must be probed to the bot-tom.”

“But I am so sure that he is in-no-cent. You know what wo-man’s in-stincts
are. I know that he has done no harm and that you will be sorry for
hav-ing ac-ted so harshly.”

“Why is he si-lent, then, if he is in-no-cent?”

“Who knows? Per-haps be-cause he was so angry that you should sus-pect
him.”

“How could I help sus-pect-ing him, when I ac-tu-ally saw him with the
cor-onet in his hand?”

“Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh, do, do take my
word for it that he is in-no-cent. Let the mat-ter drop and say no more.
It is so dread-ful to think of our dear Ar-thur in prison!”

“I shall never let it drop un-til the gems are found—never, Mary! Your
af-fec-tion for Ar-thur blinds you as to the aw-ful con-sequences to me. Far
from hush-ing the thing up, I have brought a gen-tle-man down from Lon-don
to in-quire more deeply into it.”

“This gen-tle-man?” she asked, fa-cing round to me.

“No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round in the
stable lane now.”

“The stable lane?” She raised her dark eye-brows. “What can he hope to
find there? Ah! this, I sup-pose, is he. I trust, sir, that you will
suc-ceed in prov-ing, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousin
Ar-thur is in-no-cent of this crime.”

“I fully share your opin-ion, and I trust, with you, that we may prove
it,” re-turned Holmes, go-ing back to the mat to knock the snow from his
shoes. “I be-lieve I have the hon-our of ad-dress-ing Miss Mary Holder.
Might I ask you a ques-tion or two?”

“Pray do, sir, if it may help to clear this hor-rible af-fair up.”

“You heard noth-ing your-self last night?”

“Noth-ing, un-til my uncle here began to speak loudly. I heard that, and
I came down.”

“You shut up the win-dows and doors the night be-fore. Did you fasten all
the win-dows?”

“Yes.”

“Were they all fastened this morn-ing?”

“Yes.”

“You have a maid who has a sweet-heart? I think that you re-marked to
your uncle last night that she had been out to see him?”

“Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the draw-ing-room, and who may
have heard uncle’s re-marks about the cor-onet.”

“I see. You in-fer that she may have gone out to tell her sweet-heart,
and that the two may have planned the rob-bery.”

“But what is the good of all these vague the-or-ies,” cried the banker
im-pa-tiently, “when I have told you that I saw Ar-thur with the cor-onet
in his hands?”

“Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About this girl,
Miss Holder. You saw her re-turn by the kit-chen door, I pre-sume?”

“Yes; when I went to see if the door was fastened for the night I met
her slip-ping in. I saw the man, too, in the gloom.”

“Do you know him?”

“Oh, yes! he is the green-gro-cer who brings our ve-get-ables round. His
name is Fran-cis Prosper.”

“He stood,” said Holmes, “to the left of the door—that is to say,
farther up the path than is ne-ces-sary to reach the door?”

“Yes, he did.”

“And he is a man with a wooden leg?”

So-mething like fear sprang up in the young lady’s ex-press-ive black
eyes. “Why, you are like a ma-gi-cian,” said she. “How do you know that?”
She smiled, but there was no an-swer-ing smile in Holmes’ thin, eager
face.

“I should be very glad now to go up-stairs,” said he. “I shall prob-ably
wish to go over the out-side of the house again. Per-haps I had bet-ter
take a look at the lower win-dows be-fore I go up.”

He walked swiftly round from one to the other, paus-ing only at the
large one which looked from the hall onto the stable lane. This he
opened and made a very care-ful ex-am-in-a-tion of the sill with his
power-ful mag-ni-fy-ing lens. “Now we shall go up-stairs,” said he at last.

The banker’s dress-ing-room was a plainly fur-nished little cham-ber, with
a grey car-pet, a large bur-eau, and a long mir-ror. Holmes went to the
bur-eau first and looked hard at the lock.

“Which key was used to open it?” he asked.

“That which my son him-self in-dic-ated—that of the cup-board of the
lum-ber-room.”

“Have you it here?”

“That is it on the dress-ing-table.”

Sh-er-lock Holmes took it up and opened the bur-eau.

“It is a noise-less lock,” said he. “It is no won-der that it did not
wake you. This case, I pre-sume, con-tains the cor-onet. We must have a
look at it.” He opened the case, and tak-ing out the dia-dem he laid it
upon the table. It was a mag-ni-fi-cent spe-ci-men of the jew-eller’s art,
and the thirty-six stones were the finest that I have ever seen. At one
side of the cor-onet was a cracked edge, where a corner hold-ing three
gems had been torn away.

“Now, Mr. Holder,” said Holmes, “here is the corner which cor-res-ponds
to that which has been so un-for-tu-nately lost. Might I beg that you will
break it off.”

The banker re-coiled in hor-ror. “I should not dream of try-ing,” said he.

“Then I will.” Holmes sud-denly bent his strength upon it, but without
res-ult. “I feel it give a little,” said he; “but, though I am
ex-cep-tion-ally strong in the fin-gers, it would take me all my time to
break it. An or-din-ary man could not do it. Now, what do you think would
hap-pen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noise like a
pis-tol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened within a few yards
of your bed and that you heard noth-ing of it?”

“I do not know what to think. It is all dark to me.”

“But per-haps it may grow lighter as we go. What do you think, Miss
Holder?”

“I con-fess that I still share my uncle’s per-plex-ity.”

“Your son had no shoes or slip-pers on when you saw him?”

“He had noth-ing on save only his trousers and shirt.”

“Thank you. We have cer-tainly been fa-voured with ex-traordin-ary luck
dur-ing this in-quiry, and it will be en-tirely our own fault if we do not
suc-ceed in clear-ing the mat-ter up. With your per-mis-sion, Mr. Holder, I
shall now con-tinue my in-vest-ig-a-tions out-side.”

He went alone, at his own re-quest, for he ex-plained that any
un-ne-ces-sary foot-marks might make his task more dif-fi-cult. For an hour
or more he was at work, re-turn-ing at last with his feet heavy with snow
and his fea-tures as in-scrut-able as ever.

“I think that I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder,”
said he; “I can serve you best by re-turn-ing to my rooms.”

“But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are they?”

“I can-not tell.”

The banker wrung his hands. “I shall never see them again!” he cried.
“And my son? You give me hopes?”

“My opin-ion is in no way altered.”

“Then, for God’s sake, what was this dark busi-ness which was ac-ted in
my house last night?”

“If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-mor-row morn-ing
between nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make it
clearer. I un-der-stand that you give me _carte blanche_ to act for you,
provided only that I get back the gems, and that you place no limit on
the sum I may draw.”

“I would give my for-tune to have them back.”

“Very good. I shall look into the mat-ter between this and then.
Good-bye; it is just pos-sible that I may have to come over here again
be-fore even-ing.”

It was ob-vi-ous to me that my com-pan-ion’s mind was now made up about the
case, al-though what his con-clu-sions were was more than I could even
dimly ima-gine. Several times dur-ing our home-ward jour-ney I en-deav-oured
to sound him upon the point, but he al-ways glided away to some other
topic, un-til at last I gave it over in des-pair. It was not yet three
when we found ourselves in our rooms once more. He hur-ried to his
cham-ber and was down again in a few minutes dressed as a com-mon loafer.
With his col-lar turned up, his shiny, seedy coat, his red cravat, and
his worn boots, he was a per-fect sample of the class.

“I think that this should do,” said he, glan-cing into the glass above
the fire-place. “I only wish that you could come with me, Wat-son, but I
fear that it won’t do. I may be on the trail in this mat-ter, or I may
be fol-low-ing a will-o’-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which it is. I
hope that I may be back in a few hours.” He cut a slice of beef from
the joint upon the side-board, sand-wiched it between two rounds of
bread, and thrust-ing this rude meal into his pocket he star-ted off upon
his ex-ped-i-tion.

I had just fin-ished my tea when he re-turned, evid-ently in ex-cel-lent
spir-its, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his hand. He chucked it
down into a corner and helped him-self to a cup of tea.

“I only looked in as I passed,” said he. “I am go-ing right on.”

“Where to?”

“Oh, to the other side of the West End. It may be some time be-fore I
get back. Don’t wait up for me in case I should be late.”

“How are you get-ting on?”

“Oh, so so. Noth-ing to com-plain of. I have been out to Streatham since
I saw you last, but I did not call at the house. It is a very sweet
little prob-lem, and I would not have missed it for a good deal.
However, I must not sit gos-sip-ing here, but must get these dis-rep-ut-able
clothes off and re-turn to my highly re-spect-able self.”

I could see by his man-ner that he had stronger reas-ons for sat-is-fac-tion
than his words alone would im-ply. His eyes twinkled, and there was even
a touch of col-our upon his sal-low cheeks. He hastened up-stairs, and a
few minutes later I heard the slam of the hall door, which told me that
he was off once more upon his con-genial hunt.

I waited un-til mid-night, but there was no sign of his re-turn, so I
re-tired to my room. It was no un-com-mon thing for him to be away for
days and nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that his
late-ness caused me no sur-prise. I do not know at what hour he came in,
but when I came down to break-fast in the morn-ing there he was with a
cup of cof-fee in one hand and the pa-per in the other, as fresh and trim
as pos-sible.

“You will ex-cuse my be-gin-ning without you, Wat-son,” said he, “but you
re-mem-ber that our cli-ent has rather an early ap-point-ment this morn-ing.”

“Why, it is after nine now,” I answered. “I should not be sur-prised if
that were he. I thought I heard a ring.”

It was, in-deed, our friend the fin-an-cier. I was shocked by the change
which had come over him, for his face which was nat-ur-ally of a broad
and massive mould, was now pinched and fallen in, while his hair seemed
to me at least a shade whiter. He entered with a wear-i-ness and leth-argy
which was even more pain-ful than his vi-ol-ence of the morn-ing be-fore,
and he dropped heav-ily into the arm-chair which I pushed for-ward for
him.

“I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried,” said he.
“Only two days ago I was a happy and pros-per-ous man, without a care in
the world. Now I am left to a lonely and dis-hon-oured age. One sor-row
comes close upon the heels of an-other. My niece, Mary, has deser-ted
me.”

“Deser-ted you?”

“Yes. Her bed this morn-ing had not been slept in, her room was empty,
and a note for me lay upon the hall table. I had said to her last
night, in sor-row and not in an-ger, that if she had mar-ried my boy all
might have been well with him. Per-haps it was thought-less of me to say
so. It is to that re-mark that she refers in this note:

    “‘MY DEAREST UNCLE,—I feel that I have brought trouble upon you,
    and that if I had ac-ted dif-fer-ently this ter-rible mis-for-tune might
    never have oc-curred. I can-not, with this thought in my mind, ever
    again be happy un-der your roof, and I feel that I must leave you
    forever. Do not worry about my fu-ture, for that is provided for;
    and, above all, do not search for me, for it will be fruit-less
    la-bour and an ill-ser-vice to me. In life or in death, I am ever
    your lov-ing,


    “‘MARY.’


“What could she mean by that note, Mr. Holmes? Do you think it points
to sui-cide?”

“No, no, noth-ing of the kind. It is per-haps the best pos-sible solu-tion.
I trust, Mr. Holder, that you are near-ing the end of your troubles.”

“Ha! You say so! You have heard some-thing, Mr. Holmes; you have learned
some-thing! Where are the gems?”

“You would not think £ 1000 apiece an ex-cess-ive sum for them?”

“I would pay ten.”

“That would be un-ne-ces-sary. Three thou-sand will cover the mat-ter. And
there is a little re-ward, I fancy. Have you your cheque-book? Here is a
pen. Bet-ter make it out for £ 4000.”

With a dazed face the banker made out the re-quired check. Holmes walked
over to his desk, took out a little tri-an-gu-lar piece of gold with three
gems in it, and threw it down upon the table.

With a shriek of joy our cli-ent clutched it up.

“You have it!” he gasped. “I am saved! I am saved!”

The re-ac-tion of joy was as pas-sion-ate as his grief had been, and he
hugged his re-covered gems to his bosom.

“There is one other thing you owe, Mr. Holder,” said Sh-er-lock Holmes
rather sternly.

“Owe!” He caught up a pen. “Name the sum, and I will pay it.”

“No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apo-logy to that noble
lad, your son, who has car-ried him-self in this mat-ter as I should be
proud to see my own son do, should I ever chance to have one.”

“Then it was not Ar-thur who took them?”

“I told you yes-ter-day, and I re-peat to-day, that it was not.”

“You are sure of it! Then let us hurry to him at once to let him know
that the truth is known.”

“He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up I had an in-ter-view
with him, and find-ing that he would not tell me the story, I told it to
him, on which he had to con-fess that I was right and to add the very
few de-tails which were not yet quite clear to me. Your news of this
morn-ing, how-ever, may open his lips.”

“For Heaven’s sake, tell me, then, what is this ex-traordin-ary mys-tery!”

“I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it. And
let me say to you, first, that which it is hard-est for me to say and
for you to hear: there has been an un-der-stand-ing between Sir Ge-orge
Burn-well and your niece Mary. They have now fled to-gether.”

“My Mary? Im-possible!”

“It is un-for-tu-nately more than pos-sible; it is cer-tain. Neither you nor
your son knew the true char-ac-ter of this man when you ad-mit-ted him into
your fam-ily circle. He is one of the most dan-ger-ous men in Eng-land—a
ruined gam-bler, an ab-so-lutely des-per-ate vil-lain, a man without heart or
con-science. Your niece knew noth-ing of such men. When he breathed his
vows to her, as he had done to a hun-dred be-fore her, she flattered
her-self that she alone had touched his heart. The devil knows best what
he said, but at least she be-came his tool and was in the habit of
see-ing him nearly every even-ing.”

“I can-not, and I will not, be-lieve it!” cried the banker with an ashen
face.

“I will tell you, then, what oc-curred in your house last night. Your
niece, when you had, as she thought, gone to your room, slipped down
and talked to her lover through the win-dow which leads into the stable
lane. His foot-marks had pressed right through the snow, so long had he
stood there. She told him of the cor-onet. His wicked lust for gold
kindled at the news, and he bent her to his will. I have no doubt that
she loved you, but there are wo-men in whom the love of a lover
ex-tin-guishes all other loves, and I think that she must have been one.
She had hardly listened to his in-struc-tions when she saw you com-ing
down-stairs, on which she closed the win-dow rap-idly and told you about
one of the ser-vants’ es-capade with her wooden-legged lover, which was
all per-fectly true.

“Your boy, Ar-thur, went to bed after his in-ter-view with you but he
slept badly on ac-count of his un-eas-i-ness about his club debts. In the
middle of the night he heard a soft tread pass his door, so he rose
and, look-ing out, was sur-prised to see his cousin walk-ing very
stealth-ily along the pas-sage un-til she dis-ap-peared into your
dress-ing-room. Pet-ri-fied with as-ton-ish-ment, the lad slipped on some
clothes and waited there in the dark to see what would come of this
strange af-fair. Presently she emerged from the room again, and in the
light of the pas-sage-lamp your son saw that she car-ried the pre-cious
cor-onet in her hands. She passed down the stairs, and he, thrill-ing
with hor-ror, ran along and slipped be-hind the cur-tain near your door,
whence he could see what passed in the hall be-neath. He saw her
stealth-ily open the win-dow, hand out the cor-onet to someone in the
gloom, and then clos-ing it once more hurry back to her room, passing
quite close to where he stood hid be-hind the cur-tain.

“As long as she was on the scene he could not take any ac-tion without a
hor-rible ex-pos-ure of the wo-man whom he loved. But the in-stant that she
was gone he real-ised how crush-ing a mis-for-tune this would be for you,
and how all-im-port-ant it was to set it right. He rushed down, just as
he was, in his bare feet, opened the win-dow, sprang out into the snow,
and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark fig-ure in the
moon-light. Sir Ge-orge Burn-well tried to get away, but Ar-thur caught
him, and there was a struggle between them, your lad tug-ging at one
side of the cor-onet, and his op-pon-ent at the other. In the scuffle,
your son struck Sir Ge-orge and cut him over the eye. Then some-thing
sud-denly snapped, and your son, find-ing that he had the cor-onet in his
hands, rushed back, closed the win-dow, as-cen-ded to your room, and had
just ob-served that the cor-onet had been twis-ted in the struggle and was
en-deav-our-ing to straighten it when you ap-peared upon the scene.”

“Is it pos-sible?” gasped the banker.

“You then roused his an-ger by call-ing him names at a mo-ment when he
felt that he had de-served your warmest thanks. He could not ex-plain the
true state of af-fairs without be-tray-ing one who cer-tainly de-served
little enough con-sid-er-a-tion at his hands. He took the more chiv-al-rous
view, how-ever, and pre-served her secret.”

“And that was why she shrieked and fain-ted when she saw the cor-onet,”
cried Mr. Holder. “Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been! And his
ask-ing to be al-lowed to go out for five minutes! The dear fel-low wanted
to see if the miss-ing piece were at the scene of the struggle. How
cruelly I have mis-judged him!”

“When I ar-rived at the house,” con-tin-ued Holmes, “I at once went very
care-fully round it to ob-serve if there were any traces in the snow
which might help me. I knew that none had fallen since the even-ing
be-fore, and also that there had been a strong frost to pre-serve
im-pres-sions. I passed along the trades-men’s path, but found it all
trampled down and in-dis-tin-guish-able. Just bey-ond it, how-ever, at the
far side of the kit-chen door, a wo-man had stood and talked with a man,
whose round im-pres-sions on one side showed that he had a wooden leg. I
could even tell that they had been dis-turbed, for the wo-man had run
back swiftly to the door, as was shown by the deep toe and light heel
marks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little, and then had gone away. I
thought at the time that this might be the maid and her sweet-heart, of
whom you had already spoken to me, and in-quiry showed it was so. I
passed round the garden without see-ing any-thing more than ran-dom
tracks, which I took to be the po-lice; but when I got into the stable
lane a very long and com-plex story was writ-ten in the snow in front of
me.

“There was a double line of tracks of a booted man, and a second double
line which I saw with de-light be-longed to a man with na-ked feet. I was
at once con-vinced from what you had told me that the lat-ter was your
son. The first had walked both ways, but the other had run swiftly, and
as his tread was marked in places over the de-pres-sion of the boot, it
was ob-vi-ous that he had passed after the other. I fol-lowed them up and
found they led to the hall win-dow, where Boots had worn all the snow
away while wait-ing. Then I walked to the other end, which was a hun-dred
yards or more down the lane. I saw where Boots had faced round, where
the snow was cut up as though there had been a struggle, and, fi-nally,
where a few drops of blood had fallen, to show me that I was not
mis-taken. Boots had then run down the lane, and an-other little smudge
of blood showed that it was he who had been hurt. When he came to the
highroad at the other end, I found that the pave-ment had been cleared,
so there was an end to that clue.

“On en-ter-ing the house, how-ever, I ex-amined, as you re-mem-ber, the sill
and frame-work of the hall win-dow with my lens, and I could at once see
that someone had passed out. I could dis-tin-guish the out-line of an
in-step where the wet foot had been placed in com-ing in. I was then
be-gin-ning to be able to form an opin-ion as to what had oc-curred. A man
had waited out-side the win-dow; someone had brought the gems; the deed
had been over-seen by your son; he had pur-sued the thief; had struggled
with him; they had each tugged at the cor-onet, their united strength
caus-ing in-jur-ies which neither alone could have ef-fected. He had
re-turned with the prize, but had left a frag-ment in the grasp of his
op-pon-ent. So far I was clear. The ques-tion now was, who was the man and
who was it brought him the cor-onet?

“It is an old maxim of mine that when you have ex-cluded the im-possible,
whatever re-mains, how-ever im-prob-able, must be the truth. Now, I knew
that it was not you who had brought it down, so there only re-mained
your niece and the maids. But if it were the maids, why should your son
al-low him-self to be ac-cused in their place? There could be no pos-sible
reason. As he loved his cousin, how-ever, there was an ex-cel-lent
ex-plan-a-tion why he should re-tain her secret—the more so as the secret
was a dis-grace-ful one. When I re-membered that you had seen her at that
win-dow, and how she had fain-ted on see-ing the cor-onet again, my
con-jec-ture be-came a cer-tainty.

“And who could it be who was her con-fed-er-ate? A lover evid-ently, for
who else could out-weigh the love and grat-it-ude which she must feel to
you? I knew that you went out little, and that your circle of friends
was a very lim-ited one. But among them was Sir Ge-orge Burn-well. I had
heard of him be-fore as be-ing a man of evil repu-ta-tion among wo-men. It
must have been he who wore those boots and re-tained the miss-ing gems.
Even though he knew that Ar-thur had dis-covered him, he might still
flat-ter him-self that he was safe, for the lad could not say a word
without com-prom-ising his own fam-ily.

“Well, your own good sense will sug-gest what meas-ures I took next. I
went in the shape of a loafer to Sir Ge-orge’s house, man-aged to pick up
an ac-quaint-ance with his valet, learned that his mas-ter had cut his
head the night be-fore, and, fi-nally, at the ex-pense of six shil-lings,
made all sure by buy-ing a pair of his cast-off shoes. With these I
jour-neyed down to Streatham and saw that they ex-actly fit-ted the
tracks.”

“I saw an ill-dressed vag-a-bond in the lane yes-ter-day even-ing,” said Mr.
Holder.

“Pre-cisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, so I came home and
changed my clothes. It was a del-ic-ate part which I had to play then,
for I saw that a pro-sec-u-tion must be avoided to avert scan-dal, and I
knew that so as-tute a vil-lain would see that our hands were tied in the
mat-ter. I went and saw him. At first, of course, he denied everything.
But when I gave him every par-tic-u-lar that had oc-curred, he tried to
bluster and took down a life-pre-server from the wall. I knew my man,
how-ever, and I clapped a pis-tol to his head be-fore he could strike.
Then he be-came a little more reas-on-able. I told him that we would give
him a price for the stones he held—£ 1000 apiece. That brought out the
first signs of grief that he had shown. ‘Why, dash it all!’ said he,
‘I’ve let them go at six hun-dred for the three!’ I soon man-aged to get
the ad-dress of the re-ceiver who had them, on prom-ising him that there
would be no pro-sec-u-tion. Off I set to him, and after much chaf-fer-ing I
got our stones at £ 1000 apiece. Then I looked in upon your son, told
him that all was right, and even-tu-ally got to my bed about two o’clock,
after what I may call a really hard day’s work.”

“A day which has saved Eng-land from a great pub-lic scan-dal,” said the
banker, rising. “Sir, I can-not find words to thank you, but you shall
not find me un-grate-ful for what you have done. Your skill has in-deed
ex-ceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must fly to my dear boy
to apo-lo-gise to him for the wrong which I have done him. As to what you
tell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not even your skill can
in-form me where she is now.”

“I think that we may safely say,” re-turned Holmes, “that she is
wherever Sir Ge-orge Burn-well is. It is equally cer-tain, too, that
whatever her sins are, they will soon re-ceive a more than suf-fi-cient
pun-ish-ment.”



XII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES

“To the man who loves art for its own sake,” re-marked Sh-er-lock Holmes,
toss-ing aside the ad-vert-ise-ment sheet of _The Daily Tele-graph_, “it is
fre-quently in its least im-port-ant and lowli-est mani-fest-a-tions that the
keen-est pleas-ure is to be de-rived. It is pleas-ant to me to ob-serve,
Wat-son, that you have so far grasped this truth that in these little
re-cords of our cases which you have been good enough to draw up, and, I
am bound to say, oc-ca-sion-ally to em-bel-lish, you have given prom-in-ence
not so much to the many _causes célèbres_ and sen-sa-tional tri-als in
which I have figured but rather to those in-cid-ents which may have been
trivial in them-selves, but which have given room for those fac-ulties of
de-duc-tion and of lo-gical syn-thesis which I have made my spe-cial
province.”

“And yet,” said I, smil-ing, “I can-not quite hold my-self ab-solved from
the charge of sen-sa-tion-al-ism which has been urged against my re-cords.”

“You have erred, per-haps,” he ob-served, tak-ing up a glow-ing cinder with
the tongs and light-ing with it the long cherry-wood pipe which was wont
to re-place his clay when he was in a dis-pu-ta-tious rather than a
med-it-at-ive mood—“you have erred per-haps in at-tempt-ing to put col-our and
life into each of your state-ments in-stead of con-fin-ing your-self to the
task of pla-cing upon re-cord that severe reas-on-ing from cause to ef-fect
which is really the only not-able fea-ture about the thing.”

“It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the mat-ter,” I
re-marked with some cold-ness, for I was re-pelled by the egot-ism which I
had more than once ob-served to be a strong factor in my friend’s
sin-gu-lar char-ac-ter.

“No, it is not selfish-ness or con-ceit,” said he, an-swer-ing, as was his
wont, my thoughts rather than my words. “If I claim full justice for my
art, it is be-cause it is an im-per-sonal thing—a thing bey-ond my-self.
Crime is com-mon. Lo-gic is rare. There-fore it is upon the lo-gic rather
than upon the crime that you should dwell. You have de-graded what
should have been a course of lec-tures into a series of tales.”

It was a cold morn-ing of the early spring, and we sat after break-fast
on either side of a cheery fire in the old room at Baker Street. A
thick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-col-oured houses, and the
op-pos-ing win-dows loomed like dark, shape-less blurs through the heavy
yel-low wreaths. Our gas was lit and shone on the white cloth and
glim-mer of china and metal, for the table had not been cleared yet.
Sh-er-lock Holmes had been si-lent all the morn-ing, dip-ping con-tinu-ously
into the ad-vert-ise-ment columns of a suc-ces-sion of pa-pers un-til at last,
hav-ing ap-par-ently given up his search, he had emerged in no very sweet
tem-per to lec-ture me upon my lit-er-ary short-com-ings.

“At the same time,” he re-marked after a pause, dur-ing which he had sat
puff-ing at his long pipe and gaz-ing down into the fire, “you can hardly
be open to a charge of sen-sa-tion-al-ism, for out of these cases which you
have been so kind as to in-terest your-self in, a fair pro-por-tion do not
treat of crime, in its legal sense, at all. The small mat-ter in which I
en-deav-oured to help the King of Bo-hemia, the sin-gu-lar ex-per-i-ence of
Miss Mary Suth-er-land, the prob-lem con-nec-ted with the man with the
twis-ted lip, and the in-cid-ent of the noble bach-elor, were all mat-ters
which are out-side the pale of the law. But in avoid-ing the sen-sa-tional,
I fear that you may have bordered on the trivial.”

“The end may have been so,” I answered, “but the meth-ods I hold to have
been novel and of in-terest.”

“Pshaw, my dear fel-low, what do the pub-lic, the great un-ob-serv-ant
pub-lic, who could hardly tell a weaver by his tooth or a com-pos-itor by
his left thumb, care about the finer shades of ana-lysis and de-duc-tion!
But, in-deed, if you are trivial, I can-not blame you, for the days of
the great cases are past. Man, or at least crim-inal man, has lost all
en-ter-prise and ori-gin-al-ity. As to my own little prac-tice, it seems to
be de-gen-er-at-ing into an agency for re-cov-er-ing lost lead pen-cils and
giv-ing ad-vice to young ladies from board-ing-schools. I think that I
have touched bot-tom at last, how-ever. This note I had this morn-ing
marks my zero-point, I fancy. Read it!” He tossed a crumpled let-ter
across to me.

It was dated from Montague Place upon the pre-ced-ing even-ing, and ran
thus:

    “DEAR MR. HOLMES,—I am very anxious to con-sult you as to whether I
    should or should not ac-cept a situ-ation which has been offered to
    me as gov-erness. I shall call at half-past ten to-mor-row if I do
    not in-con-veni-ence you. Yours faith-fully,


    “VIOLET HUNTER.”


“Do you know the young lady?” I asked.

“Not I.”

“It is half-past ten now.”

“Yes, and I have no doubt that is her ring.”

“It may turn out to be of more in-terest than you think. You re-mem-ber
that the af-fair of the blue car-buncle, which ap-peared to be a mere whim
at first, de-veloped into a ser-i-ous in-vest-ig-a-tion. It may be so in this
case, also.”

“Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, for
here, un-less I am much mis-taken, is the per-son in ques-tion.”

As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room. She was
plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face, freckled like a
plover’s egg, and with the brisk man-ner of a wo-man who has had her own
way to make in the world.

“You will ex-cuse my troub-ling you, I am sure,” said she, as my
com-pan-ion rose to greet her, “but I have had a very strange ex-per-i-ence,
and as I have no par-ents or re-la-tions of any sort from whom I could ask
ad-vice, I thought that per-haps you would be kind enough to tell me what
I should do.”

“Pray take a seat, Miss Hunter. I shall be happy to do any-thing that I
can to serve you.”

I could see that Holmes was fa-vour-ably im-pressed by the man-ner and
speech of his new cli-ent. He looked her over in his search-ing fash-ion,
and then com-posed him-self, with his lids droop-ing and his fin-ger-tips
to-gether, to listen to her story.

“I have been a gov-erness for five years,” said she, “in the fam-ily of
Co-l-onel Spence Munro, but two months ago the col-onel re-ceived an
ap-point-ment at Hal-i-fax, in Nova Sco-tia, and took his chil-dren over to
Amer-ica with him, so that I found my-self without a situ-ation. I
ad-vert-ised, and I answered ad-vert-ise-ments, but without suc-cess. At last
the little money which I had saved began to run short, and I was at my
wit’s end as to what I should do.

“There is a well-known agency for gov-ernesses in the West End called
West-away’s, and there I used to call about once a week in or-der to see
whether any-thing had turned up which might suit me. West-away was the
name of the founder of the busi-ness, but it is really man-aged by Miss
Stoper. She sits in her own little of-fice, and the ladies who are
seek-ing em-ploy-ment wait in an ante-room, and are then shown in one by
one, when she con-sults her ledgers and sees whether she has any-thing
which would suit them.

“Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little of-fice as
usual, but I found that Miss Stoper was not alone. A prodi-giously stout
man with a very smil-ing face and a great heavy chin which rolled down
in fold upon fold over his throat sat at her el-bow with a pair of
glasses on his nose, look-ing very earn-estly at the ladies who entered.
As I came in he gave quite a jump in his chair and turned quickly to
Miss Stoper.

“‘That will do,’ said he; ‘I could not ask for any-thing bet-ter.
Cap-ital! cap-ital!’ He seemed quite en-thu-si-astic and rubbed his hands
to-gether in the most gen-ial fash-ion. He was such a com-fort-able-look-ing
man that it was quite a pleas-ure to look at him.

“‘You are look-ing for a situ-ation, miss?’ he asked.

“‘Yes, sir.’

“‘As gov-erness?’

“‘Yes, sir.’

“‘And what salary do you ask?’

“‘I had £ 4 a month in my last place with Co-l-onel Spence Munro.’

“‘Oh, tut, tut! sweat-ing—rank sweat-ing!’ he cried, throw-ing his fat
hands out into the air like a man who is in a boil-ing pas-sion. ‘How
could any-one of-fer so pi-ti-ful a sum to a lady with such at-trac-tions and
ac-com-plish-ments?’

“‘My ac-com-plish-ments, sir, may be less than you ima-gine,’ said I. ‘A
little French, a little Ger-man, mu-sic, and draw-ing—’

“‘Tut, tut!’ he cried. ‘This is all quite be-side the ques-tion. The
point is, have you or have you not the bear-ing and de-port-ment of a
lady? There it is in a nut-shell. If you have not, you are not fit-ted
for the rear-ing of a child who may some day play a con-sid-er-able part in
the his-tory of the coun-try. But if you have why, then, how could any
gen-tle-man ask you to con-des-cend to ac-cept any-thing un-der the three
fig-ures? Your salary with me, madam, would com-mence at £ 100 a year.’

“You may ima-gine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, des-ti-tute as I was, such an
of-fer seemed al-most too good to be true. The gen-tle-man, how-ever, see-ing
per-haps the look of in-credu-lity upon my face, opened a pocket-book and
took out a note.

“‘It is also my cus-tom,’ said he, smil-ing in the most pleas-ant fash-ion
un-til his eyes were just two little shin-ing slits amid the white
creases of his face, ‘to ad-vance to my young ladies half their salary
be-fore-hand, so that they may meet any little ex-penses of their jour-ney
and their ward-robe.’

“It seemed to me that I had never met so fas-cin-at-ing and so thought-ful
a man. As I was already in debt to my trades-men, the ad-vance was a
great con-veni-ence, and yet there was some-thing un-nat-ural about the
whole trans-ac-tion which made me wish to know a little more be-fore I
quite com-mit-ted my-self.

“‘May I ask where you live, sir?’ said I.

“‘Hamp-shire. Charm-ing rural place. The Cop-per Beeches, five miles on
the far side of Winchester. It is the most lovely coun-try, my dear
young lady, and the dearest old coun-try-house.’

“‘And my du-ties, sir? I should be glad to know what they would be.’

“‘One child—one dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if you could
see him killing cock-roaches with a slip-per! Smack! smack! smack! Three
gone be-fore you could wink!’ He leaned back in his chair and laughed
his eyes into his head again.

“I was a little startled at the nature of the child’s amuse-ment, but
the father’s laughter made me think that per-haps he was jok-ing.

“‘My sole du-ties, then,’ I asked, ‘are to take charge of a single
child?’

“‘No, no, not the sole, not the sole, my dear young lady,’ he cried.
‘Your duty would be, as I am sure your good sense would sug-gest, to
obey any little com-mands my wife might give, provided al-ways that they
were such com-mands as a lady might with pro-pri-ety obey. You see no
dif-fi-culty, heh?’

“‘I should be happy to make my-self use-ful.’

“‘Quite so. In dress now, for ex-ample. We are faddy people, you
know—faddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked to wear any dress which
we might give you, you would not ob-ject to our little whim. Heh?’

“‘No,’ said I, con-sid-er-ably as-ton-ished at his words.

“‘Or to sit here, or sit there, that would not be of-fens-ive to you?’

“‘Oh, no.’

“‘Or to cut your hair quite short be-fore you come to us?’

“I could hardly be-lieve my ears. As you may ob-serve, Mr. Holmes, my
hair is some-what lux-uri-ant, and of a rather pe-cu-liar tint of chest-nut.
It has been con-sidered artistic. I could not dream of sac-ri-fi-cing it in
this off-hand fash-ion.

“‘I am afraid that that is quite im-possible,’ said I. He had been
watch-ing me eagerly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadow
pass over his face as I spoke.

“‘I am afraid that it is quite es-sen-tial,’ said he. ‘It is a little
fancy of my wife’s, and ladies’ fan-cies, you know, madam, ladies’
fan-cies must be con-sul-ted. And so you won’t cut your hair?’

“‘No, sir, I really could not,’ I answered firmly.

“‘Ah, very well; then that quite settles the mat-ter. It is a pity,
be-cause in other re-spects you would really have done very nicely. In
that case, Miss Stoper, I had best in-spect a few more of your young
ladies.’

“The man-ageress had sat all this while busy with her pa-pers without a
word to either of us, but she glanced at me now with so much an-noy-ance
upon her face that I could not help sus-pect-ing that she had lost a
hand-some com-mis-sion through my re-fusal.

“‘Do you de-sire your name to be kept upon the books?’ she asked.

“‘If you please, Miss Stoper.’

“‘Well, really, it seems rather use-less, since you re-fuse the most
ex-cel-lent of-fers in this fash-ion,’ said she sharply. ‘You can hardly
ex-pect us to ex-ert ourselves to find an-other such open-ing for you.
Good-day to you, Miss Hunter.’ She struck a gong upon the table, and I
was shown out by the page.

“Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got back to my lodgings and found little
enough in the cup-board, and two or three bills upon the table, I began
to ask my-self whether I had not done a very fool-ish thing. After all,
if these people had strange fads and ex-pec-ted obed-i-ence on the most
ex-traordin-ary mat-ters, they were at least ready to pay for their
ec-cent-ri-city. Very few gov-ernesses in Eng-land are get-ting £ 100 a year.
Besides, what use was my hair to me? Many people are im-proved by
wear-ing it short and per-haps I should be among the num-ber. Next day I
was in-clined to think that I had made a mis-take, and by the day after I
was sure of it. I had al-most over-come my pride so far as to go back to
the agency and in-quire whether the place was still open when I re-ceived
this let-ter from the gen-tle-man him-self. I have it here and I will read
it to you:

“‘The Cop-per Beeches, near Winchester.

    “‘DEAR MISS HUNTER,—Miss Stoper has very kindly given me your
    ad-dress, and I write from here to ask you whether you have
    re-con-sidered your de-cision. My wife is very anxious that you should
    come, for she has been much at-trac-ted by my de-scrip-tion of you. We
    are will-ing to give £ 30 a quarter, or £ 120 a year, so as to
    re-com-pense you for any little in-con-veni-ence which our fads may
    cause you. They are not very ex-act-ing, after all. My wife is fond
    of a par-tic-u-lar shade of elec-tric blue and would like you to wear
    such a dress in-doors in the morn-ing. You need not, how-ever, go to
    the ex-pense of pur-chas-ing one, as we have one be-long-ing to my dear
    daugh-ter Alice (now in Phil-adelphia), which would, I should think,
    fit you very well. Then, as to sit-ting here or there, or amus-ing
    your-self in any man-ner in-dic-ated, that need cause you no
    in-con-veni-ence. As re-gards your hair, it is no doubt a pity,
    es-pe-cially as I could not help re-mark-ing its beauty dur-ing our
    short in-ter-view, but I am afraid that I must re-main firm upon this
    point, and I only hope that the in-creased salary may re-com-pense you
    for the loss. Your du-ties, as far as the child is con-cerned, are
    very light. Now do try to come, and I shall meet you with the
    dog-cart at Winchester. Let me know your train. Yours faith-fully,


    “‘JEPHRO RUCASTLE.’


“That is the let-ter which I have just re-ceived, Mr. Holmes, and my mind
is made up that I will ac-cept it. I thought, how-ever, that be-fore
tak-ing the fi-nal step I should like to sub-mit the whole mat-ter to your
con-sid-er-a-tion.”

“Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is made up, that settles the
ques-tion,” said Holmes, smil-ing.

“But you would not ad-vise me to re-fuse?”

“I con-fess that it is not the situ-ation which I should like to see a
sis-ter of mine ap-ply for.”

“What is the mean-ing of it all, Mr. Holmes?”

“Ah, I have no data. I can-not tell. Per-haps you have your-self formed
some opin-ion?”

“Well, there seems to me to be only one pos-sible solu-tion. Mr. Ru-castle
seemed to be a very kind, good-natured man. Is it not pos-sible that his
wife is a lun-atic, that he de-sires to keep the mat-ter quiet for fear
she should be taken to an asylum, and that he hu-mours her fan-cies in
every way in or-der to pre-vent an out-break?”

“That is a pos-sible solu-tion—in fact, as mat-ters stand, it is the most
prob-able one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nice house-hold
for a young lady.”

“But the money, Mr. Holmes, the money!”

“Well, yes, of course the pay is good—too good. That is what makes me
un-easy. Why should they give you £ 120 a year, when they could have
their pick for £ 40? There must be some strong reason be-hind.”

“I thought that if I told you the cir-cum-stances you would un-der-stand
af-ter-wards if I wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if I
felt that you were at the back of me.”

“Oh, you may carry that feel-ing away with you. I as-sure you that your
little prob-lem prom-ises to be the most in-ter-est-ing which has come my
way for some months. There is some-thing dis-tinctly novel about some of
the fea-tures. If you should find your-self in doubt or in danger—”

“Danger! What danger do you fore-see?”

Holmes shook his head gravely. “It would cease to be a danger if we
could define it,” said he. “But at any time, day or night, a tele-gram
would bring me down to your help.”

“That is enough.” She rose briskly from her chair with the anxi-ety all
swept from her face. “I shall go down to Hamp-shire quite easy in my
mind now. I shall write to Mr. Ru-castle at once, sac-ri-fice my poor hair
to-night, and start for Winchester to-mor-row.” With a few grate-ful
words to Holmes she bade us both good-night and bustled off upon her
way.

“At least,” said I as we heard her quick, firm steps des-cend-ing the
stairs, “she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to take
care of her-self.”

“And she would need to be,” said Holmes gravely. “I am much mis-taken if
we do not hear from her be-fore many days are past.”

It was not very long be-fore my friend’s pre-dic-tion was ful-filled. A
fort-night went by, dur-ing which I fre-quently found my thoughts turn-ing
in her dir-ec-tion and won-der-ing what strange side-al-ley of hu-man
ex-per-i-ence this lonely wo-man had strayed into. The un-usual salary, the
curi-ous con-di-tions, the light du-ties, all poin-ted to some-thing
ab-nor-mal, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether the man were a
phil-an-throp-ist or a vil-lain, it was quite bey-ond my powers to
de-term-ine. As to Holmes, I ob-served that he sat fre-quently for half an
hour on end, with knit-ted brows and an ab-strac-ted air, but he swept the
mat-ter away with a wave of his hand when I men-tioned it. “Data! data!
data!” he cried im-pa-tiently. “I can’t make bricks without clay.” And
yet he would al-ways wind up by mut-ter-ing that no sis-ter of his should
ever have ac-cep-ted such a situ-ation.

The tele-gram which we even-tu-ally re-ceived came late one night just as I
was think-ing of turn-ing in and Holmes was set-tling down to one of those
all-night chem-ical re-searches which he fre-quently in-dulged in, when I
would leave him stoop-ing over a re-tort and a test-tube at night and
find him in the same po-s-i-tion when I came down to break-fast in the
morn-ing. He opened the yel-low en-vel-ope, and then, glan-cing at the
mes-sage, threw it across to me.

“Just look up the trains in Brad-shaw,” said he, and turned back to his
chem-ical stud-ies.

The sum-mons was a brief and ur-gent one.

“Please be at the Black Swan Hotel at Winchester at mid-day to-mor-row,”
it said. “Do come! I am at my wit’s end.


“HUNTER.”


“Will you come with me?” asked Holmes, glan-cing up.

“I should wish to.”

“Just look it up, then.”

“There is a train at half-past nine,” said I, glan-cing over my
Brad-shaw. “It is due at Winchester at 11:30.”

“That will do very nicely. Then per-haps I had bet-ter post-pone my
ana-lysis of the acet-ones, as we may need to be at our best in the
morn-ing.”

By el-even o’clock the next day we were well upon our way to the old
Eng-lish cap-ital. Holmes had been bur-ied in the morn-ing pa-pers all the
way down, but after we had passed the Hamp-shire bor-der he threw them
down and began to ad-mire the scenery. It was an ideal spring day, a
light blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white clouds drift-ing across
from west to east. The sun was shin-ing very brightly, and yet there was
an ex-hil-ar-at-ing nip in the air, which set an edge to a man’s en-ergy.
All over the coun-tryside, away to the rolling hills around Alder-shot,
the little red and grey roofs of the farm-stead-ings peeped out from
amid the light green of the new fo-liage.

“Are they not fresh and beau-ti-ful?” I cried with all the en-thu-si-asm of
a man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.

But Holmes shook his head gravely.

“Do you know, Wat-son,” said he, “that it is one of the curses of a mind
with a turn like mine that I must look at everything with ref-er-ence to
my own spe-cial sub-ject. You look at these scattered houses, and you are
im-pressed by their beauty. I look at them, and the only thought which
comes to me is a feel-ing of their isol-a-tion and of the im-pun-ity with
which crime may be com-mit-ted there.”

“Good heav-ens!” I cried. “Who would as-so-ci-ate crime with these dear old
homesteads?”

“They al-ways fill me with a cer-tain hor-ror. It is my be-lief, Wat-son,
foun-ded upon my ex-per-i-ence, that the low-est and vilest al-leys in Lon-don
do not present a more dread-ful re-cord of sin than does the smil-ing and
beau-ti-ful coun-tryside.”

“You hor-rify me!”

“But the reason is very ob-vi-ous. The pres-sure of pub-lic opin-ion can do
in the town what the law can-not ac-com-plish. There is no lane so vile
that the scream of a tor-tured child, or the thud of a drunk-ard’s blow,
does not be-get sym-pathy and in-dig-na-tion among the neigh-bours, and then
the whole ma-chinery of justice is ever so close that a word of
com-plaint can set it go-ing, and there is but a step between the crime
and the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its own fields,
filled for the most part with poor ig-nor-ant folk who know little of the
law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hid-den wicked-ness which
may go on, year in, year out, in such places, and none the wiser. Had
this lady who ap-peals to us for help gone to live in Winchester, I
should never have had a fear for her. It is the five miles of coun-try
which makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she is not per-son-ally
threatened.”

“No. If she can come to Winchester to meet us she can get away.”

“Quite so. She has her free-dom.”

“What _can_ be the mat-ter, then? Can you sug-gest no ex-plan-a-tion?”

“I have de-vised seven sep-ar-ate ex-plan-a-tions, each of which would cover
the facts as far as we know them. But which of these is cor-rect can
only be de-term-ined by the fresh in-form-a-tion which we shall no doubt
find wait-ing for us. Well, there is the tower of the cathed-ral, and we
shall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell.”

The Black Swan is an inn of re-pute in the High Street, at no dis-tance
from the sta-tion, and there we found the young lady wait-ing for us. She
had en-gaged a sit-ting-room, and our lunch awaited us upon the table.

“I am so de-lighted that you have come,” she said earn-estly. “It is so
very kind of you both; but in-deed I do not know what I should do. Your
ad-vice will be al-to-gether in-valu-able to me.”

“Pray tell us what has happened to you.”

“I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have prom-ised Mr. Ru-castle to
be back be-fore three. I got his leave to come into town this morn-ing,
though he little knew for what pur-pose.”

“Let us have everything in its due or-der.” Holmes thrust his long thin
legs out to-wards the fire and com-posed him-self to listen.

“In the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with no
ac-tual ill-treat-ment from Mr. and Mrs. Ru-castle. It is only fair to
them to say that. But I can-not un-der-stand them, and I am not easy in my
mind about them.”

“What can you not un-der-stand?”

“Their reas-ons for their con-duct. But you shall have it all just as it
oc-curred. When I came down, Mr. Ru-castle met me here and drove me in
his dog-cart to the Cop-per Beeches. It is, as he said, beau-ti-fully
situ-ated, but it is not beau-ti-ful in it-self, for it is a large square
block of a house, white-washed, but all stained and streaked with damp
and bad weather. There are grounds round it, woods on three sides, and
on the fourth a field which slopes down to the Southamp-ton highroad,
which curves past about a hun-dred yards from the front door. This
ground in front be-longs to the house, but the woods all round are part
of Lord Souther-ton’s pre-serves. A clump of cop-per beeches im-me-di-ately
in front of the hall door has given its name to the place.

“I was driven over by my em-ployer, who was as ami-able as ever, and was
in-tro-duced by him that even-ing to his wife and the child. There was no
truth, Mr. Holmes, in the con-jec-ture which seemed to us to be prob-able
in your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs. Ru-castle is not mad. I found her to
be a si-lent, pale-faced wo-man, much younger than her hus-band, not more
than thirty, I should think, while he can hardly be less than
forty-five. From their con-ver-sa-tion I have gathered that they have been
mar-ried about seven years, that he was a wid-ower, and that his only
child by the first wife was the daugh-ter who has gone to Phil-adelphia.
Mr. Ru-castle told me in private that the reason why she had left them
was that she had an un-reas-on-ing aver-sion to her step-mother. As the
daugh-ter could not have been less than twenty, I can quite ima-gine that
her po-s-i-tion must have been un-com-fort-able with her father’s young wife.

“Mrs. Ru-castle seemed to me to be col-our-less in mind as well as in
fea-ture. She im-pressed me neither fa-vour-ably nor the re-verse. She was a
non-entity. It was easy to see that she was pas-sion-ately de-voted both to
her hus-band and to her little son. Her light grey eyes wandered
con-tinu-ally from one to the other, not-ing every little want and
fore-stalling it if pos-sible. He was kind to her also in his bluff,
bois-ter-ous fash-ion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy couple.
And yet she had some secret sor-row, this wo-man. She would of-ten be lost
in deep thought, with the sad-dest look upon her face. More than once I
have sur-prised her in tears. I have thought some-times that it was the
dis-pos-i-tion of her child which weighed upon her mind, for I have never
met so ut-terly spoiled and so ill-natured a little creature. He is
small for his age, with a head which is quite dis-pro-por-tion-ately large.
His whole life ap-pears to be spent in an al-tern-a-tion between sav-age
fits of pas-sion and gloomy in-ter-vals of sulk-ing. Giv-ing pain to any
creature weaker than him-self seems to be his one idea of amuse-ment, and
he shows quite re-mark-able tal-ent in plan-ning the cap-ture of mice,
little birds, and in-sects. But I would rather not talk about the
creature, Mr. Holmes, and, in-deed, he has little to do with my story.”

“I am glad of all de-tails,” re-marked my friend, “whether they seem to
you to be rel-ev-ant or not.”

“I shall try not to miss any-thing of im-port-ance. The one un-pleas-ant
thing about the house, which struck me at once, was the ap-pear-ance and
con-duct of the ser-vants. There are only two, a man and his wife.
Toller, for that is his name, is a rough, un-couth man, with grizzled
hair and whiskers, and a per-petual smell of drink. Twice since I have
been with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Ru-castle seemed to
take no no-tice of it. His wife is a very tall and strong wo-man with a
sour face, as si-lent as Mrs. Ru-castle and much less ami-able. They are a
most un-pleas-ant couple, but for-tu-nately I spend most of my time in the
nurs-ery and my own room, which are next to each other in one corner of
the build-ing.

“For two days after my ar-rival at the Cop-per Beeches my life was very
quiet; on the third, Mrs. Ru-castle came down just after break-fast and
whispered some-thing to her hus-band.

“‘Oh, yes,’ said he, turn-ing to me, ‘we are very much ob-liged to you,
Miss Hunter, for fall-ing in with our whims so far as to cut your hair.
I as-sure you that it has not de-trac-ted in the ti-ni-est iota from your
ap-pear-ance. We shall now see how the elec-tric-blue dress will be-come
you. You will find it laid out upon the bed in your room, and if you
would be so good as to put it on we should both be ex-tremely ob-liged.’

“The dress which I found wait-ing for me was of a pe-cu-liar shade of
blue. It was of ex-cel-lent ma-ter-ial, a sort of beige, but it bore
un-mis-tak-able signs of hav-ing been worn be-fore. It could not have been a
bet-ter fit if I had been meas-ured for it. Both Mr. and Mrs. Ru-castle
ex-pressed a de-light at the look of it, which seemed quite ex-ag-ger-ated
in its vehe-mence. They were wait-ing for me in the draw-ing-room, which
is a very large room, stretch-ing along the en-tire front of the house,
with three long win-dows reach-ing down to the floor. A chair had been
placed close to the cent-ral win-dow, with its back turned to-wards it. In
this I was asked to sit, and then Mr. Ru-castle, walk-ing up and down on
the other side of the room, began to tell me a series of the fun-ni-est
stor-ies that I have ever listened to. You can-not ima-gine how com-ical he
was, and I laughed un-til I was quite weary. Mrs. Ru-castle, how-ever, who
has evid-ently no sense of hu-mour, never so much as smiled, but sat with
her hands in her lap, and a sad, anxious look upon her face. After an
hour or so, Mr. Ru-castle sud-denly re-marked that it was time to com-mence
the du-ties of the day, and that I might change my dress and go to
little Ed-ward in the nurs-ery.

“Two days later this same per-form-ance was gone through un-der ex-actly
sim-ilar cir-cum-stances. Again I changed my dress, again I sat in the
win-dow, and again I laughed very heart-ily at the funny stor-ies of which
my em-ployer had an im-mense _réper-toire_, and which he told in-im-it-ably.
Then he handed me a yel-low-backed novel, and mov-ing my chair a little
side-ways, that my own shadow might not fall upon the page, he begged me
to read aloud to him. I read for about ten minutes, be-gin-ning in the
heart of a chapter, and then sud-denly, in the middle of a sen-tence, he
ordered me to cease and to change my dress.

“You can eas-ily ima-gine, Mr. Holmes, how curi-ous I be-came as to what
the mean-ing of this ex-traordin-ary per-form-ance could pos-sibly be. They
were al-ways very care-ful, I ob-served, to turn my face away from the
win-dow, so that I be-came con-sumed with the de-sire to see what was go-ing
on be-hind my back. At first it seemed to be im-possible, but I soon
de-vised a means. My hand-mir-ror had been broken, so a happy thought
seized me, and I con-cealed a piece of the glass in my handker-chief. On
the next oc-ca-sion, in the midst of my laughter, I put my handker-chief
up to my eyes, and was able with a little man-age-ment to see all that
there was be-hind me. I con-fess that I was dis-ap-poin-ted. There was
noth-ing. At least that was my first im-pres-sion. At the second glance,
how-ever, I per-ceived that there was a man stand-ing in the Southamp-ton
Road, a small bearded man in a grey suit, who seemed to be look-ing in
my dir-ec-tion. The road is an im-port-ant high-way, and there are usu-ally
people there. This man, how-ever, was lean-ing against the rail-ings which
bordered our field and was look-ing earn-estly up. I lowered my
handker-chief and glanced at Mrs. Ru-castle to find her eyes fixed upon
me with a most search-ing gaze. She said noth-ing, but I am con-vinced
that she had di-vined that I had a mir-ror in my hand and had seen what
was be-hind me. She rose at once.

“‘Jephro,’ said she, ‘there is an im-per-tin-ent fel-low upon the road
there who stares up at Miss Hunter.’

“‘No friend of yours, Miss Hunter?’ he asked.

“‘No, I know no one in these parts.’

“‘Dear me! How very im-per-tin-ent! Kindly turn round and mo-tion to him to
go away.’

“‘Surely it would be bet-ter to take no no-tice.’

“‘No, no, we should have him loiter-ing here al-ways. Kindly turn round
and wave him away like that.’

“I did as I was told, and at the same in-stant Mrs. Ru-castle drew down
the blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat again
in the win-dow, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the man in the
road.”

“Pray con-tinue,” said Holmes. “Your nar-rat-ive prom-ises to be a most
in-ter-est-ing one.”

“You will find it rather dis-con-nec-ted, I fear, and there may prove to
be little re-la-tion between the dif-fer-ent in-cid-ents of which I speak. On
the very first day that I was at the Cop-per Beeches, Mr. Ru-castle took
me to a small out-house which stands near the kit-chen door. As we
ap-proached it I heard the sharp rat-tling of a chain, and the sound as
of a large an-imal mov-ing about.

“‘Look in here!’ said Mr. Ru-castle, show-ing me a slit between two
planks. ‘Is he not a beauty?’

“I looked through and was con-scious of two glow-ing eyes, and of a vague
fig-ure huddled up in the dark-ness.

“‘Don’t be frightened,’ said my em-ployer, laugh-ing at the start which I
had given. ‘It’s only Carlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, but really
old Toller, my groom, is the only man who can do any-thing with him. We
feed him once a day, and not too much then, so that he is al-ways as
keen as mus-tard. Toller lets him loose every night, and God help the
tres-passer whom he lays his fangs upon. For good-ness’ sake don’t you
ever on any pre-text set your foot over the threshold at night, for it’s
as much as your life is worth.’

“The warn-ing was no idle one, for two nights later I happened to look
out of my bed-room win-dow about two o’clock in the morn-ing. It was a
beau-ti-ful moon-light night, and the lawn in front of the house was
silvered over and al-most as bright as day. I was stand-ing, rapt in the
peace-ful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that some-thing was
mov-ing un-der the shadow of the cop-per beeches. As it emerged into the
moon-shine I saw what it was. It was a gi-ant dog, as large as a calf,
tawny tin-ted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge pro-ject-ing
bones. It walked slowly across the lawn and van-ished into the shadow
upon the other side. That dread-ful sen-tinel sent a chill to my heart
which I do not think that any burg-lar could have done.

“And now I have a very strange ex-per-i-ence to tell you. I had, as you
know, cut off my hair in Lon-don, and I had placed it in a great coil at
the bot-tom of my trunk. One even-ing, after the child was in bed, I
began to amuse my-self by ex-amin-ing the fur-niture of my room and by
re-arran-ging my own little things. There was an old chest of draw-ers in
the room, the two up-per ones empty and open, the lower one locked. I
had filled the first two with my linen, and as I had still much to pack
away I was nat-ur-ally an-noyed at not hav-ing the use of the third drawer.
It struck me that it might have been fastened by a mere over-sight, so I
took out my bunch of keys and tried to open it. The very first key
fit-ted to per-fec-tion, and I drew the drawer open. There was only one
thing in it, but I am sure that you would never guess what it was. It
was my coil of hair.

“I took it up and ex-amined it. It was of the same pe-cu-liar tint, and
the same thick-ness. But then the im-possib-il-ity of the thing ob-truded
it-self upon me. How could my hair have been locked in the drawer? With
trem-bling hands I un-did my trunk, turned out the con-tents, and drew
from the bot-tom my own hair. I laid the two tresses to-gether, and I
as-sure you that they were identical. Was it not ex-traordin-ary? Puzzle
as I would, I could make noth-ing at all of what it meant. I re-turned
the strange hair to the drawer, and I said noth-ing of the mat-ter to the
Ru-castles as I felt that I had put my-self in the wrong by open-ing a
drawer which they had locked.

“I am nat-ur-ally ob-ser-v-ant, as you may have re-marked, Mr. Holmes, and I
soon had a pretty good plan of the whole house in my head. There was
one wing, how-ever, which ap-peared not to be in-hab-ited at all. A door
which faced that which led into the quar-ters of the Tollers opened into
this suite, but it was in-vari-ably locked. One day, how-ever, as I
as-cen-ded the stair, I met Mr. Ru-castle com-ing out through this door,
his keys in his hand, and a look on his face which made him a very
dif-fer-ent per-son to the round, jovial man to whom I was ac-cus-tomed. His
cheeks were red, his brow was all crinkled with an-ger, and the veins
stood out at his temples with pas-sion. He locked the door and hur-ried
past me without a word or a look.

“This aroused my curi-os-ity, so when I went out for a walk in the
grounds with my charge, I strolled round to the side from which I could
see the win-dows of this part of the house. There were four of them in a
row, three of which were simply dirty, while the fourth was shuttered
up. They were evid-ently all deser-ted. As I strolled up and down,
glan-cing at them oc-ca-sion-ally, Mr. Ru-castle came out to me, look-ing as
merry and jovial as ever.

“‘Ah!’ said he, ‘you must not think me rude if I passed you without a
word, my dear young lady. I was pre-oc-cu-pied with busi-ness mat-ters.’

“I as-sured him that I was not of-fen-ded. ‘By the way,’ said I, ‘you seem
to have quite a suite of spare rooms up there, and one of them has the
shut-ters up.’

“He looked sur-prised and, as it seemed to me, a little startled at my
re-mark.

“‘Pho-to-graphy is one of my hob-bies,’ said he. ‘I have made my dark room
up there. But, dear me! what an ob-ser-v-ant young lady we have come upon.
Who would have be-lieved it? Who would have ever be-lieved it?’ He spoke
in a jest-ing tone, but there was no jest in his eyes as he looked at
me. I read sus-pi-cion there and an-noy-ance, but no jest.

“Well, Mr. Holmes, from the mo-ment that I un-der-stood that there was
some-thing about that suite of rooms which I was not to know, I was all
on fire to go over them. It was not mere curi-os-ity, though I have my
share of that. It was more a feel-ing of duty—a feel-ing that some good
might come from my pen-et-rat-ing to this place. They talk of wo-man’s
in-stinct; per-haps it was wo-man’s in-stinct which gave me that feel-ing.
At any rate, it was there, and I was keenly on the lookout for any
chance to pass the for-bid-den door.

“It was only yes-ter-day that the chance came. I may tell you that,
be-sides Mr. Ru-castle, both Toller and his wife find some-thing to do in
these deser-ted rooms, and I once saw him car-ry-ing a large black linen
bag with him through the door. Re-cently he has been drink-ing hard, and
yes-ter-day even-ing he was very drunk; and when I came up-stairs there was
the key in the door. I have no doubt at all that he had left it there.
Mr. and Mrs. Ru-castle were both down-stairs, and the child was with
them, so that I had an ad-mir-able op-por-tun-ity. I turned the key gently
in the lock, opened the door, and slipped through.

“There was a little pas-sage in front of me, un-papered and un-car-peted,
which turned at a right angle at the farther end. Round this corner
were three doors in a line, the first and third of which were open.
They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheer-less, with two win-dows
in the one and one in the other, so thick with dirt that the even-ing
light glimmered dimly through them. The centre door was closed, and
across the out-side of it had been fastened one of the broad bars of an
iron bed, pad-locked at one end to a ring in the wall, and fastened at
the other with stout cord. The door it-self was locked as well, and the
key was not there. This bar-ri-caded door cor-res-pon-ded clearly with the
shuttered win-dow out-side, and yet I could see by the glim-mer from
be-neath it that the room was not in dark-ness. Evidently there was a
sky-light which let in light from above. As I stood in the pas-sage
gaz-ing at the sin-is-ter door and won-der-ing what secret it might veil, I
sud-denly heard the sound of steps within the room and saw a shadow pass
back-ward and for-ward against the little slit of dim light which shone
out from un-der the door. A mad, un-reas-on-ing ter-ror rose up in me at the
sight, Mr. Holmes. My over-strung nerves failed me sud-denly, and I
turned and ran—ran as though some dread-ful hand were be-hind me
clutch-ing at the skirt of my dress. I rushed down the pas-sage, through
the door, and straight into the arms of Mr. Ru-castle, who was wait-ing
out-side.

“‘So,’ said he, smil-ing, ‘it was you, then. I thought that it must be
when I saw the door open.’

“‘Oh, I am so frightened!’ I panted.

“‘My dear young lady! my dear young lady!’—you can-not think how
caress-ing and sooth-ing his man-ner was—‘and what has frightened you, my
dear young lady?’

“But his voice was just a little too coax-ing. He over-did it. I was
keenly on my guard against him.

“‘I was fool-ish enough to go into the empty wing,’ I answered. ‘But it
is so lonely and eerie in this dim light that I was frightened and ran
out again. Oh, it is so dread-fully still in there!’

“‘Only that?’ said he, look-ing at me keenly.

“‘Why, what did you think?’ I asked.

“‘Why do you think that I lock this door?’

“‘I am sure that I do not know.’

“‘It is to keep people out who have no busi-ness there. Do you see?’ He
was still smil-ing in the most ami-able man-ner.

“‘I am sure if I had known—’

“‘Well, then, you know now. And if you ever put your foot over that
threshold again’—here in an in-stant the smile hardened into a grin of
rage, and he glared down at me with the face of a de-mon—‘I’ll throw you
to the mastiff.’

“I was so ter-ri-fied that I do not know what I did. I sup-pose that I
must have rushed past him into my room. I re-mem-ber noth-ing un-til I
found my-self ly-ing on my bed trem-bling all over. Then I thought of you,
Mr. Holmes. I could not live there longer without some ad-vice. I was
frightened of the house, of the man, of the wo-man, of the ser-vants,
even of the child. They were all hor-rible to me. If I could only bring
you down all would be well. Of course I might have fled from the house,
but my curi-os-ity was al-most as strong as my fears. My mind was soon
made up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and cloak, went down
to the of-fice, which is about half a mile from the house, and then
re-turned, feel-ing very much easier. A hor-rible doubt came into my mind
as I ap-proached the door lest the dog might be loose, but I re-membered
that Toller had drunk him-self into a state of in-sens-ib-il-ity that
even-ing, and I knew that he was the only one in the house-hold who had
any in-flu-ence with the sav-age creature, or who would ven-ture to set him
free. I slipped in in safety and lay awake half the night in my joy at
the thought of see-ing you. I had no dif-fi-culty in get-ting leave to come
into Winchester this morn-ing, but I must be back be-fore three o’clock,
for Mr. and Mrs. Ru-castle are go-ing on a visit, and will be away all
the even-ing, so that I must look after the child. Now I have told you
all my ad-ven-tures, Mr. Holmes, and I should be very glad if you could
tell me what it all means, and, above all, what I should do.”

Holmes and I had listened spell-bound to this ex-traordin-ary story. My
friend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in his
pock-ets, and an ex-pres-sion of the most pro-found grav-ity upon his face.

“Is Toller still drunk?” he asked.

“Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Ru-castle that she could do noth-ing
with him.”

“That is well. And the Ru-castles go out to-night?”

“Yes.”

“Is there a cel-lar with a good strong lock?”

“Yes, the wine-cel-lar.”

“You seem to me to have ac-ted all through this mat-ter like a very brave
and sens-ible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could per-form one
more feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think you a quite
ex-cep-tional wo-man.”

“I will try. What is it?”

“We shall be at the Cop-per Beeches by seven o’clock, my friend and I.
The Ru-castles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, be
in-cap-able. There only re-mains Mrs. Toller, who might give the alarm. If
you could send her into the cel-lar on some er-rand, and then turn the
key upon her, you would fa-cil-it-ate mat-ters im-mensely.”

“I will do it.”

“Ex-cel-lent! We shall then look thor-oughly into the af-fair. Of course
there is only one feas-ible ex-plan-a-tion. You have been brought there to
per-son-ate someone, and the real per-son is im-prisoned in this cham-ber.
That is ob-vi-ous. As to who this pris-oner is, I have no doubt that it is
the daugh-ter, Miss Alice Ru-castle, if I re-mem-ber right, who was said to
have gone to Amer-ica. You were chosen, doubt-less, as re-sem-bling her in
height, fig-ure, and the col-our of your hair. Hers had been cut off,
very pos-sibly in some ill-ness through which she has passed, and so, of
course, yours had to be sac-ri-ficed also. By a curi-ous chance you came
upon her tresses. The man in the road was un-doubtedly some friend of
hers—pos-sibly her _fi-ancé_—and no doubt, as you wore the girl’s dress
and were so like her, he was con-vinced from your laughter, whenever he
saw you, and af-ter-wards from your ges-ture, that Miss Ru-castle was
per-fectly happy, and that she no longer de-sired his at-ten-tions. The dog
is let loose at night to pre-vent him from en-deav-our-ing to com-mu-nic-ate
with her. So much is fairly clear. The most ser-i-ous point in the case
is the dis-pos-i-tion of the child.”

“What on earth has that to do with it?” I ejac-u-lated.

“My dear Wat-son, you as a med-ical man are con-tinu-ally gain-ing light as
to the tend-en-cies of a child by the study of the par-ents. Don’t you see
that the con-verse is equally valid. I have fre-quently gained my first
real in-sight into the char-ac-ter of par-ents by study-ing their chil-dren.
This child’s dis-pos-i-tion is ab-nor-mally cruel, merely for cruelty’s
sake, and whether he de-rives this from his smil-ing father, as I should
sus-pect, or from his mother, it bodes evil for the poor girl who is in
their power.”

“I am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes,” cried our cli-ent. “A
thou-sand things come back to me which make me cer-tain that you have hit
it. Oh, let us lose not an in-stant in bring-ing help to this poor
creature.”

“We must be cir-cum-spect, for we are deal-ing with a very cun-ning man. We
can do noth-ing un-til seven o’clock. At that hour we shall be with you,
and it will not be long be-fore we solve the mys-tery.”

We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we reached the
Cop-per Beeches, hav-ing put up our trap at a way-side pub-lic-house. The
group of trees, with their dark leaves shin-ing like burn-ished metal in
the light of the set-ting sun, were suf-fi-cient to mark the house even
had Miss Hunter not been stand-ing smil-ing on the door-step.

“Have you man-aged it?” asked Holmes.

A loud thud-ding noise came from some-where down-stairs. “That is Mrs.
Toller in the cel-lar,” said she. “Her hus-band lies snor-ing on the
kit-chen rug. Here are his keys, which are the du-plic-ates of Mr.
Ru-castle’s.”

“You have done well in-deed!” cried Holmes with en-thu-si-asm. “Now lead
the way, and we shall soon see the end of this black busi-ness.”

We passed up the stair, un-locked the door, fol-lowed on down a pas-sage,
and found ourselves in front of the bar-ri-cade which Miss Hunter had
de-scribed. Holmes cut the cord and re-moved the trans-verse bar. Then he
tried the vari-ous keys in the lock, but without suc-cess. No sound came
from within, and at the si-lence Holmes’ face clouded over.

“I trust that we are not too late,” said he. “I think, Miss Hunter,
that we had bet-ter go in without you. Now, Wat-son, put your shoulder to
it, and we shall see whether we can-not make our way in.”

It was an old rick-ety door and gave at once be-fore our united strength.
To-gether we rushed into the room. It was empty. There was no fur-niture
save a little pal-let bed, a small table, and a bas-ket-ful of linen. The
sky-light above was open, and the pris-oner gone.

“There has been some vil-lainy here,” said Holmes; “this beauty has
guessed Miss Hunter’s in-ten-tions and has car-ried his vic-tim off.”

“But how?”

“Through the sky-light. We shall soon see how he man-aged it.” He swung
him-self up onto the roof. “Ah, yes,” he cried, “here’s the end of a
long light lad-der against the eaves. That is how he did it.”

“But it is im-possible,” said Miss Hunter; “the lad-der was not there
when the Ru-castles went away.”

“He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a clever and
dan-ger-ous man. I should not be very much sur-prised if this were he
whose step I hear now upon the stair. I think, Wat-son, that it would be
as well for you to have your pis-tol ready.”

The words were hardly out of his mouth be-fore a man ap-peared at the
door of the room, a very fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in his
hand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the wall at the sight of
him, but Sh-er-lock Holmes sprang for-ward and con-fron-ted him.

“You vil-lain!” said he, “where’s your daugh-ter?”

The fat man cast his eyes round, and then up at the open sky-light.

“It is for me to ask you that,” he shrieked, “you thieves! Spies and
thieves! I have caught you, have I? You are in my power. I’ll serve
you!” He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he could go.

“He’s gone for the dog!” cried Miss Hunter.

“I have my re-volver,” said I.

“Bet-ter close the front door,” cried Holmes, and we all rushed down the
stairs to-gether. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard the
bay-ing of a hound, and then a scream of agony, with a hor-rible wor-ry-ing
sound which it was dread-ful to listen to. An eld-erly man with a red
face and shak-ing limbs came stag-ger-ing out at a side door.

“My God!” he cried. “Someone has loosed the dog. It’s not been fed for
two days. Quick, quick, or it’ll be too late!”

Holmes and I rushed out and round the angle of the house, with Toller
hur-ry-ing be-hind us. There was the huge fam-ished brute, its black muzzle
bur-ied in Ru-castle’s throat, while he writhed and screamed upon the
ground. Run-ning up, I blew its brains out, and it fell over with its
keen white teeth still meet-ing in the great creases of his neck. With
much la-bour we sep-ar-ated them and car-ried him, liv-ing but hor-ribly
mangled, into the house. We laid him upon the draw-ing-room sofa, and
hav-ing dis-patched the sobered Toller to bear the news to his wife, I
did what I could to re-lieve his pain. We were all as-sembled round him
when the door opened, and a tall, gaunt wo-man entered the room.

“Mrs. Toller!” cried Miss Hunter.

“Yes, miss. Mr. Ru-castle let me out when he came back be-fore he went up
to you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn’t let me know what you were
plan-ning, for I would have told you that your pains were wasted.”

“Ha!” said Holmes, look-ing keenly at her. “It is clear that Mrs. Toller
knows more about this mat-ter than any-one else.”

“Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know.”

“Then, pray, sit down, and let us hear it for there are sev-eral points
on which I must con-fess that I am still in the dark.”

“I will soon make it clear to you,” said she; “and I’d have done so
be-fore now if I could ha’ got out from the cel-lar. If there’s
po-lice-court busi-ness over this, you’ll re-mem-ber that I was the one
that stood your friend, and that I was Miss Alice’s friend too.

“She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasn’t, from the time that her
father mar-ried again. She was slighted like and had no say in any-thing,
but it never really be-came bad for her un-til after she met Mr. Fowler
at a friend’s house. As well as I could learn, Miss Alice had rights of
her own by will, but she was so quiet and pa-tient, she was, that she
never said a word about them but just left everything in Mr. Ru-castle’s
hands. He knew he was safe with her; but when there was a chance of a
hus-band com-ing for-ward, who would ask for all that the law would give
him, then her father thought it time to put a stop on it. He wanted her
to sign a pa-per, so that whether she mar-ried or not, he could use her
money. When she wouldn’t do it, he kept on wor-ry-ing her un-til she got
brain-fever, and for six weeks was at death’s door. Then she got bet-ter
at last, all worn to a shadow, and with her beau-ti-ful hair cut off; but
that didn’t make no change in her young man, and he stuck to her as
true as man could be.”

“Ah,” said Holmes, “I think that what you have been good enough to tell
us makes the mat-ter fairly clear, and that I can de-duce all that
re-mains. Mr. Ru-castle then, I pre-sume, took to this sys-tem of
im-pris-on-ment?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And brought Miss Hunter down from Lon-don in or-der to get rid of the
dis-agree-able per-sist-ence of Mr. Fowler.”

“That was it, sir.”

“But Mr. Fowler be-ing a per-sever-ing man, as a good sea-man should be,
block-aded the house, and hav-ing met you suc-ceeded by cer-tain ar-gu-ments,
metal-lic or oth-er-wise, in con-vin-cing you that your in-terests were the
same as his.”

“Mr. Fowler was a very kind-spoken, free-handed gen-tle-man,” said Mrs.
Toller se-renely.

“And in this way he man-aged that your good man should have no want of
drink, and that a lad-der should be ready at the mo-ment when your mas-ter
had gone out.”

“You have it, sir, just as it happened.”

“I am sure we owe you an apo-logy, Mrs. Toller,” said Holmes, “for you
have cer-tainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here comes
the coun-try sur-geon and Mrs. Ru-castle, so I think, Wat-son, that we had
best es-cort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me that our
_locus standi_ now is rather a ques-tion-able one.”

And thus was solved the mys-tery of the sin-is-ter house with the cop-per
beeches in front of the door. Mr. Ru-castle sur-vived, but was al-ways a
broken man, kept alive solely through the care of his de-voted wife.
They still live with their old ser-vants, who prob-ably know so much of
Ru-castle’s past life that he finds it dif-fi-cult to part from them. Mr.
Fowler and Miss Ru-castle were mar-ried, by spe-cial li-cense, in
Southamp-ton the day after their flight, and he is now the holder of a
gov-ern-ment ap-point-ment in the is-land of Maur-i-tius. As to Miss Vi-olet
Hunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my dis-ap-point-ment, mani-fes-ted no
fur-ther in-terest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of
one of his prob-lems, and she is now the head of a private school at
Walsall, where I be-lieve that she has met with con-sid-er-able suc-cess.
