THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER

By Mark Twain


HARTFORD, 1876.




CHAPTER I

“TOM!”

No an-swer.

“TOM!”

No an-swer.

“What's gone with that boy,  I won-der? You TOM!”

No an-swer.

The old lady pulled her spec-tacles down and looked over them about the
room; then she put them up and looked out un-der them. She sel-dom or
never looked _through_ them for so small a thing as a boy; they were
her state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for “style,” not
ser-vice--she could have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well.
She looked per-plexed for a mo-ment, and then said, not fiercely, but
still loud enough for the fur-niture to hear:

“Well, I lay if I get hold of you I'll--”

She did not fin-ish, for by this time she was bend-ing down and punch-ing
un-der the bed with the broom, and so she needed breath to punc-tu-ate the
punches with. She re-sur-rec-ted noth-ing but the cat.

“I never did see the beat of that boy!”

She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the
to-mato vines and “jimpson” weeds that con-sti-tuted the garden. No Tom. So
she lif-ted up her voice at an angle cal-cu-lated for dis-tance and shouted:

“Y-o-u-u TOM!”

There was a slight noise be-hind her and she turned just in time to seize
a small boy by the slack of his round-about and ar-rest his flight.

“There! I might 'a' thought of that closet. What you been do-ing in
there?”

“Noth-ing.”

“Noth-ing! Look at your hands. And look at your mouth. What _is_ that
truck?”

“I don't know, aunt.”

“Well, I know. It's jam--that's what it is. Forty times I've said if you
didn't let that jam alone I'd skin you. Hand me that switch.”

The switch hovered in the air--the peril was des-per-ate--

“My! Look be-hind you, aunt!”

The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of danger.
The lad fled on the in-stant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and
dis-ap-peared over it.

His aunt Polly stood sur-prised a mo-ment, and then broke into a gentle
laugh.

“Hang the boy, can't I never learn any-thing? Ain't he played me tricks
enough like that for me to be look-ing out for him by this time? But old
fools is the biggest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks,
as the say-ing is. But my good-ness, he never plays them alike, two days,
and how is a body to know what's com-ing? He 'pears to know just how long
he can tor-ment me be-fore I get my dander up, and he knows if he can make
out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down again and
I can't hit him a lick. I ain't do-ing my duty by that boy, and that's
the Lord's truth, good-ness knows. Spare the rod and spile the child,
as the Good Book says. I'm a lay-ing up sin and suf-fer-ing for us both,
I know. He's full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me! he's my own
dead sis-ter's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash him,
some-how. Every time I let him off, my con-science does hurt me so, and
every time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well-a-well, man that is
born of wo-man is of few days and full of trouble, as the Scrip-ture
says, and I reckon it's so. He'll play hookey this even-ing, * and [*
South-west-ern for “af-ter-noon”] I'll just be ob-lee-ged to make him work,
to-mor-row, to pun-ish him. It's mighty hard to make him work Saturdays,
when all the boys is hav-ing hol-i-day, but he hates work more than he
hates any-thing else, and I've _got_ to do some of my duty by him, or
I'll be the ru-in-a-tion of the child.”

Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time. He got back home
barely in sea-son to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's wood
and split the kind-lings be-fore sup-per--at least he was there in time
to tell his ad-ven-tures to Jim while Jim did three-fourths of the work.
Tom's younger brother (or rather half-brother) Sid was already through
with his part of the work (pick-ing up chips), for he was a quiet boy,
and had no ad-ven-tur-ous, trouble-some ways.

While Tom was eat-ing his sup-per, and steal-ing sugar as op-por-tun-ity
offered, Aunt Polly asked him ques-tions that were full of guile, and
very deep--for she wanted to trap him into dam-aging re-veal-ments. Like
many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet van-ity to be-lieve she
was en-dowed with a tal-ent for dark and mys-ter-i-ous dip-lomacy, and she
loved to con-tem-plate her most trans-par-ent devices as mar-vels of low
cun-ning. Said she:

“Tom, it was mid-dling warm in school, warn't it?”

“Yes'm.”

“Power-ful warm, warn't it?”

“Yes'm.”

“Didn't you want to go in a-swim-ming, Tom?”

A bit of a scare shot through Tom--a touch of un-com-fort-able sus-pi-cion. He
searched Aunt Polly's face, but it told him noth-ing. So he said:

“No'm--well, not very much.”

The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said:

“But you ain't too warm now, though.” And it flattered her to re-flect
that she had dis-covered that the shirt was dry without any-body know-ing
that that was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew
where the wind lay, now. So he fore-stalled what might be the next move:

“Some of us pumped on our heads--mine's damp yet. See?”

Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had over-looked that bit of
cir-cum-stan-tial evid-ence, and missed a trick. Then she had a new
in-spir-a-tion:

“Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt col-lar where I sewed it, to
pump on your head, did you? Un-but-ton your jacket!”

The trouble van-ished out of Tom's face. He opened his jacket. His shirt
col-lar was se-curely sewed.

“Bother! Well, go 'long with you. I'd made sure you'd played hookey
and been a-swim-ming. But I for-give ye, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of a
singed cat, as the say-ing is--bet-ter'n you look. _This_ time.”

She was half sorry her saga-city had mis-car-ried, and half glad that Tom
had stumbled into obed-i-ent con-duct for once.

But Sid-ney said:

“Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his col-lar with white thread,
but it's black.”

“Why, I did sew it with white! Tom!”

But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the door he said:

“Siddy, I'll lick you for that.”

In a safe place Tom ex-amined two large needles which were thrust into
the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them--one needle
car-ried white thread and the other black. He said:

“She'd never no-ticed if it hadn't been for Sid. Con-found it! some-times
she sews it with white, and some-times she sews it with black. I wish to
gee-miny she'd stick to one or t'other--I can't keep the run of 'em. But
I bet you I'll lam Sid for that. I'll learn him!”

He was not the Model Boy of the vil-lage. He knew the model boy very well
though--and loathed him.

Within two minutes, or even less, he had for-got-ten all his troubles. Not
be-cause his troubles were one whit less heavy and bit-ter to him than a
man's are to a man, but be-cause a new and power-ful in-terest bore
them down and drove them out of his mind for the time--just as men's
mis-for-tunes are for-got-ten in the ex-cite-ment of new en-ter-prises. This new
in-terest was a val-ued nov-elty in whist-ling, which he had just ac-quired
from a negro, and he was suf-fer-ing to prac-tise it un-dis-turbed. It
con-sisted in a pe-cu-liar bird-like turn, a sort of li-quid warble,
pro-duced by touch-ing the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short
in-ter-vals in the midst of the mu-sic--the reader prob-ably re-mem-bers how to
do it, if he has ever been a boy. Di-li-gence and at-ten-tion soon gave him
the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his mouth full of
har-mony and his soul full of grat-it-ude. He felt much as an as-tro-nomer
feels who has dis-covered a new planet--no doubt, as far as strong, deep,
un-al-loyed pleas-ure is con-cerned, the ad-vant-age was with the boy, not the
as-tro-nomer.

The sum-mer even-ings were long. It was not dark, yet. Presently Tom
checked his whistle. A stranger was be-fore him--a boy a shade lar-ger
than him-self. A new-comer of any age or either sex was an im-press-ive
curi-os-ity in the poor little shabby vil-lage of St. Peters-burg. This boy
was well dressed, too--well dressed on a week-day. This was simply as
astound-ing. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth
round-about was new and natty, and so were his pan-ta-loons. He had shoes
on--and it was only Fri-day. He even wore a neck-tie, a bright bit of
rib-bon. He had a citi-fied air about him that ate into Tom's vi-tals. The
more Tom stared at the splen-did mar-vel, the higher he turned up his nose
at his finery and the shab-bier and shab-bier his own out-fit seemed to
him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the other moved--but only
side-wise, in a circle; they kept face to face and eye to eye all the
time. Fin-ally Tom said:

“I can lick you!”

“I'd like to see you try it.”

“Well, I can do it.”

“No you can't, either.”

“Yes I can.”

“No you can't.”

“I can.”

“You can't.”

“Can!”

“Can't!”

An un-com-fort-able pause. Then Tom said:

“What's your name?”

“'Tisn't any of your busi-ness, maybe.”

“Well I 'low I'll _make_ it my busi-ness.”

“Well why don't you?”

“If you say much, I will.”

“Much--much--_much_. There now.”

“Oh, you think you're mighty smart, _don't_ you? I could lick you with
one hand tied be-hind me, if I wanted to.”

“Well why don't you _do_ it? You _say_ you can do it.”

“Well I _will_, if you fool with me.”

“Oh yes--I've seen whole fam-il-ies in the same fix.”

“Smarty! You think you're _some_, now, _don't_ you? Oh, what a hat!”

“You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare you to knock it
off--and any-body that'll take a dare will suck eggs.”

“You're a liar!”

“You're an-other.”

“You're a fight-ing liar and dasn't take it up.”

“Aw--take a walk!”

“Say--if you give me much more of your sass I'll take and bounce a rock
off'n your head.”

“Oh, of _course_ you will.”

“Well I _will_.”

“Well why don't you _do_ it then? What do you keep _say-ing_ you will
for? Why don't you _do_ it? It's be-cause you're afraid.”

“I _ain't_ afraid.”

“You are.”

“I ain't.”

“You are.”

Another pause, and more ey-ing and sid-ling around each other. Presently
they were shoulder to shoulder. Tom said:

“Get away from here!”

“Go away your-self!”

“I won't.”

“I won't either.”

So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and both
shov-ing with might and main, and glower-ing at each other with hate. But
neither could get an ad-vant-age. After strug-gling till both were hot and
flushed, each re-laxed his strain with watch-ful cau-tion, and Tom said:

“You're a cow-ard and a pup. I'll tell my big brother on you, and he can
thrash you with his little fin-ger, and I'll make him do it, too.”

“What do I care for your big brother? I've got a brother that's big-ger
than he is--and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too.”
 [Both broth-ers were ima-gin-ary.]

“That's a lie.”

“_Your_ say-ing so don't make it so.”

Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said:

“I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand
up. Anybody that'll take a dare will steal sheep.”

The new boy stepped over promptly, and said:

“Now you said you'd do it, now let's see you do it.”

“Don't you crowd me now; you bet-ter look out.”

“Well, you _said_ you'd do it--why don't you do it?”

“By jingo! for two cents I _will_ do it.”

The new boy took two broad cop-pers out of his pocket and held them out
with de-ri-sion. Tom struck them to the ground. In an in-stant both boys
were rolling and tum-bling in the dirt, gripped to-gether like cats; and
for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other's hair and
clothes, punched and scratched each other's nose, and covered them-selves
with dust and glory. Presently the con-fu-sion took form, and through the
fog of battle Tom ap-peared, seated astride the new boy, and pound-ing him
with his fists. “Holler 'nuff!” said he.

The boy only struggled to free him-self. He was cry-ing--mainly from rage.

“Holler 'nuff!”--and the pound-ing went on.

At last the stranger got out a smothered “'Nuff!” and Tom let him up and
said:

“Now that'll learn you. Bet-ter look out who you're fool-ing with next
time.”

The new boy went off brush-ing the dust from his clothes, sob-bing,
snuff-ling, and oc-ca-sion-ally look-ing back and shak-ing his head and
threat-en-ing what he would do to Tom the “next time he caught him out.”
 To which Tom re-spon-ded with jeers, and star-ted off in high feather, and
as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone, threw it
and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like
an ante-lope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out where he
lived. He then held a po-s-i-tion at the gate for some time, dar-ing the
en-emy to come out-side, but the en-emy only made faces at him through the
win-dow and de-clined. At last the en-emy's mother ap-peared, and called Tom
a bad, vi-cious, vul-gar child, and ordered him away. So he went away; but
he said he “'lowed” to “lay” for that boy.

He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed cau-tiously in
at the win-dow, he un-covered an am-bus-cade, in the per-son of his aunt; and
when she saw the state his clothes were in her res-ol-u-tion to turn his
Saturday hol-i-day into cap-tiv-ity at hard labor be-came adam-antine in its
firm-ness.




CHAPTER II

SATURDAY morn-ing was come, and all the sum-mer world was bright and
fresh, and brim-ming with life. There was a song in every heart; and if
the heart was young the mu-sic is-sued at the lips. There was cheer in
every face and a spring in every step. The lo-cust-trees were in bloom
and the fra-grance of the blos-soms filled the air. Cardiff Hill, bey-ond
the vil-lage and above it, was green with ve-get-a-tion and it lay just far
enough away to seem a Delect-able Land, dreamy, re-pose-ful, and in-vit-ing.

Tom ap-peared on the side-walk with a bucket of white-wash and a
long-handled brush. He sur-veyed the fence, and all glad-ness left him and
a deep mel-an-choly settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards of board
fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed hol-low, and ex-ist-ence but a
bur-den. Sigh-ing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the top-most
plank; re-peated the op-er-a-tion; did it again; com-pared the in-sig-ni-fic-ant
white-washed streak with the far-reach-ing con-tin-ent of un-white-washed
fence, and sat down on a tree-box dis-cour-aged. Jim came skip-ping out at
the gate with a tin pail, and singing Buf-falo Gals. Bringing wa-ter from
the town pump had al-ways been hate-ful work in Tom's eyes, be-fore, but
now it did not strike him so. He re-membered that there was com-pany at
the pump. White, mu-latto, and negro boys and girls were al-ways there
wait-ing their turns, rest-ing, trad-ing playthings, quar-rel-ling, fight-ing,
sky-lark-ing. And he re-membered that al-though the pump was only a hun-dred
and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of wa-ter un-der an
hour--and even then some-body gen-er-ally had to go after him. Tom said:

“Say, Jim, I'll fetch the wa-ter if you'll white-wash some.”

Jim shook his head and said:

“Can't, Mars Tom. Ole mis-sis, she tole me I got to go an' git dis wa-ter
an' not stop foolin' roun' wid any-body. She say she spec' Mars Tom gwine
to ax me to white-wash, an' so she tole me go 'long an' 'tend to my own
busi-ness--she 'lowed _she'd_ 'tend to de white-washin'.”

“Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim. That's the way she al-ways talks.
Gimme the bucket--I won't be gone only a a minute. _She_ won't ever
know.”

“Oh, I dasn't, Mars Tom. Ole mis-sis she'd take an' tar de head off'n me.
'Deed she would.”

“_She_! She never licks any-body--whacks 'em over the head with her
thimble--and who cares for that, I'd like to know. She talks aw-ful, but
talk don't hurt--any-ways it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give you a
mar-vel. I'll give you a white al-ley!”

Jim began to waver.

“White al-ley, Jim! And it's a bully taw.”

“My! Dat's a mighty gay mar-vel, I tell you! But Mars Tom I's power-ful
'fraid ole mis-sis--”

“And be-sides, if you will I'll show you my sore toe.”

Jim was only hu-man--this at-trac-tion was too much for him. He put down
his pail, took the white al-ley, and bent over the toe with ab-sorb-ing
in-terest while the band-age was be-ing un-wound. In an-other mo-ment he
was fly-ing down the street with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was
white-wash-ing with vigor, and Aunt Polly was re-tir-ing from the field with
a slip-per in her hand and tri-umph in her eye.

But Tom's en-ergy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had
planned for this day, and his sor-rows mul-ti-plied. Soon the free boys
would come trip-ping along on all sorts of de-li-cious ex-ped-i-tions, and
they would make a world of fun of him for hav-ing to work--the very
thought of it burnt him like fire. He got out his worldly wealth and
ex-amined it--bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an ex-change
of _work_, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an hour
of pure free-dom. So he re-turned his straitened means to his pocket, and
gave up the idea of try-ing to buy the boys. At this dark and hope-less
mo-ment an in-spir-a-tion burst upon him! Noth-ing less than a great,
mag-ni-fi-cent in-spir-a-tion.

He took up his brush and went tran-quilly to work. Ben Ro-gers hove in
sight presently--the very boy, of all boys, whose ri-dicule he had been
dread-ing. Ben's gait was the hop-skip-and-jump--proof enough that his
heart was light and his an-ti-cip-a-tions high. He was eat-ing an apple, and
giv-ing a long, me-lodi-ous whoop, at in-ter-vals, fol-lowed by a deep-toned
ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was per-son-at-ing a steam-boat. As
he drew near, he slackened speed, took the middle of the street, leaned
far over to star-board and roun-ded to pon-der-ously and with la-bor-i-ous pomp
and cir-cum-stance--for he was per-son-at-ing the Big Mis-souri, and con-sidered
him-self to be draw-ing nine feet of wa-ter. He was boat and cap-tain and
en-gine-bells com-bined, so he had to ima-gine him-self stand-ing on his own
hur-ricane-deck giv-ing the or-ders and ex-ecut-ing them:

“Stop her, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling!” The head-way ran al-most out, and he
drew up slowly to-ward the side-walk.

“Ship up to back! Ting-a-ling-ling!” His arms straightened and stiffened
down his sides.

“Set her back on the stab-board! Ting-a-ling-ling! Chow! ch-chow-wow!
Chow!” His right hand, mean-time, de-scrib-ing stately circles--for it was
rep-res-ent-ing a forty-foot wheel.

“Let her go back on the lab-board! Ting-a-ling-ling! Chow-ch-chow-chow!”
 The left hand began to de-scribe circles.

“Stop the stab-board! Ting-a-ling-ling! Stop the lab-board! Come ahead on
the stab-board! Stop her! Let your out-side turn over slow! Ting-a-ling-ling!
Chow-ow-ow! Get out that head-line! _lively_ now! Come--out with
your spring-line--what're you about there! Take a turn round that stump
with the bight of it! Stand by that stage, now--let her go! Done with
the en-gines, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling! SH'T! S'H'T! SH'T!” (try-ing the
gauge-cocks).

Tom went on white-wash-ing--paid no at-ten-tion to the steam-boat. Ben stared
a mo-ment and then said: “_Hi-Yi! You're_ up a stump, ain't you!”

No an-swer. Tom sur-veyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then
he gave his brush an-other gentle sweep and sur-veyed the res-ult, as
be-fore. Ben ranged up along-side of him. Tom's mouth watered for the
apple, but he stuck to his work. Ben said:

“Hello, old chap, you got to work, hey?”

Tom wheeled sud-denly and said:

“Why, it's you, Ben! I warn't no-ti-cing.”

“Say--I'm go-ing in a-swim-ming, I am. Don't you wish you could? But of
course you'd druther _work_--wouldn't you? Course you would!”

Tom con-tem-plated the boy a bit, and said:

“What do you call work?”

“Why, ain't _that_ work?”

Tom re-sumed his white-wash-ing, and answered care-lessly:

“Well, maybe it is, and maybe it ain't. All I know, is, it suits Tom
Saw-yer.”

“Oh come, now, you don't mean to let on that you _like_ it?”

The brush con-tin-ued to move.

“Like it? Well, I don't see why I oughtn't to like it. Does a boy get a
chance to white-wash a fence every day?”

That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped nib-bling his apple.
Tom swept his brush dain-tily back and forth--stepped back to note the
ef-fect--ad-ded a touch here and there--cri-ti-cised the ef-fect again--Ben
watch-ing every move and get-ting more and more in-ter-ested, more and more
ab-sorbed. Presently he said:

“Say, Tom, let _me_ white-wash a little.”

Tom con-sidered, was about to con-sent; but he altered his mind:

“No--no--I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see, Aunt Polly's aw-ful
par-tic-u-lar about this fence--right here on the street, you know--but if it
was the back fence I wouldn't mind and _she_ wouldn't. Yes, she's aw-ful
par-tic-u-lar about this fence; it's got to be done very care-ful; I reckon
there ain't one boy in a thou-sand, maybe two thou-sand, that can do it
the way it's got to be done.”

“No--is that so? Oh come, now--lemme just try. Only just a little--I'd let
_y-ou_, if you was me, Tom.”

“Ben, I'd like to, hon-est in-jun; but Aunt Polly--well, Jim wanted to do
it, but she wouldn't let him; Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't let
Sid. Now don't you see how I'm fixed? If you was to tackle this fence
and any-thing was to hap-pen to it--”

“Oh, shucks, I'll be just as care-ful. Now lemme try. Say--I'll give you
the core of my apple.”

“Well, here--No, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard--”

“I'll give you _all_ of it!”

Tom gave up the brush with re-luct-ance in his face, but alac-rity in his
heart. And while the late steamer Big Mis-souri worked and sweated in the
sun, the re-tired artist sat on a bar-rel in the shade close by,
dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the slaughter of more
in-no-cents. There was no lack of ma-ter-ial; boys happened along every
little while; they came to jeer, but re-mained to white-wash. By the time
Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for
a kite, in good re-pair; and when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in
for a dead rat and a string to swing it with--and so on, and so on, hour
after hour. And when the middle of the af-ter-noon came, from be-ing a
poor poverty-stricken boy in the morn-ing, Tom was lit-er-ally rolling in
wealth. He had be-sides the things be-fore men-tioned, twelve marbles, part
of a jews-harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass to look through, a spool
can-non, a key that wouldn't un-lock any-thing, a frag-ment of chalk, a
glass stop-per of a de-canter, a tin sol-dier, a couple of tad-poles,
six fire-crack-ers, a kit-ten with only one eye, a brass door-knob, a
dog-col-lar--but no dog--the handle of a knife, four pieces of or-ange-peel,
and a dilap-id-ated old win-dow sash.

He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while--plenty of com-pany--and
the fence had three coats of white-wash on it! If he hadn't run out of
white-wash he would have bank-rup-ted every boy in the vil-lage.

Tom said to him-self that it was not such a hol-low world, after all. He
had dis-covered a great law of hu-man ac-tion, without know-ing it--namely,
that in or-der to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only ne-ces-sary
to make the thing dif-fi-cult to at-tain. If he had been a great and
wise philo-sopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have
com-pre-hen-ded that Work con-sists of whatever a body is _ob-liged_ to do,
and that Play con-sists of whatever a body is not ob-liged to do. And
this would help him to un-der-stand why con-struct-ing ar-ti-fi-cial flowers or
per-form-ing on a tread-mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or climb-ing
Mont Blanc is only amuse-ment. There are wealthy gen-tle-men in Eng-land
who drive four-horse pas-sen-ger-coaches twenty or thirty miles on a
daily line, in the sum-mer, be-cause the priv-ilege costs them con-sid-er-able
money; but if they were offered wages for the ser-vice, that would turn
it into work and then they would resign.

The boy mused awhile over the sub-stan-tial change which had taken place
in his worldly cir-cum-stances, and then wen-ded to-ward headquar-ters to
re-port.




CHAPTER III

TOM presen-ted him-self be-fore Aunt Polly, who was sit-ting by an
open win-dow in a pleas-ant rear-ward apart-ment, which was bed-room,
break-fast-room, din-ing-room, and lib-rary, com-bined. The balmy sum-mer
air, the rest-ful quiet, the odor of the flowers, and the drows-ing
mur-mur of the bees had had their ef-fect, and she was nod-ding over her
knit-ting--for she had no com-pany but the cat, and it was asleep in her
lap. Her spec-tacles were propped up on her gray head for safety. She had
thought that of course Tom had deser-ted long ago, and she wondered at
see-ing him place him-self in her power again in this in-trepid way. He
said: “Mayn't I go and play now, aunt?”

“What, a'ready? How much have you done?”

“It's all done, aunt.”

“Tom, don't lie to me--I can't bear it.”

“I ain't, aunt; it _is_ all done.”

Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evid-ence. She went out to see for
her-self; and she would have been con-tent to find twenty per cent. of
Tom's state-ment true. When she found the en-tire fence white-washed, and
not only white-washed but elab-or-ately coated and re-coated, and even a
streak ad-ded to the ground, her as-ton-ish-ment was al-most un-speak-able. She
said:

“Well, I never! There's no get-ting round it, you can work when you're a
mind to, Tom.” And then she di-luted the com-pli-ment by adding, “But it's
power-ful sel-dom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say. Well, go 'long and
play; but mind you get back some time in a week, or I'll tan you.”

She was so over-come by the splendor of his achieve-ment that she took
him into the closet and se-lec-ted a choice apple and de-livered it to him,
along with an im-prov-ing lec-ture upon the ad-ded value and fla-vor a treat
took to it-self when it came without sin through vir-tu-ous ef-fort.
And while she closed with a happy Scrip-tural flour-ish, he “hooked” a
dough-nut.

Then he skipped out, and saw Sid just start-ing up the out-side stair-way
that led to the back rooms on the second floor. Clods were handy and
the air was full of them in a twink-ling. They raged around Sid like a
hail-storm; and be-fore Aunt Polly could col-lect her sur-prised fac-ulties
and sally to the res-cue, six or seven clods had taken per-sonal ef-fect,
and Tom was over the fence and gone. There was a gate, but as a gen-eral
thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it. His soul was at
peace, now that he had settled with Sid for call-ing at-ten-tion to his
black thread and get-ting him into trouble.

Tom skir-ted the block, and came round into a muddy al-ley that led by the
back of his aunt's cow-stable. He presently got safely bey-ond the reach
of cap-ture and pun-ish-ment, and hastened to-ward the pub-lic square of the
vil-lage, where two “mil-it-ary” com-pan-ies of boys had met for con-flict,
ac-cord-ing to pre-vi-ous ap-point-ment. Tom was Gen-eral of one of these
armies, Joe Harper (a bosom friend) Gen-eral of the other. These two
great com-mand-ers did not con-des-cend to fight in per-son--that be-ing bet-ter
suited to the still smal-ler fry--but sat to-gether on an em-in-ence
and con-duc-ted the field op-er-a-tions by or-ders de-livered through
aides-de-camp. Tom's army won a great vic-tory, after a long and
hard-fought battle. Then the dead were coun-ted, pris-on-ers ex-changed,
the terms of the next dis-agree-ment agreed upon, and the day for the
ne-ces-sary battle ap-poin-ted; after which the armies fell into line and
marched away, and Tom turned home-ward alone.

As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new
girl in the garden--a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yel-low
hair plaited into two long-tails, white sum-mer frock and em-broidered
pan-talettes. The fresh-crowned hero fell without fir-ing a shot. A
cer-tain Amy Lawrence van-ished out of his heart and left not even a
memory of her-self be-hind. He had thought he loved her to dis-trac-tion;
he had re-garded his pas-sion as ad-or-a-tion; and be-hold it was only a poor
little evan-es-cent par-ti-al-ity. He had been months win-ning her; she had
con-fessed hardly a week ago; he had been the hap-pi-est and the proudest
boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one in-stant of time
she had gone out of his heart like a cas-ual stranger whose visit is
done.

He wor-shipped this new an-gel with furt-ive eye, till he saw that she had
dis-covered him; then he pre-ten-ded he did not know she was present, and
began to “show off” in all sorts of ab-surd boy-ish ways, in or-der to win
her ad-mir-a-tion. He kept up this grot-esque fool-ish-ness for some time;
but by-and-by, while he was in the midst of some dan-ger-ous gym-nastic
per-form-ances, he glanced aside and saw that the little girl was wend-ing
her way to-ward the house. Tom came up to the fence and leaned on it,
griev-ing, and hop-ing she would tarry yet awhile longer. She hal-ted a
mo-ment on the steps and then moved to-ward the door. Tom heaved a great
sigh as she put her foot on the threshold. But his face lit up,
right away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a mo-ment be-fore she
dis-ap-peared.

The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and
then shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street as
if he had dis-covered some-thing of in-terest go-ing on in that dir-ec-tion.
Presently he picked up a straw and began try-ing to bal-ance it on his
nose, with his head tilted far back; and as he moved from side to side,
in his ef-forts, he edged nearer and nearer to-ward the pansy; fi-nally his
bare foot res-ted upon it, his pli-ant toes closed upon it, and he hopped
away with the treas-ure and dis-ap-peared round the corner. But only for a
minute--only while he could but-ton the flower in-side his jacket, next
his heart--or next his stom-ach, pos-sibly, for he was not much pos-ted in
ana-tomy, and not hy-per-crit-ical, any-way.

He re-turned, now, and hung about the fence till night-fall, “show-ing
off,” as be-fore; but the girl never ex-hib-ited her-self again, though Tom
com-for-ted him-self a little with the hope that she had been near some
win-dow, mean-time, and been aware of his at-ten-tions. Fin-ally he strode
home re-luct-antly, with his poor head full of vis-ions.

All through sup-per his spir-its were so high that his aunt wondered “what
had got into the child.” He took a good scold-ing about clod-ding Sid, and
did not seem to mind it in the least. He tried to steal sugar un-der his
aunt's very nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it. He said:

“Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it.”

“Well, Sid don't tor-ment a body the way you do. You'd be al-ways into
that sugar if I warn't watch-ing you.”

Presently she stepped into the kit-chen, and Sid, happy in his im-munity,
reached for the sugar-bowl--a sort of glory-ing over Tom which was
wellnigh un-bear-able. But Sid's fin-gers slipped and the bowl dropped and
broke. Tom was in ec-stas-ies. In such ec-stas-ies that he even con-trolled
his tongue and was si-lent. He said to him-self that he would not speak a
word, even when his aunt came in, but would sit per-fectly still till she
asked who did the mis-chief; and then he would tell, and there would be
noth-ing so good in the world as to see that pet model “catch it.” He was
so brim-ful of ex-ulta-tion that he could hardly hold him-self when the old
lady came back and stood above the wreck dis-char-ging light-nings of wrath
from over her spec-tacles. He said to him-self, “Now it's com-ing!” And the
next in-stant he was sprawl-ing on the floor! The po-tent palm was up-lif-ted
to strike again when Tom cried out:

“Hold on, now, what 'er you belt-ing _me_ for?--Sid broke it!”

Aunt Polly paused, per-plexed, and Tom looked for heal-ing pity. But when
she got her tongue again, she only said:

“Umf! Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I reckon. You been into some
other au-da-cious mis-chief when I wasn't around, like enough.”

Then her con-science re-proached her, and she yearned to say some-thing
kind and lov-ing; but she judged that this would be con-strued into a
con-fes-sion that she had been in the wrong, and dis-cip-line for-bade that.
So she kept si-lence, and went about her af-fairs with a troubled heart.
Tom sulked in a corner and ex-al-ted his woes. He knew that in her heart
his aunt was on her knees to him, and he was mor-osely grat-i-fied by the
con-scious-ness of it. He would hang out no sig-nals, he would take no-tice
of none. He knew that a yearn-ing glance fell upon him, now and then,
through a film of tears, but he re-fused re-cog-ni-tion of it. He pic-tured
him-self ly-ing sick unto death and his aunt bend-ing over him be-seech-ing
one little for-giv-ing word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and
die with that word un-said. Ah, how would she feel then? And he pic-tured
him-self brought home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and
his sore heart at rest. How she would throw her-self upon him, and how
her tears would fall like rain, and her lips pray God to give her back
her boy and she would never, never ab-use him any more! But he would
lie there cold and white and make no sign--a poor little suf-ferer, whose
griefs were at an end. He so worked upon his feel-ings with the pathos of
these dreams, that he had to keep swal-low-ing, he was so like to choke;
and his eyes swam in a blur of wa-ter, which over-flowed when he winked,
and ran down and trickled from the end of his nose. And such a lux-ury to
him was this pet-ting of his sor-rows, that he could not bear to have any
worldly cheeri-ness or any grat-ing de-light in-trude upon it; it was too
sac-red for such con-tact; and so, presently, when his cousin Mary danced
in, all alive with the joy of see-ing home again after an age-long visit
of one week to the coun-try, he got up and moved in clouds and dark-ness
out at one door as she brought song and sun-shine in at the other.

He wandered far from the ac-cus-tomed haunts of boys, and sought des-ol-ate
places that were in har-mony with his spirit. A log raft in the river
in-vited him, and he seated him-self on its outer edge and con-tem-plated
the dreary vast-ness of the stream, wish-ing, the while, that he could
only be drowned, all at once and un-con-sciously, without un-der-go-ing the
un-com-fort-able routine de-vised by nature. Then he thought of his flower.
He got it out, rumpled and wil-ted, and it migh-tily in-creased his dis-mal
fe-li-city. He wondered if she would pity him if she knew? Would she
cry, and wish that she had a right to put her arms around his neck and
com-fort him? Or would she turn coldly away like all the hol-low world?
This pic-ture brought such an agony of pleas-ur-able suf-fer-ing that he
worked it over and over again in his mind and set it up in new and
var-ied lights, till he wore it thread-bare. At last he rose up sigh-ing
and de-par-ted in the dark-ness.

About half-past nine or ten o'clock he came along the deser-ted street to
where the Adored Unknown lived; he paused a mo-ment; no sound fell upon
his listen-ing ear; a candle was cast-ing a dull glow upon the cur-tain
of a second-story win-dow. Was the sac-red pres-ence there? He climbed the
fence, threaded his stealthy way through the plants, till he stood un-der
that win-dow; he looked up at it long, and with emo-tion; then he laid him
down on the ground un-der it, dis-pos-ing him-self upon his back, with his
hands clasped upon his breast and hold-ing his poor wil-ted flower.
And thus he would die--out in the cold world, with no shel-ter over his
home-less head, no friendly hand to wipe the death-damps from his brow,
no lov-ing face to bend pity-ingly over him when the great agony came. And
thus _she_ would see him when she looked out upon the glad morn-ing, and
oh! would she drop one little tear upon his poor, life-less form, would
she heave one little sigh to see a bright young life so rudely blighted,
so un-timely cut down?

The win-dow went up, a maid-ser-vant's dis-cord-ant voice pro-faned the holy
calm, and a de-luge of wa-ter drenched the prone mar-tyr's re-mains!

The strangling hero sprang up with a re-liev-ing snort. There was a whiz
as of a mis-sile in the air, mingled with the mur-mur of a curse, a sound
as of shiv-er-ing glass fol-lowed, and a small, vague form went over the
fence and shot away in the gloom.

Not long after, as Tom, all un-dressed for bed, was sur-vey-ing his
drenched gar-ments by the light of a tal-low dip, Sid woke up; but if he
had any dim idea of mak-ing any “ref-er-ences to al-lu-sions,” he thought
bet-ter of it and held his peace, for there was danger in Tom's eye.

Tom turned in without the ad-ded vex-a-tion of pray-ers, and Sid made men-tal
note of the omis-sion.




CHAPTER IV

THE sun rose upon a tran-quil world, and beamed down upon the peace-ful
vil-lage like a be-ne-dic-tion. Break-fast over, Aunt Polly had fam-ily
wor-ship: it began with a prayer built from the ground up of solid
courses of Scrip-tural quo-ta-tions, wel-ded to-gether with a thin mor-tar of
ori-gin-al-ity; and from the sum-mit of this she de-livered a grim chapter of
the Mo-saic Law, as from Sinai.

Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and went to work to “get
his verses.” Sid had learned his les-son days be-fore. Tom bent all his
en-er-gies to the mem-or-iz-ing of five verses, and he chose part of the
Ser-mon on the Mount, be-cause he could find no verses that were shorter.
At the end of half an hour Tom had a vague gen-eral idea of his les-son,
but no more, for his mind was tra-vers-ing the whole field of hu-man
thought, and his hands were busy with dis-tract-ing re-cre-ations. Mary took
his book to hear him re-cite, and he tried to find his way through the
fog:

“Blessed are the--a--a--”

“Poor”--

“Yes--poor; blessed are the poor--a--a--”

“In spirit--”

“In spirit; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they--they--”

“_Theirs_--”

“For _theirs_. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the king-dom
of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn, for they--they--”

“Sh--”

“For they--a--”

“S, H, A--”

“For they S, H--Oh, I don't know what it is!”

“_Shall_!”

“Oh, _shall_! for they shall--for they shall--a--a--shall mourn--a--a--blessed
are they that shall--they that--a--they that shall mourn, for they
shall--a--shall _what_? Why don't you tell me, Mary?--what do you want to
be so mean for?”

“Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I'm not teas-ing you. I wouldn't
do that. You must go and learn it again. Don't you be dis-cour-aged, Tom,
you'll man-age it--and if you do, I'll give you some-thing ever so nice.
There, now, that's a good boy.”

“All right! What is it, Mary, tell me what it is.”

“Never you mind, Tom. You know if I say it's nice, it is nice.”

“You bet you that's so, Mary. All right, I'll tackle it again.”

And he did “tackle it again”--and un-der the double pres-sure of curi-os-ity
and pro-spect-ive gain he did it with such spirit that he ac-com-plished a
shin-ing suc-cess. Mary gave him a brand-new “Bar-low” knife worth twelve
and a half cents; and the con-vul-sion of de-light that swept his sys-tem
shook him to his found-a-tions. True, the knife would not cut any-thing,
but it was a “sure-enough” Bar-low, and there was in-con-ceiv-able grandeur
in that--though where the Western boys ever got the idea that such a
weapon could pos-sibly be coun-ter-feited to its in-jury is an im-pos-ing
mys-tery and will al-ways re-main so, per-haps. Tom con-trived to scar-ify the
cup-board with it, and was ar-ran-ging to be-gin on the bur-eau, when he was
called off to dress for Sunday-school.

Mary gave him a tin basin of wa-ter and a piece of soap, and he went
out-side the door and set the basin on a little bench there; then he
dipped the soap in the wa-ter and laid it down; turned up his sleeves;
poured out the wa-ter on the ground, gently, and then entered the kit-chen
and began to wipe his face di-li-gently on the towel be-hind the door. But
Mary re-moved the towel and said:

“Now ain't you ashamed, Tom. You mustn't be so bad. Water won't hurt
you.”

Tom was a trifle dis-con-cer-ted. The basin was re-filled, and this time he
stood over it a little while, gath-er-ing res-ol-u-tion; took in a big breath
and began. When he entered the kit-chen presently, with both eyes shut
and grop-ing for the towel with his hands, an hon-or-able testi-mony of
suds and wa-ter was drip-ping from his face. But when he emerged from
the towel, he was not yet sat-is-fact-ory, for the clean ter-rit-ory stopped
short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; be-low and bey-ond this line
there was a dark ex-panse of unir-rig-ated soil that spread down-ward in
front and back-ward around his neck. Mary took him in hand, and when she
was done with him he was a man and a brother, without dis-tinc-tion of
color, and his sat-ur-ated hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls
wrought into a dainty and sym-met-rical gen-eral ef-fect. [He privately
smoothed out the curls, with labor and dif-fi-culty, and plastered his
hair close down to his head; for he held curls to be ef-fem-in-ate, and his
own filled his life with bit-ter-ness.] Then Mary got out a suit of his
cloth-ing that had been used only on Sundays dur-ing two years--they were
simply called his “other clothes”--and so by that we know the size of his
ward-robe. The girl “put him to rights” after he had dressed him-self;
she buttoned his neat round-about up to his chin, turned his vast shirt
col-lar down over his shoulders, brushed him off and crowned him with
his speckled straw hat. He now looked ex-ceed-ingly im-proved and
un-com-fort-able. He was fully as un-com-fort-able as he looked; for there
was a re-straint about whole clothes and clean-li-ness that galled him. He
hoped that Mary would for-get his shoes, but the hope was blighted; she
coated them thor-oughly with tal-low, as was the cus-tom, and brought
them out. He lost his tem-per and said he was al-ways be-ing made to do
everything he didn't want to do. But Mary said, per-suas-ively:

“Please, Tom--that's a good boy.”

So he got into the shoes snarling. Mary was soon ready, and the three
chil-dren set out for Sunday-school--a place that Tom hated with his whole
heart; but Sid and Mary were fond of it.

Sab-bath-school hours were from nine to half-past ten; and then church
ser-vice. Two of the chil-dren al-ways re-mained for the ser-mon vol-un-tar-ily,
and the other al-ways re-mained too--for stronger reas-ons. The church's
high-backed, un-cush-ioned pews would seat about three hun-dred per-sons;
the edi-fice was but a small, plain af-fair, with a sort of pine board
tree-box on top of it for a steeple. At the door Tom dropped back a step
and ac-cos-ted a Sunday-dressed com-rade:

“Say, Billy, got a yaller ticket?”

“Yes.”

“What'll you take for her?”

“What'll you give?”

“Piece of lick-rish and a fish-hook.”

“Less see 'em.”

Tom ex-hib-ited. They were sat-is-fact-ory, and the prop-erty changed hands.
Then Tom traded a couple of white al-leys for three red tick-ets, and some
small trifle or other for a couple of blue ones. He way-laid other
boys as they came, and went on buy-ing tick-ets of vari-ous col-ors ten
or fif-teen minutes longer. He entered the church, now, with a swarm
of clean and noisy boys and girls, pro-ceeded to his seat and star-ted
a quar-rel with the first boy that came handy. The teacher, a grave,
eld-erly man, in-terfered; then turned his back a mo-ment and Tom pulled a
boy's hair in the next bench, and was ab-sorbed in his book when the boy
turned around; stuck a pin in an-other boy, presently, in or-der to hear
him say “Ouch!” and got a new rep-rim-and from his teacher. Tom's whole
class were of a pat-tern--rest-less, noisy, and trouble-some. When they came
to re-cite their les-sons, not one of them knew his verses per-fectly, but
had to be promp-ted all along. However, they wor-ried through, and each
got his re-ward--in small blue tick-ets, each with a pas-sage of Scrip-ture
on it; each blue ticket was pay for two verses of the re-cit-a-tion. Ten
blue tick-ets equalled a red one, and could be ex-changed for it; ten red
tick-ets equalled a yel-low one; for ten yel-low tick-ets the su-per-in-tend-ent
gave a very plainly bound Bible (worth forty cents in those easy
times) to the pu-pil. How many of my read-ers would have the in-dustry and
ap-plic-a-tion to mem-or-ize two thou-sand verses, even for a Dore Bible? And
yet Mary had ac-quired two Bibles in this way--it was the pa-tient work of
two years--and a boy of Ger-man par-ent-age had won four or five. He once
re-cited three thou-sand verses without stop-ping; but the strain upon his
men-tal fac-ulties was too great, and he was little bet-ter than an idiot
from that day forth--a griev-ous mis-for-tune for the school, for on great
oc-ca-sions, be-fore com-pany, the su-per-in-tend-ent (as Tom ex-pressed it)
had al-ways made this boy come out and “spread him-self.” Only the older
pu-pils man-aged to keep their tick-ets and stick to their te-di-ous work
long enough to get a Bible, and so the de-liv-ery of one of these prizes
was a rare and note-worthy cir-cum-stance; the suc-cess-ful pu-pil was so
great and con-spicu-ous for that day that on the spot every scholar's
heart was fired with a fresh am-bi-tion that of-ten las-ted a couple
of weeks. It is pos-sible that Tom's men-tal stom-ach had never really
hungered for one of those prizes, but un-ques-tion-ably his en-tire be-ing
had for many a day longed for the glory and the eclat that came with it.

In due course the su-per-in-tend-ent stood up in front of the pul-pit, with
a closed hymn-book in his hand and his fore-finger in-ser-ted between its
leaves, and com-manded at-ten-tion. When a Sunday-school su-per-in-tend-ent
makes his cus-tom-ary little speech, a hymn-book in the hand is as
ne-ces-sary as is the in-ev-it-able sheet of mu-sic in the hand of a singer
who stands for-ward on the plat-form and sings a solo at a con-cert--though
why, is a mys-tery: for neither the hymn-book nor the sheet of mu-sic
is ever re-ferred to by the suf-ferer. This su-per-in-tend-ent was a slim
creature of thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair; he
wore a stiff stand-ing-col-lar whose up-per edge al-most reached his ears
and whose sharp points curved for-ward abreast the corners of his mouth--a
fence that com-pelled a straight lookout ahead, and a turn-ing of the
whole body when a side view was re-quired; his chin was propped on a
spread-ing cravat which was as broad and as long as a bank-note, and had
fringed ends; his boot toes were turned sharply up, in the fash-ion
of the day, like sleigh-run-ners--an ef-fect pa-tiently and la-bor-i-ously
pro-duced by the young men by sit-ting with their toes pressed against a
wall for hours to-gether. Mr. Wal-ters was very earn-est of mien, and very
sin-cere and hon-est at heart; and he held sac-red things and places
in such rev-er-ence, and so sep-ar-ated them from worldly mat-ters, that
un-con-sciously to him-self his Sunday-school voice had ac-quired a pe-cu-liar
in-ton-a-tion which was wholly ab-sent on week-days. He began after this
fash-ion:

“Now, chil-dren, I want you all to sit up just as straight and pretty as
you can and give me all your at-ten-tion for a minute or two. There--that
is it. That is the way good little boys and girls should do. I see one
little girl who is look-ing out of the win-dow--I am afraid she thinks I
am out there some-where--per-haps up in one of the trees mak-ing a speech
to the little birds. [Ap-plaus-ive tit-ter.] I want to tell you how good it
makes me feel to see so many bright, clean little faces as-sembled in a
place like this, learn-ing to do right and be good.” And so forth and so
on. It is not ne-ces-sary to set down the rest of the ora-tion. It was of a
pat-tern which does not vary, and so it is fa-mil-iar to us all.

The lat-ter third of the speech was marred by the re-sump-tion of fights
and other re-cre-ations among cer-tain of the bad boys, and by fid-get-ings
and whis-per-ings that ex-ten-ded far and wide, wash-ing even to the bases of
isol-ated and in-cor-rupt-ible rocks like Sid and Mary. But now every sound
ceased sud-denly, with the sub-sid-ence of Mr. Wal-ters' voice, and the
con-clu-sion of the speech was re-ceived with a burst of si-lent grat-it-ude.

A good part of the whis-per-ing had been oc-ca-sioned by an event which was
more or less rare--the en-trance of vis-it-ors: law-yer Thatcher, ac-com-pan-ied
by a very feeble and aged man; a fine, portly, middle-aged gen-tle-man
with iron-gray hair; and a dig-ni-fied lady who was doubt-less the lat-ter's
wife. The lady was lead-ing a child. Tom had been rest-less and full of
chaf-ings and re-pin-ings; con-science-smit-ten, too--he could not meet Amy
Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her lov-ing gaze. But when he saw this
small new-comer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in a mo-ment. The next
mo-ment he was “show-ing off” with all his might--cuff-ing boys, pulling
hair, mak-ing faces--in a word, us-ing every art that seemed likely to
fas-cin-ate a girl and win her ap-plause. His ex-al-ta-tion had but one
al-loy--the memory of his hu-mi-li-ation in this an-gel's garden--and that
re-cord in sand was fast wash-ing out, un-der the waves of hap-pi-ness that
were sweep-ing over it now.

The vis-it-ors were given the highest seat of honor, and as soon as Mr.
Wal-ters' speech was fin-ished, he in-tro-duced them to the school. The
middle-aged man turned out to be a prodi-gious per-son-age--no less a one
than the county judge--al-to-gether the most au-gust cre-ation these chil-dren
had ever looked upon--and they wondered what kind of ma-ter-ial he was made
of--and they half wanted to hear him roar, and were half afraid he might,
too. He was from Con-stantinople, twelve miles away--so he had trav-elled,
and seen the world--these very eyes had looked upon the county
court-house--which was said to have a tin roof. The awe which these
re-flec-tions in-spired was at-tested by the im-press-ive si-lence and the
ranks of star-ing eyes. This was the great Judge Thatcher, brother of
their own law-yer. Jeff Thatcher im-me-di-ately went for-ward, to be fa-mil-iar
with the great man and be en-vied by the school. It would have been mu-sic
to his soul to hear the whis-per-ings:

“Look at him, Jim! He's a go-ing up there. Say--look! he's a go-ing to
shake hands with him--he _is_ shak-ing hands with him! By jings, don't you
wish you was Jeff?”

Mr. Wal-ters fell to “show-ing off,” with all sorts of of-fi-cial bust-lings
and activ-it-ies, giv-ing or-ders, de-liv-er-ing judg-ments, dis-char-ging
dir-ec-tions here, there, every-where that he could find a tar-get. The
lib-rar-ian “showed off”--run-ning hither and thither with his arms full of
books and mak-ing a deal of the splut-ter and fuss that in-sect au-thor-ity
de-lights in. The young lady teach-ers “showed off”--bend-ing sweetly over
pu-pils that were lately be-ing boxed, lift-ing pretty warn-ing fin-gers
at bad little boys and pat-ting good ones lov-ingly. The young gen-tle-men
teach-ers “showed off” with small scold-ings and other little dis-plays of
au-thor-ity and fine at-ten-tion to dis-cip-line--and most of the teach-ers, of
both sexes, found busi-ness up at the lib-rary, by the pul-pit; and it was
busi-ness that fre-quently had to be done over again two or three times
(with much seem-ing vex-a-tion). The little girls “showed off” in vari-ous
ways, and the little boys “showed off” with such di-li-gence that the air
was thick with pa-per wads and the mur-mur of scuff-lings. And above it
all the great man sat and beamed a majestic ju-di-cial smile upon all
the house, and warmed him-self in the sun of his own grandeur--for he was
“show-ing off,” too.

There was only one thing want-ing to make Mr. Wal-ters' ec-stasy com-plete,
and that was a chance to de-liver a Bible-prize and ex-hibit a prodigy.
Several pu-pils had a few yel-low tick-ets, but none had enough--he had been
around among the star pu-pils in-quir-ing. He would have given worlds, now,
to have that Ger-man lad back again with a sound mind.

And now at this mo-ment, when hope was dead, Tom Saw-yer came for-ward with
nine yel-low tick-ets, nine red tick-ets, and ten blue ones, and de-man-ded
a Bible. This was a thun-der-bolt out of a clear sky. Wal-ters was not
ex-pect-ing an ap-plic-a-tion from this source for the next ten years. But
there was no get-ting around it--here were the cer-ti-fied checks, and they
were good for their face. Tom was there-fore el-ev-ated to a place with
the Judge and the other elect, and the great news was an-nounced from
headquar-ters. It was the most stun-ning sur-prise of the dec-ade, and
so pro-found was the sen-sa-tion that it lif-ted the new hero up to the
ju-di-cial one's alti-tude, and the school had two mar-vels to gaze upon
in place of one. The boys were all eaten up with envy--but those that
suffered the bitterest pangs were those who per-ceived too late that they
them-selves had con-trib-uted to this hated splendor by trad-ing tick-ets to
Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling white-wash-ing priv-ileges.
These des-pised them-selves, as be-ing the dupes of a wily fraud, a
guile-ful snake in the grass.

The prize was de-livered to Tom with as much ef-fu-sion as the
su-per-in-tend-ent could pump up un-der the cir-cum-stances; but it lacked
some-what of the true gush, for the poor fel-low's in-stinct taught him
that there was a mys-tery here that could not well bear the light,
per-haps; it was simply pre-pos-ter-ous that this boy had ware-housed two
thou-sand sheaves of Scrip-tural wis-dom on his premises--a dozen would
strain his ca-pa-city, without a doubt.

Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in
her face--but he wouldn't look. She wondered; then she was just a grain
troubled; next a dim sus-pi-cion came and went--came again; she watched;
a furt-ive glance told her worlds--and then her heart broke, and she was
jeal-ous, and angry, and the tears came and she hated every-body. Tom most
of all (she thought).

Tom was in-tro-duced to the Judge; but his tongue was tied, his breath
would hardly come, his heart quaked--partly be-cause of the aw-ful
great-ness of the man, but mainly be-cause he was her par-ent. He would
have liked to fall down and wor-ship him, if it were in the dark. The
Judge put his hand on Tom's head and called him a fine little man, and
asked him what his name was. The boy stammered, gasped, and got it out:

“Tom.”

“Oh, no, not Tom--it is--”

“Tho-mas.”

“Ah, that's it. I thought there was more to it, maybe. That's very well.
But you've an-other one I daresay, and you'll tell it to me, won't you?”

“Tell the gen-tle-man your other name, Tho-mas,” said Wal-ters, “and say
sir. You mustn't for-get your man-ners.”

“Tho-mas Saw-yer--sir.”

“That's it! That's a good boy. Fine boy. Fine, manly little fel-low. Two
thou-sand verses is a great many--very, very great many. And you never can
be sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for know-ledge is worth
more than any-thing there is in the world; it's what makes great men
and good men; you'll be a great man and a good man your-self, some
day, Tho-mas, and then you'll look back and say, It's all ow-ing to the
pre-cious Sunday-school priv-ileges of my boy-hood--it's all ow-ing to
my dear teach-ers that taught me to learn--it's all ow-ing to the good
su-per-in-tend-ent, who en-cour-aged me, and watched over me, and gave me a
beau-ti-ful Bible--a splen-did el-eg-ant Bible--to keep and have it all for my
own, al-ways--it's all ow-ing to right bring-ing up! That is what you will
say, Tho-mas--and you wouldn't take any money for those two thou-sand
verses--no in-deed you wouldn't. And now you wouldn't mind telling me and
this lady some of the things you've learned--no, I know you wouldn't--for
we are proud of little boys that learn. Now, no doubt you know the names
of all the twelve dis-ciples. Won't you tell us the names of the first
two that were ap-poin-ted?”

Tom was tug-ging at a but-ton-hole and look-ing sheep-ish. He blushed,
now, and his eyes fell. Mr. Wal-ters' heart sank within him. He said
to him-self, it is not pos-sible that the boy can an-swer the simplest
ques-tion--why _did_ the Judge ask him? Yet he felt ob-liged to speak up
and say:

“An-swer the gen-tle-man, Tho-mas--don't be afraid.”

Tom still hung fire.

“Now I know you'll tell me,” said the lady. “The names of the first two
dis-ciples were--”

“_David And Go-liah!_”

Let us draw the cur-tain of char-ity over the rest of the scene.




CHAPTER V

ABOUT half-past ten the cracked bell of the small church began to ring,
and presently the people began to gather for the morn-ing ser-mon. The
Sunday-school chil-dren dis-trib-uted them-selves about the house and
oc-cu-pied pews with their par-ents, so as to be un-der su-per-vi-sion. Aunt
Polly came, and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her--Tom be-ing placed next
the aisle, in or-der that he might be as far away from the open win-dow
and the se-duct-ive out-side sum-mer scenes as pos-sible. The crowd filed up
the aisles: the aged and needy post-mas-ter, who had seen bet-ter days;
the mayor and his wife--for they had a mayor there, among other
un-ne-ces-sar-ies; the justice of the peace; the widow Dou-glass, fair,
smart, and forty, a gen-er-ous, good-hearted soul and well-to-do, her hill
man-sion the only palace in the town, and the most hos-pit-able and much
the most lav-ish in the mat-ter of fest-iv-it-ies that St. Peters-burg could
boast; the bent and ven-er-able Ma-jor and Mrs. Ward; law-yer River-son, the
new not-able from a dis-tance; next the belle of the vil-lage, fol-lowed by
a troop of lawn-clad and rib-bon-decked young heart-break-ers; then all
the young clerks in town in a body--for they had stood in the ves-ti-bule
suck-ing their cane-heads, a circ-ling wall of oiled and sim-per-ing
ad-mirers, till the last girl had run their gant-let; and last of all came
the Model Boy, Wil-lie Muffer-son, tak-ing as heed-ful care of his mother as
if she were cut glass. He al-ways brought his mother to church, and was
the pride of all the mat-rons. The boys all hated him, he was so
good. And be-sides, he had been “thrown up to them” so much. His
white handker-chief was hanging out of his pocket be-hind, as usual on
Sundays--ac-ci-dent-ally. Tom had no handker-chief, and he looked upon boys
who had as snobs.

The con-greg-a-tion be-ing fully as-sembled, now, the bell rang once more,
to warn lag-gards and strag-glers, and then a sol-emn hush fell upon the
church which was only broken by the tit-ter-ing and whis-per-ing of the
choir in the gal-lery. The choir al-ways tittered and whispered all
through ser-vice. There was once a church choir that was not ill-bred,
but I have for-got-ten where it was, now. It was a great many years ago,
and I can scarcely re-mem-ber any-thing about it, but I think it was in
some for-eign coun-try.

The min-is-ter gave out the hymn, and read it through with a rel-ish, in a
pe-cu-liar style which was much ad-mired in that part of the coun-try. His
voice began on a me-dium key and climbed stead-ily up till it reached a
cer-tain point, where it bore with strong em-phasis upon the top-most word
and then plunged down as if from a spring-board:

Shall I be car-ri-ed toe the skies, on flow'ry _beds_ of ease,

Whilst oth-ers fight to win the prize, and sail thro' _blood_-y seas?

He was re-garded as a won-der-ful reader. At church “so-ci-ables” he was
al-ways called upon to read po-etry; and when he was through, the ladies
would lift up their hands and let them fall help-lessly in their laps,
and “wall” their eyes, and shake their heads, as much as to say, “Words
can-not ex-press it; it is too beau-ti-ful, TOO beau-ti-ful for this mor-tal
earth.”

After the hymn had been sung, the Rev. Mr. Sprague turned him-self into
a bul-letin-board, and read off “no-tices” of meet-ings and so-ci-et-ies and
things till it seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of
doom--a queer cus-tom which is still kept up in Amer-ica, even in cit-ies,
away here in this age of abund-ant news-pa-pers. Often, the less there is
to jus-tify a tra-di-tional cus-tom, the harder it is to get rid of it.

And now the min-is-ter prayed. A good, gen-er-ous prayer it was, and went
into de-tails: it pleaded for the church, and the little chil-dren of the
church; for the other churches of the vil-lage; for the vil-lage it-self;
for the county; for the State; for the State of-ficers; for the Un-ited
States; for the churches of the Un-ited States; for Con-gress; for the
Pres-id-ent; for the of-ficers of the Govern-ment; for poor sail-ors, tossed
by stormy seas; for the op-pressed mil-lions groan-ing un-der the heel of
European mon-arch-ies and Ori-ental des-pot-isms; for such as have the light
and the good tid-ings, and yet have not eyes to see nor ears to hear
withal; for the hea-then in the far is-lands of the sea; and closed with
a sup-plic-a-tion that the words he was about to speak might find grace
and fa-vor, and be as seed sown in fer-tile ground, yield-ing in time a
grate-ful har-vest of good. Amen.

There was a rust-ling of dresses, and the stand-ing con-greg-a-tion sat down.
The boy whose his-tory this book relates did not en-joy the prayer, he
only en-dured it--if he even did that much. He was rest-ive all through it;
he kept tally of the de-tails of the prayer, un-con-sciously--for he was not
listen-ing, but he knew the ground of old, and the cler-gy-man's reg-u-lar
route over it--and when a little trifle of new mat-ter was in-ter-lar-ded,
his ear de-tec-ted it and his whole nature re-sen-ted it; he con-sidered
ad-di-tions un-fair, and scoun-drelly. In the midst of the prayer a fly had
lit on the back of the pew in front of him and tor-tured his spirit by
calmly rub-bing its hands to-gether, em-bra-cing its head with its arms, and
pol-ish-ing it so vig-or-ously that it seemed to al-most part com-pany with
the body, and the slender thread of a neck was ex-posed to view; scrap-ing
its wings with its hind legs and smooth-ing them to its body as if they
had been coat-tails; go-ing through its whole toi-let as tran-quilly as if
it knew it was per-fectly safe. As in-deed it was; for as sorely as Tom's
hands itched to grab for it they did not dare--he be-lieved his soul would
be in-stantly des-troyed if he did such a thing while the prayer was go-ing
on. But with the clos-ing sen-tence his hand began to curve and steal
for-ward; and the in-stant the “Amen” was out the fly was a pris-oner of
war. His aunt de-tec-ted the act and made him let it go.

The min-is-ter gave out his text and droned along mono-ton-ously through an
ar-gu-ment that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod--and
yet it was an ar-gu-ment that dealt in lim-it-less fire and brim-stone and
thinned the pre-destined elect down to a com-pany so small as to be hardly
worth the sav-ing. Tom coun-ted the pages of the ser-mon; after church he
al-ways knew how many pages there had been, but he sel-dom knew any-thing
else about the dis-course. However, this time he was really in-ter-ested
for a little while. The min-is-ter made a grand and mov-ing pic-ture of the
as-sem-bling to-gether of the world's hosts at the mil-len-nium when the lion
and the lamb should lie down to-gether and a little child should lead
them. But the pathos, the les-son, the moral of the great spec-tacle
were lost upon the boy; he only thought of the con-spicu-ous-ness of the
prin-cipal char-ac-ter be-fore the on-look-ing na-tions; his face lit with the
thought, and he said to him-self that he wished he could be that child,
if it was a tame lion.

Now he lapsed into suf-fer-ing again, as the dry ar-gu-ment was re-sumed.
Presently he be-thought him of a treas-ure he had and got it out. It was
a large black beetle with for-mid-able jaws--a “pinch-bug,” he called it. It
was in a per-cus-sion-cap box. The first thing the beetle did was to
take him by the fin-ger. A nat-ural fil-lip fol-lowed, the beetle went
flounder-ing into the aisle and lit on its back, and the hurt fin-ger went
into the boy's mouth. The beetle lay there work-ing its help-less legs,
un-able to turn over. Tom eyed it, and longed for it; but it was safe out
of his reach. Other people un-in-ter-ested in the ser-mon found re-lief in
the beetle, and they eyed it too. Presently a vag-rant poodle dog came
id-ling along, sad at heart, lazy with the sum-mer soft-ness and the
quiet, weary of cap-tiv-ity, sigh-ing for change. He spied the beetle; the
droop-ing tail lif-ted and wagged. He sur-veyed the prize; walked around
it; smelt at it from a safe dis-tance; walked around it again; grew
bolder, and took a closer smell; then lif-ted his lip and made a gingerly
snatch at it, just miss-ing it; made an-other, and an-other; began to en-joy
the di-ver-sion; sub-sided to his stom-ach with the beetle between his paws,
and con-tin-ued his ex-per-i-ments; grew weary at last, and then in-dif-fer-ent
and ab-sent-minded. His head nod-ded, and little by little his chin
des-cen-ded and touched the en-emy, who seized it. There was a sharp yelp,
a flirt of the poodle's head, and the beetle fell a couple of yards
away, and lit on its back once more. The neigh-bor-ing spec-tat-ors
shook with a gentle in-ward joy, sev-eral faces went be-hind fans and
hand-ker-chiefs, and Tom was en-tirely happy. The dog looked fool-ish,
and prob-ably felt so; but there was re-sent-ment in his heart, too, and a
crav-ing for re-venge. So he went to the beetle and began a wary at-tack on
it again; jump-ing at it from every point of a circle, light-ing with his
fore-paws within an inch of the creature, mak-ing even closer snatches at
it with his teeth, and jerking his head till his ears flapped again. But
he grew tired once more, after a while; tried to amuse him-self with a
fly but found no re-lief; fol-lowed an ant around, with his nose close
to the floor, and quickly wear-ied of that; yawned, sighed, for-got the
beetle en-tirely, and sat down on it. Then there was a wild yelp of agony
and the poodle went sail-ing up the aisle; the yelps con-tin-ued, and so
did the dog; he crossed the house in front of the al-tar; he flew
down the other aisle; he crossed be-fore the doors; he clamored up the
home-stretch; his an-guish grew with his pro-gress, till presently he was
but a woolly comet mov-ing in its or-bit with the gleam and the speed of
light. At last the frantic suf-ferer sheered from its course, and sprang
into its mas-ter's lap; he flung it out of the win-dow, and the voice of
dis-tress quickly thinned away and died in the dis-tance.

By this time the whole church was red-faced and suf-foc-at-ing with
sup-pressed laughter, and the ser-mon had come to a dead stand-still.
The dis-course was re-sumed presently, but it went lame and halt-ing, all
pos-sib-il-ity of im-press-ive-ness be-ing at an end; for even the gravest
sen-ti-ments were con-stantly be-ing re-ceived with a smothered burst of
un-holy mirth, un-der cover of some re-mote pew-back, as if the poor par-son
had said a rarely fa-cetious thing. It was a genu-ine re-lief to the whole
con-greg-a-tion when the or-deal was over and the be-ne-dic-tion pro-nounced.

Tom Saw-yer went home quite cheer-ful, think-ing to him-self that there was
some sat-is-fac-tion about di-vine ser-vice when there was a bit of vari-ety
in it. He had but one mar-ring thought; he was will-ing that the dog
should play with his pinch-bug, but he did not think it was up-right in
him to carry it off.




CHAPTER VI

MONDAY morn-ing found Tom Saw-yer miser-able. Monday morn-ing al-ways found
him so--be-cause it began an-other week's slow suf-fer-ing in school. He
gen-er-ally began that day with wish-ing he had had no in-ter-ven-ing hol-i-day,
it made the go-ing into cap-tiv-ity and fet-ters again so much more odi-ous.

Tom lay think-ing. Presently it oc-curred to him that he wished he was
sick; then he could stay home from school. Here was a vague pos-sib-il-ity.
He can-vassed his sys-tem. No ail-ment was found, and he in-vest-ig-ated
again. This time he thought he could de-tect col-icky symp-toms, and he
began to en-cour-age them with con-sid-er-able hope. But they soon grew
feeble, and presently died wholly away. He re-flec-ted fur-ther. Sud-denly
he dis-covered some-thing. One of his up-per front teeth was loose. This
was lucky; he was about to be-gin to groan, as a “starter,” as he
called it, when it oc-curred to him that if he came into court with that
ar-gu-ment, his aunt would pull it out, and that would hurt. So he thought
he would hold the tooth in re-serve for the present, and seek fur-ther.
Noth-ing offered for some little time, and then he re-membered hear-ing
the doc-tor tell about a cer-tain thing that laid up a pa-tient for two or
three weeks and threatened to make him lose a fin-ger. So the boy eagerly
drew his sore toe from un-der the sheet and held it up for in-spec-tion.
But now he did not know the ne-ces-sary symp-toms. However, it seemed
well worth while to chance it, so he fell to groan-ing with con-sid-er-able
spirit.

But Sid slept on un-con-scious.

Tom groaned louder, and fan-cied that he began to feel pain in the toe.

No res-ult from Sid.

Tom was pant-ing with his ex-er-tions by this time. He took a rest and then
swelled him-self up and fetched a suc-ces-sion of ad-mir-able groans.

Sid snored on.

Tom was ag-grav-ated. He said, “Sid, Sid!” and shook him. This course
worked well, and Tom began to groan again. Sid yawned, stretched, then
brought him-self up on his el-bow with a snort, and began to stare at Tom.
Tom went on groan-ing. Sid said:

“Tom! Say, Tom!” [No re-sponse.] “Here, Tom! TOM! What is the mat-ter,
Tom?” And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.

Tom moaned out:

“Oh, don't, Sid. Don't joggle me.”

“Why, what's the mat-ter, Tom? I must call auntie.”

“No--never mind. It'll be over by and by, maybe. Don't call any-body.”

“But I must! _Don't_ groan so, Tom, it's aw-ful. How long you been this
way?”

“Hours. Ouch! Oh, don't stir so, Sid, you'll kill me.”

“Tom, why didn't you wake me sooner? Oh, Tom, _don't!_ It makes my flesh
crawl to hear you. Tom, what is the mat-ter?”

“I for-give you everything, Sid. [Groan.] Everything you've ever done to
me. When I'm gone--”

“Oh, Tom, you ain't dy-ing, are you? Don't, Tom--oh, don't. Maybe--”

“I for-give every-body, Sid. [Groan.] Tell 'em so, Sid. And Sid, you give
my win-dow-sash and my cat with one eye to that new girl that's come to
town, and tell her--”

But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom was suf-fer-ing in real-ity,
now, so hand-somely was his ima-gin-a-tion work-ing, and so his groans had
gathered quite a genu-ine tone.

Sid flew down-stairs and said:

“Oh, Aunt Polly, come! Tom's dy-ing!”

“Dy-ing!”

“Yes'm. Don't wait--come quick!”

“Rub-bage! I don't be-lieve it!”

But she fled up-stairs, nev-er-the-less, with Sid and Mary at her heels.
And her face grew white, too, and her lip trembled. When she reached the
bed-side she gasped out:

“You, Tom! Tom, what's the mat-ter with you?”

“Oh, auntie, I'm--”

“What's the mat-ter with you--what is the mat-ter with you, child?”

“Oh, auntie, my sore toe's mor-ti-fied!”

The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed a little, then cried a
little, then did both to-gether. This re-stored her and she said:

“Tom, what a turn you did give me. Now you shut up that non-sense and
climb out of this.”

The groans ceased and the pain van-ished from the toe. The boy felt a
little fool-ish, and he said:

“Aunt Polly, it _seemed_ mor-ti-fied, and it hurt so I never minded my
tooth at all.”

“Your tooth, in-deed! What's the mat-ter with your tooth?”

“One of them's loose, and it aches per-fectly aw-ful.”

“There, there, now, don't be-gin that groan-ing again. Open your mouth.
Well--your tooth _is_ loose, but you're not go-ing to die about that.
Mary, get me a silk thread, and a chunk of fire out of the kit-chen.”

Tom said:

“Oh, please, auntie, don't pull it out. It don't hurt any more. I wish
I may never stir if it does. Please don't, auntie. I don't want to stay
home from school.”

“Oh, you don't, don't you? So all this row was be-cause you thought you'd
get to stay home from school and go a-fish-ing? Tom, Tom, I love you so,
and you seem to try every way you can to break my old heart with your
out-rageous-ness.” By this time the dental in-stru-ments were ready. The old
lady made one end of the silk thread fast to Tom's tooth with a loop
and tied the other to the bed-post. Then she seized the chunk of fire and
sud-denly thrust it al-most into the boy's face. The tooth hung dangling
by the bed-post, now.

But all tri-als bring their com-pens-a-tions. As Tom wen-ded to school after
break-fast, he was the envy of every boy he met be-cause the gap in his
up-per row of teeth en-abled him to ex-pect-or-ate in a new and ad-mir-able
way. He gathered quite a fol-low-ing of lads in-ter-ested in the ex-hib-i-tion;
and one that had cut his fin-ger and had been a centre of fas-cin-a-tion and
homage up to this time, now found him-self sud-denly without an ad-her-ent,
and shorn of his glory. His heart was heavy, and he said with a dis-dain
which he did not feel that it wasn't any-thing to spit like Tom Saw-yer;
but an-other boy said, “Sour grapes!” and he wandered away a dis-mantled
hero.

Shortly Tom came upon the ju-ven-ile pariah of the vil-lage, Huckle-berry
Finn, son of the town drunk-ard. Huckle-berry was cor-di-ally hated and
dreaded by all the moth-ers of the town, be-cause he was idle and law-less
and vul-gar and bad--and be-cause all their chil-dren ad-mired him so, and
de-lighted in his for-bid-den so-ci-ety, and wished they dared to be like
him. Tom was like the rest of the re-spect-able boys, in that he en-vied
Huckle-berry his gaudy out-cast con-di-tion, and was un-der strict or-ders
not to play with him. So he played with him every time he got a chance.
Huckle-berry was al-ways dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown
men, and they were in per-en-nial bloom and flut-ter-ing with rags. His hat
was a vast ruin with a wide cres-cent lopped out of its brim; his coat,
when he wore one, hung nearly to his heels and had the rear-ward but-tons
far down the back; but one sus-pender sup-por-ted his trousers; the seat of
the trousers bagged low and con-tained noth-ing, the fringed legs dragged
in the dirt when not rolled up.

Huckle-berry came and went, at his own free will. He slept on door-steps
in fine weather and in empty hogsheads in wet; he did not have to go to
school or to church, or call any be-ing mas-ter or obey any-body; he could
go fish-ing or swim-ming when and where he chose, and stay as long as it
suited him; nobody for-bade him to fight; he could sit up as late as he
pleased; he was al-ways the first boy that went bare-foot in the spring
and the last to re-sume leather in the fall; he never had to wash, nor
put on clean clothes; he could swear won-der-fully. In a word, everything
that goes to make life pre-cious that boy had. So thought every har-assed,
hampered, re-spect-able boy in St. Peters-burg.

Tom hailed the ro-mantic out-cast:

“Hello, Huckle-berry!”

“Hello your-self, and see how you like it.”

“What's that you got?”

“Dead cat.”

“Lemme see him, Huck. My, he's pretty stiff. Where'd you get him?”

“Bought him off'n a boy.”

“What did you give?”

“I give a blue ticket and a blad-der that I got at the slaughter-house.”

“Where'd you get the blue ticket?”

“Bought it off'n Ben Ro-gers two weeks ago for a hoop-stick.”

“Say--what is dead cats good for, Huck?”

“Good for? Cure warts with.”

“No! Is that so? I know some-thing that's bet-ter.”

“I bet you don't. What is it?”

“Why, spunk-wa-ter.”

“Spunk-wa-ter! I wouldn't give a dern for spunk-wa-ter.”

“You wouldn't, wouldn't you? D'you ever try it?”

“No, I hain't. But Bob Tan-ner did.”

“Who told you so!”

“Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny
told Jim Hol-lis, and Jim told Ben Ro-gers, and Ben told a nig-ger, and the
nig-ger told me. There now!”

“Well, what of it? They'll all lie. Least-ways all but the nig-ger. I
don't know _him_. But I never see a nig-ger that _wouldn't_ lie. Shucks!
Now you tell me how Bob Tan-ner done it, Huck.”

“Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rot-ten stump where the rain-wa-ter
was.”

“In the day-time?”

“Cer-tainly.”

“With his face to the stump?”

“Yes. Least I reckon so.”

“Did he say any-thing?”

“I don't reckon he did. I don't know.”

“Aha! Talk about try-ing to cure warts with spunk-wa-ter such a blame fool
way as that! Why, that ain't a-go-ing to do any good. You got to go all
by your-self, to the middle of the woods, where you know there's a
spunk-wa-ter stump, and just as it's mid-night you back up against the stump
and jam your hand in and say:

'Bar-ley-corn, bar-ley-corn, in-jun-meal shorts, Spunk-wa-ter, spunk-wa-ter,
swaller these warts,'

and then walk away quick, el-even steps, with your eyes shut, and then
turn around three times and walk home without speak-ing to any-body.
Be-cause if you speak the charm's bus-ted.”

“Well, that sounds like a good way; but that ain't the way Bob Tan-ner
done.”

“No, sir, you can bet he didn't, becuz he's the warti-est boy in this
town; and he wouldn't have a wart on him if he'd knowed how to work
spunk-wa-ter. I've took off thou-sands of warts off of my hands that way,
Huck. I play with frogs so much that I've al-ways got con-sid-er-able many
warts. So-me-times I take 'em off with a bean.”

“Yes, bean's good. I've done that.”

“Have you? What's your way?”

“You take and split the bean, and cut the wart so as to get some blood,
and then you put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and dig
a hole and bury it 'bout mid-night at the cross-roads in the dark of the
moon, and then you burn up the rest of the bean. You see that piece
that's got the blood on it will keep draw-ing and draw-ing, try-ing to
fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the
wart, and pretty soon off she comes.”

“Yes, that's it, Huck--that's it; though when you're bury-ing it if you
say 'Down bean; off wart; come no more to bother me!' it's bet-ter.
That's the way Joe Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coon-ville and
most every-wheres. But say--how do you cure 'em with dead cats?”

“Why, you take your cat and go and get in the grave-yard 'long about
mid-night when some-body that was wicked has been bur-ied; and when it's
mid-night a devil will come, or maybe two or three, but you can't see
'em, you can only hear some-thing like the wind, or maybe hear 'em talk;
and when they're tak-ing that feller away, you heave your cat after 'em
and say, 'Devil fol-low corpse, cat fol-low devil, warts fol-low cat, I'm
done with ye!' That'll fetch _any_ wart.”

“Sounds right. D'you ever try it, Huck?”

“No, but old Mother Hop-kins told me.”

“Well, I reckon it's so, then. Becuz they say she's a witch.”

“Say! Why, Tom, I _know_ she is. She witched pap. Pap says so his own
self. He come along one day, and he see she was a-witch-ing him, so he
took up a rock, and if she hadn't dodged, he'd a got her. Well, that
very night he rolled off'n a shed wher' he was a layin drunk, and broke
his arm.”

“Why, that's aw-ful. How did he know she was a-witch-ing him?”

“Lord, pap can tell, easy. Pap says when they keep look-ing at you right
stiddy, they're a-witch-ing you. Spe-cially if they mumble. Becuz when
they mumble they're say-ing the Lord's Prayer back-ards.”

“Say, Hucky, when you go-ing to try the cat?”

“To-night. I reckon they'll come after old Hoss Wil-li-ams to-night.”

“But they bur-ied him Saturday. Didn't they get him Saturday night?”

“Why, how you talk! How could their charms work till mid-night?--and
_then_ it's Sunday. Devils don't slosh around much of a Sunday, I don't
reckon.”

“I never thought of that. That's so. Lemme go with you?”

“Of course--if you ain't afeard.”

“Afeard! 'Tain't likely. Will you meow?”

“Yes--and you meow back, if you get a chance. Last time, you kep' me
a-meow-ing around till old Hays went to throw-ing rocks at me and says
'Dern that cat!' and so I hove a brick through his win-dow--but don't you
tell.”

“I won't. I couldn't meow that night, becuz auntie was watch-ing me, but
I'll meow this time. Say--what's that?”

“Noth-ing but a tick.”

“Where'd you get him?”

“Out in the woods.”

“What'll you take for him?”

“I don't know. I don't want to sell him.”

“All right. It's a mighty small tick, any-way.”

“Oh, any-body can run a tick down that don't be-long to them. I'm
sat-is-fied with it. It's a good enough tick for me.”

“Sho, there's ticks a plenty. I could have a thou-sand of 'em if I wanted
to.”

“Well, why don't you? Becuz you know mighty well you can't. This is a
pretty early tick, I reckon. It's the first one I've seen this year.”

“Say, Huck--I'll give you my tooth for him.”

“Less see it.”

Tom got out a bit of pa-per and care-fully un-rolled it. Huckle-berry viewed
it wist-fully. The tempta-tion was very strong. At last he said:

“Is it genuwyne?”

Tom lif-ted his lip and showed the va-cancy.

“Well, all right,” said Huckle-berry, “it's a trade.”

Tom en-closed the tick in the per-cus-sion-cap box that had lately been the
pinch-bug's prison, and the boys sep-ar-ated, each feel-ing wealth-ier than
be-fore.

When Tom reached the little isol-ated frame school-house, he strode in
briskly, with the man-ner of one who had come with all hon-est speed. He
hung his hat on a peg and flung him-self into his seat with busi-ness-like
alac-rity. The mas-ter, throned on high in his great splint-bot-tom
arm-chair, was doz-ing, lulled by the drowsy hum of study. The
in-ter-rup-tion roused him.

“Tho-mas Saw-yer!”

Tom knew that when his name was pro-nounced in full, it meant trouble.

“Sir!”

“Come up here. Now, sir, why are you late again, as usual?”

Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two long tails of
yel-low hair hanging down a back that he re-cog-nized by the elec-tric
sym-pathy of love; and by that form was _the only va-cant place_ on the
girls' side of the school-house. He in-stantly said:

“_I stopped to talk with Huckle-berry Finn!_”

The mas-ter's pulse stood still, and he stared help-lessly. The buzz of
study ceased. The pu-pils wondered if this fool-hardy boy had lost his
mind. The mas-ter said:

“You--you did what?”

“Stopped to talk with Huckle-berry Finn.”

There was no mis-tak-ing the words.

“Tho-mas Saw-yer, this is the most astound-ing con-fes-sion I have ever
listened to. No mere fer-ule will an-swer for this of-fence. Take off your
jacket.”

The mas-ter's arm per-formed un-til it was tired and the stock of switches
not-ably di-min-ished. Then the or-der fol-lowed:

“Now, sir, go and sit with the girls! And let this be a warn-ing to you.”

The tit-ter that rippled around the room ap-peared to abash the boy, but
in real-ity that res-ult was caused rather more by his wor-ship-ful awe
of his un-known idol and the dread pleas-ure that lay in his high good
for-tune. He sat down upon the end of the pine bench and the girl hitched
her-self away from him with a toss of her head. Nudges and winks and
whis-pers tra-versed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon the
long, low desk be-fore him, and seemed to study his book.

By and by at-ten-tion ceased from him, and the ac-cus-tomed school mur-mur
rose upon the dull air once more. Presently the boy began to steal
furt-ive glances at the girl. She ob-served it, “made a mouth” at him
and gave him the back of her head for the space of a minute. When she
cau-tiously faced around again, a peach lay be-fore her. She thrust it
away. Tom gently put it back. She thrust it away again, but with less
an-im-os-ity. Tom pa-tiently re-turned it to its place. Then she let it
re-main. Tom scrawled on his slate, “Please take it--I got more.” The
girl glanced at the words, but made no sign. Now the boy began to draw
some-thing on the slate, hid-ing his work with his left hand. For a time
the girl re-fused to no-tice; but her hu-man curi-os-ity presently began
to mani-fest it-self by hardly per-cept-ible signs. The boy worked on,
ap-par-ently un-con-scious. The girl made a sort of non-com-mit-tal at-tempt
to see, but the boy did not be-tray that he was aware of it. At last she
gave in and hes-it-at-ingly whispered:

“Let me see it.”

Tom partly un-covered a dis-mal ca-ri-ca-ture of a house with two gable ends
to it and a cork-screw of smoke is-su-ing from the chim-ney. Then the girl's
in-terest began to fasten it-self upon the work and she for-got everything
else. When it was fin-ished, she gazed a mo-ment, then whispered:

“It's nice--make a man.”

The artist erec-ted a man in the front yard, that re-sembled a der-rick. He
could have stepped over the house; but the girl was not hy-per-crit-ical;
she was sat-is-fied with the mon-ster, and whispered:

“It's a beau-ti-ful man--now make me com-ing along.”

Tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw limbs to it and armed
the spread-ing fin-gers with a portent-ous fan. The girl said:

“It's ever so nice--I wish I could draw.”

“It's easy,” whispered Tom, “I'll learn you.”

“Oh, will you? When?”

“At noon. Do you go home to din-ner?”

“I'll stay if you will.”

“Good--that's a whack. What's your name?”

“Becky Thatcher. What's yours? Oh, I know. It's Tho-mas Saw-yer.”

“That's the name they lick me by. I'm Tom when I'm good. You call me
Tom, will you?”

“Yes.”

Now Tom began to scrawl some-thing on the slate, hid-ing the words from
the girl. But she was not back-ward this time. She begged to see. Tom
said:

“Oh, it ain't any-thing.”

“Yes it is.”

“No it ain't. You don't want to see.”

“Yes I do, in-deed I do. Please let me.”

“You'll tell.”

“No I won't--deed and deed and double deed won't.”

“You won't tell any-body at all? Ever, as long as you live?”

“No, I won't ever tell _any_body. Now let me.”

“Oh, _y-ou_ don't want to see!”

“Now that you treat me so, I _will_ see.” And she put her small hand
upon his and a little scuffle en-sued, Tom pre-tend-ing to res-ist in
earn-est but let-ting his hand slip by de-grees till these words were
re-vealed: “_I love you_.”

“Oh, you bad thing!” And she hit his hand a smart rap, but reddened and
looked pleased, nev-er-the-less.

Just at this junc-ture the boy felt a slow, fate-ful grip clos-ing on his
ear, and a steady lift-ing im-pulse. In that wise he was borne across the
house and de-pos-ited in his own seat, un-der a pep-per-ing fire of giggles
from the whole school. Then the mas-ter stood over him dur-ing a few aw-ful
mo-ments, and fi-nally moved away to his throne without say-ing a word. But
al-though Tom's ear tingled, his heart was ju-bil-ant.

As the school quieted down Tom made an hon-est ef-fort to study, but
the tur-moil within him was too great. In turn he took his place in the
read-ing class and made a botch of it; then in the geo-graphy class and
turned lakes into moun-tains, moun-tains into rivers, and rivers into
con-tin-ents, till chaos was come again; then in the spelling class, and
got “turned down,” by a suc-ces-sion of mere baby words, till he brought
up at the foot and yiel-ded up the pew-ter medal which he had worn with
os-ten-ta-tion for months.




CHAPTER VII

THE harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more his ideas
wandered. So at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he gave it up. It seemed
to him that the noon re-cess would never come. The air was ut-terly dead.
There was not a breath stir-ring. It was the sleepi-est of sleepy days.
The drows-ing mur-mur of the five and twenty study-ing schol-ars soothed
the soul like the spell that is in the mur-mur of bees. Away off in the
flam-ing sun-shine, Cardiff Hill lif-ted its soft green sides through a
shim-mer-ing veil of heat, tin-ted with the purple of dis-tance; a few birds
floated on lazy wing high in the air; no other liv-ing thing was vis-ible
but some cows, and they were asleep. Tom's heart ached to be free, or
else to have some-thing of in-terest to do to pass the dreary time.
His hand wandered into his pocket and his face lit up with a glow of
grat-it-ude that was prayer, though he did not know it. Then furt-ively
the per-cus-sion-cap box came out. He re-leased the tick and put him on
the long flat desk. The creature prob-ably glowed with a grat-it-ude that
amoun-ted to prayer, too, at this mo-ment, but it was pre-ma-ture: for when
he star-ted thank-fully to travel off, Tom turned him aside with a pin and
made him take a new dir-ec-tion.

Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suf-fer-ing just as Tom had been, and
now he was deeply and grate-fully in-ter-ested in this en-ter-tain-ment in
an in-stant. This bosom friend was Joe Harper. The two boys were sworn
friends all the week, and em-battled en-emies on Saturdays. Joe took a
pin out of his lapel and began to as-sist in ex-er-cising the pris-oner.
The sport grew in in-terest mo-mently. Soon Tom said that they were
in-ter-fer-ing with each other, and neither get-ting the fullest be-ne-fit
of the tick. So he put Joe's slate on the desk and drew a line down the
middle of it from top to bot-tom.

“Now,” said he, “as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and
I'll let him alone; but if you let him get away and get on my side,
you're to leave him alone as long as I can keep him from cross-ing over.”

“All right, go ahead; start him up.”

The tick es-caped from Tom, presently, and crossed the equator. Joe
har-assed him awhile, and then he got away and crossed back again. This
change of base oc-curred of-ten. While one boy was wor-ry-ing the tick with
ab-sorb-ing in-terest, the other would look on with in-terest as strong, the
two heads bowed to-gether over the slate, and the two souls dead to all
things else. At last luck seemed to settle and abide with Joe. The
tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as ex-cited and as
anxious as the boys them-selves, but time and again just as he would
have vic-tory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fin-gers would
be twitch-ing to be-gin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off, and keep
pos-ses-sion. At last Tom could stand it no longer. The tempta-tion was too
strong. So he reached out and lent a hand with his pin. Joe was angry in
a mo-ment. Said he:

“Tom, you let him alone.”

“I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe.”

“No, sir, it ain't fair; you just let him alone.”

“Blame it, I ain't go-ing to stir him much.”

“Let him alone, I tell you.”

“I won't!”

“You shall--he's on my side of the line.”

“Look here, Joe Harper, whose is that tick?”

“I don't care whose tick he is--he's on my side of the line, and you
sha'n't touch him.”

“Well, I'll just bet I will, though. He's my tick and I'll do what I
blame please with him, or die!”

A tre-mend-ous whack came down on Tom's shoulders, and its du-plic-ate on
Joe's; and for the space of two minutes the dust con-tin-ued to fly from
the two jack-ets and the whole school to en-joy it. The boys had been
too ab-sorbed to no-tice the hush that had stolen upon the school awhile
be-fore when the mas-ter came tip-toe-ing down the room and stood over them.
He had con-tem-plated a good part of the per-form-ance be-fore he con-trib-uted
his bit of vari-ety to it.

When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and whispered
in her ear:

“Put on your bon-net and let on you're go-ing home; and when you get to
the corner, give the rest of 'em the slip, and turn down through the
lane and come back. I'll go the other way and come it over 'em the same
way.”

So the one went off with one group of schol-ars, and the other with
an-other. In a little while the two met at the bot-tom of the lane, and
when they reached the school they had it all to them-selves. Then they
sat to-gether, with a slate be-fore them, and Tom gave Becky the pen-cil
and held her hand in his, guid-ing it, and so cre-ated an-other sur-pris-ing
house. When the in-terest in art began to wane, the two fell to talk-ing.
Tom was swim-ming in bliss. He said:

“Do you love rats?”

“No! I hate them!”

“Well, I do, too--_live_ ones. But I mean dead ones, to swing round your
head with a string.”

“No, I don't care for rats much, any-way. What I like is chew-ing-gum.”

“Oh, I should say so! I wish I had some now.”

“Do you? I've got some. I'll let you chew it awhile, but you must give
it back to me.”

That was agree-able, so they chewed it turn about, and dangled their legs
against the bench in ex-cess of con-tent-ment.

“Was you ever at a cir-cus?” said Tom.

“Yes, and my pa's go-ing to take me again some time, if I'm good.”

“I been to the cir-cus three or four times--lots of times. Church ain't
shucks to a cir-cus. There's things go-ing on at a cir-cus all the time.
I'm go-ing to be a clown in a cir-cus when I grow up.”

“Oh, are you! That will be nice. They're so lovely, all spot-ted up.”

“Yes, that's so. And they get slath-ers of money--most a dol-lar a day, Ben
Ro-gers says. Say, Becky, was you ever en-gaged?”

“What's that?”

“Why, en-gaged to be mar-ried.”

“No.”

“Would you like to?”

“I reckon so. I don't know. What is it like?”

“Like? Why it ain't like any-thing. You only just tell a boy you won't
ever have any-body but him, ever ever ever, and then you kiss and that's
all. Anybody can do it.”

“Kiss? What do you kiss for?”

“Why, that, you know, is to--well, they al-ways do that.”

“Every-body?”

“Why, yes, every-body that's in love with each other. Do you re-mem-ber
what I wrote on the slate?”

“Ye--yes.”

“What was it?”

“I sha'n't tell you.”

“Shall I tell _y-ou_?”

“Ye--yes--but some other time.”

“No, now.”

“No, not now--to-mor-row.”

“Oh, no, _now_. Please, Becky--I'll whis-per it, I'll whis-per it ever so
easy.”

Becky hes-it-at-ing, Tom took si-lence for con-sent, and passed his arm about
her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly, with his mouth close to
her ear. And then he ad-ded:

“Now you whis-per it to me--just the same.”

She res-isted, for a while, and then said:

“You turn your face away so you can't see, and then I will. But you
mustn't ever tell any-body--_will_ you, Tom? Now you won't, _will_ you?”

“No, in-deed, in-deed I won't. Now, Becky.”

He turned his face away. She bent tim-idly around till her breath stirred
his curls and whispered, “I--love--you!”

Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches,
with Tom after her, and took refuge in a corner at last, with her little
white ap-ron to her face. Tom clasped her about her neck and pleaded:

“Now, Becky, it's all done--all over but the kiss. Don't you be afraid
of that--it ain't any-thing at all. Please, Becky.” And he tugged at her
ap-ron and the hands.

By and by she gave up, and let her hands drop; her face, all glow-ing
with the struggle, came up and sub-mit-ted. Tom kissed the red lips and
said:

“Now it's all done, Becky. And al-ways after this, you know, you ain't
ever to love any-body but me, and you ain't ever to marry any-body but me,
ever never and forever. Will you?”

“No, I'll never love any-body but you, Tom, and I'll never marry any-body
but you--and you ain't to ever marry any-body but me, either.”

“Cer-tainly. Of course. That's _part_ of it. And al-ways com-ing to school
or when we're go-ing home, you're to walk with me, when there ain't
any-body look-ing--and you choose me and I choose you at parties, be-cause
that's the way you do when you're en-gaged.”

“It's so nice. I never heard of it be-fore.”

“Oh, it's ever so gay! Why, me and Amy Lawrence--”

The big eyes told Tom his blun-der and he stopped, con-fused.

“Oh, Tom! Then I ain't the first you've ever been en-gaged to!”

The child began to cry. Tom said:

“Oh, don't cry, Becky, I don't care for her any more.”

“Yes, you do, Tom--you know you do.”

Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and
turned her face to the wall, and went on cry-ing. Tom tried again, with
sooth-ing words in his mouth, and was re-pulsed again. Then his pride was
up, and he strode away and went out-side. He stood about, rest-less and
un-easy, for a while, glan-cing at the door, every now and then, hop-ing
she would re-pent and come to find him. But she did not. Then he began
to feel badly and fear that he was in the wrong. It was a hard struggle
with him to make new ad-vances, now, but he nerved him-self to it and
entered. She was still stand-ing back there in the corner, sob-bing, with
her face to the wall. Tom's heart smote him. He went to her and stood a
mo-ment, not know-ing ex-actly how to pro-ceed. Then he said hes-it-at-ingly:

“Becky, I--I don't care for any-body but you.”

No reply--but sobs.

“Becky”--plead-ingly. “Becky, won't you say some-thing?”

More sobs.

Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of an and-iron,
and passed it around her so that she could see it, and said:

“Please, Becky, won't you take it?”

She struck it to the floor. Then Tom marched out of the house and over
the hills and far away, to re-turn to school no more that day. Presently
Becky began to sus-pect. She ran to the door; he was not in sight; she
flew around to the play-yard; he was not there. Then she called:

“Tom! Come back, Tom!”

She listened in-tently, but there was no an-swer. She had no com-pan-ions
but si-lence and loneli-ness. So she sat down to cry again and up-braid
her-self; and by this time the schol-ars began to gather again, and she
had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart and take up the cross
of a long, dreary, aching af-ter-noon, with none among the strangers about
her to ex-change sor-rows with.




CHAPTER VIII

TOM dodged hither and thither through lanes un-til he was well out of the
track of re-turn-ing schol-ars, and then fell into a moody jog. He crossed
a small “branch” two or three times, be-cause of a pre-vail-ing ju-ven-ile
su-per-sti-tion that to cross wa-ter baffled pur-suit. Half an hour later
he was dis-ap-pear-ing be-hind the Douglas man-sion on the sum-mit of Cardiff
Hill, and the school-house was hardly dis-tin-guish-able away off in the
val-ley be-hind him. He entered a dense wood, picked his path-less way to
the centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot un-der a spread-ing oak.
There was not even a zephyr stir-ring; the dead noonday heat had even
stilled the songs of the birds; nature lay in a trance that was broken
by no sound but the oc-ca-sional far-off ham-mer-ing of a wood-pecker, and
this seemed to render the per-vad-ing si-lence and sense of loneli-ness the
more pro-found. The boy's soul was steeped in mel-an-choly; his feel-ings
were in happy ac-cord with his sur-round-ings. He sat long with his el-bows
on his knees and his chin in his hands, med-it-at-ing. It seemed to him
that life was but a trouble, at best, and he more than half en-vied Jimmy
Hodges, so lately re-leased; it must be very peace-ful, he thought, to lie
and slum-ber and dream forever and ever, with the wind whis-per-ing through
the trees and caress-ing the grass and the flowers over the grave, and
noth-ing to bother and grieve about, ever any more. If he only had a
clean Sunday-school re-cord he could be will-ing to go, and be done with
it all. Now as to this girl. What had he done? Noth-ing. He had meant
the best in the world, and been treated like a dog--like a very dog. She
would be sorry some day--maybe when it was too late. Ah, if he could only
die _tem-por-ar-ily_!

But the elastic heart of youth can-not be com-pressed into one con-strained
shape long at a time. Tom presently began to drift in-sens-ibly back into
the con-cerns of this life again. What if he turned his back, now, and
dis-ap-peared mys-ter-i-ously? What if he went away--ever so far away, into
un-known coun-tries bey-ond the seas--and never came back any more! How
would she feel then! The idea of be-ing a clown re-curred to him now, only
to fill him with dis-gust. For frivolity and jokes and spot-ted tights
were an of-fense, when they in-truded them-selves upon a spirit that was
ex-al-ted into the vague au-gust realm of the ro-mantic. No, he would be
a sol-dier, and re-turn after long years, all war-worn and il-lus-tri-ous.
No--bet-ter still, he would join the In-di-ans, and hunt buf-fa-loes and go on
the warpath in the moun-tain ranges and the track-less great plains of the
Far West, and away in the fu-ture come back a great chief, brist-ling with
feath-ers, hideous with paint, and prance into Sunday-school, some drowsy
sum-mer morn-ing, with a blood-curd-ling war-whoop, and sear the eye-balls
of all his com-pan-ions with un-ap-peas-able envy. But no, there was
some-thing gaud-ier even than this. He would be a pir-ate! That was it!
_now_ his fu-ture lay plain be-fore him, and glow-ing with un-ima-gin-able
splendor. How his name would fill the world, and make people shud-der!
How glor-i-ously he would go plow-ing the dan-cing seas, in his long, low,
black-hulled racer, the Spirit of the Storm, with his grisly flag fly-ing
at the fore! And at the zenith of his fame, how he would sud-denly ap-pear
at the old vil-lage and stalk into church, brown and weather-beaten, in
his black vel-vet doublet and trunks, his great jack-boots, his crim-son
sash, his belt brist-ling with horse-pis-tols, his crime-rus-ted cut-lass
at his side, his slouch hat with wav-ing plumes, his black flag un-furled,
with the skull and cross-bones on it, and hear with swell-ing ec-stasy
the whis-per-ings, “It's Tom Saw-yer the Pir-ate!--the Black Avenger of the
Span-ish Main!”

Yes, it was settled; his ca-reer was de-term-ined. He would run away from
home and enter upon it. He would start the very next morn-ing. There-fore
he must now be-gin to get ready. He would col-lect his re-sources to-gether.
He went to a rot-ten log near at hand and began to dig un-der one end of
it with his Bar-low knife. He soon struck wood that soun-ded hol-low. He
put his hand there and uttered this in-cant-a-tion im-press-ively:

“What hasn't come here, come! What's here, stay here!”

Then he scraped away the dirt, and ex-posed a pine shingle. He took it
up and dis-closed a shapely little treas-ure-house whose bot-tom and sides
were of shingles. In it lay a marble. Tom's as-ton-ish-ment was bound-less!
He scratched his head with a per-plexed air, and said:

“Well, that beats any-thing!”

Then he tossed the marble away pet-tishly, and stood co-git-at-ing. The
truth was, that a su-per-sti-tion of his had failed, here, which he and
all his com-rades had al-ways looked upon as in-fal-lible. If you bur-ied
a marble with cer-tain ne-ces-sary in-cant-a-tions, and left it alone a
fort-night, and then opened the place with the in-cant-a-tion he had just
used, you would find that all the marbles you had ever lost had gathered
them-selves to-gether there, mean-time, no mat-ter how widely they had been
sep-ar-ated. But now, this thing had ac-tu-ally and un-ques-tion-ably failed.
Tom's whole struc-ture of faith was shaken to its found-a-tions. He had
many a time heard of this thing suc-ceed-ing but never of its fail-ing
be-fore. It did not oc-cur to him that he had tried it sev-eral times
be-fore, him-self, but could never find the hid-ing-places af-ter-ward. He
puzzled over the mat-ter some time, and fi-nally de-cided that some witch
had in-terfered and broken the charm. He thought he would sat-isfy him-self
on that point; so he searched around till he found a small sandy spot
with a little fun-nel-shaped de-pres-sion in it. He laid him-self down and
put his mouth close to this de-pres-sion and called--

“Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know! Doodle-bug,
doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know!”

The sand began to work, and presently a small black bug ap-peared for a
second and then dar-ted un-der again in a fright.

“He dasn't tell! So it _was_ a witch that done it. I just knowed it.”

He well knew the fu-til-ity of try-ing to con-tend against witches, so he
gave up dis-cour-aged. But it oc-curred to him that he might as well have
the marble he had just thrown away, and there-fore he went and made a
pa-tient search for it. But he could not find it. Now he went back to his
treas-ure-house and care-fully placed him-self just as he had been stand-ing
when he tossed the marble away; then he took an-other marble from his
pocket and tossed it in the same way, say-ing:

“Brother, go find your brother!”

He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked. But it must
have fallen short or gone too far; so he tried twice more. The last
re-pe-ti-tion was suc-cess-ful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each
other.

Just here the blast of a toy tin trum-pet came faintly down the green
aisles of the forest. Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned
a sus-pender into a belt, raked away some brush be-hind the rot-ten log,
dis-clos-ing a rude bow and ar-row, a lath sword and a tin trum-pet, and
in a mo-ment had seized these things and bounded away, bare-legged,
with flut-ter-ing shirt. He presently hal-ted un-der a great elm, blew an
an-swer-ing blast, and then began to tip-toe and look war-ily out, this way
and that. He said cau-tiously--to an ima-gin-ary com-pany:

“Hold, my merry men! Keep hid till I blow.”

Now ap-peared Joe Harper, as air-ily clad and elab-or-ately armed as Tom.
Tom called:

“Hold! Who comes here into Sher-wood Forest without my pass?”

“Guy of Guis-borne wants no man's pass. Who art thou that--that--”

“Dares to hold such lan-guage,” said Tom, prompt-ing--for they talked “by
the book,” from memory.

“Who art thou that dares to hold such lan-guage?”

“I, in-deed! I am Robin Hood, as thy caitiff car-case soon shall know.”

“Then art thou in-deed that fam-ous out-law? Right gladly will I dis-pute
with thee the passes of the merry wood. Have at thee!”

They took their lath swords, dumped their other traps on the ground,
struck a fen-cing at-ti-tude, foot to foot, and began a grave, care-ful
com-bat, “two up and two down.” Presently Tom said:

“Now, if you've got the hang, go it lively!”

So they “went it lively,” pant-ing and per-spir-ing with the work. By and
by Tom shouted:

“Fall! fall! Why don't you fall?”

“I sha'n't! Why don't you fall your-self? You're get-ting the worst of
it.”

“Why, that ain't any-thing. I can't fall; that ain't the way it is in the
book. The book says, 'Then with one back-handed stroke he slew poor Guy
of Guis-borne.' You're to turn around and let me hit you in the back.”

There was no get-ting around the au-thor-it-ies, so Joe turned, re-ceived the
whack and fell.

“Now,” said Joe, get-ting up, “you got to let me kill _y-ou_. That's
fair.”

“Why, I can't do that, it ain't in the book.”

“Well, it's blamed mean--that's all.”

“Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much the miller's son, and lam
me with a quarter-staff; or I'll be the Sher-iff of Not-ting-ham and you be
Robin Hood a little while and kill me.”

This was sat-is-fact-ory, and so these ad-ven-tures were car-ried out. Then
Tom be-came Robin Hood again, and was al-lowed by the treach-er-ous nun to
bleed his strength away through his neg-lected wound. And at last Joe,
rep-res-ent-ing a whole tribe of weep-ing out-laws, dragged him sadly forth,
gave his bow into his feeble hands, and Tom said, “Where this ar-row
falls, there bury poor Robin Hood un-der the green-wood tree.” Then he
shot the ar-row and fell back and would have died, but he lit on a nettle
and sprang up too gaily for a corpse.

The boys dressed them-selves, hid their ac-coutre-ments, and went off
griev-ing that there were no out-laws any more, and won-der-ing what mod-ern
civil-iz-a-tion could claim to have done to com-pensate for their loss.
They said they would rather be out-laws a year in Sher-wood Forest than
Pres-id-ent of the Un-ited States forever.




CHAPTER IX

AT half-past nine, that night, Tom and Sid were sent to bed, as usual.
They said their pray-ers, and Sid was soon asleep. Tom lay awake and
waited, in rest-less im-pa-tience. When it seemed to him that it must be
nearly day-light, he heard the clock strike ten! This was des-pair. He
would have tossed and fid-geted, as his nerves de-man-ded, but he was
afraid he might wake Sid. So he lay still, and stared up into the dark.
Everything was dis-mally still. By and by, out of the still-ness, little,
scarcely per-cept-ible noises began to em-phas-ize them-selves. The tick-ing
of the clock began to bring it-self into no-tice. Old beams began to crack
mys-ter-i-ously. The stairs creaked faintly. Evidently spir-its were abroad.
A meas-ured, muffled snore is-sued from Aunt Polly's cham-ber. And now the
tire-some chirp-ing of a cricket that no hu-man in-genu-ity could loc-ate,
began. Next the ghastly tick-ing of a death-watch in the wall at the
bed's head made Tom shud-der--it meant that some-body's days were numbered.
Then the howl of a far-off dog rose on the night air, and was answered
by a fainter howl from a re-moter dis-tance. Tom was in an agony. At last
he was sat-is-fied that time had ceased and etern-ity be-gun; he began to
doze, in spite of him-self; the clock chimed el-even, but he did not hear
it. And then there came, ming-ling with his half-formed dreams, a most
mel-an-choly cat-er-waul-ing. The rais-ing of a neigh-bor-ing win-dow dis-turbed
him. A cry of “Scat! you devil!” and the crash of an empty bottle
against the back of his aunt's wood-shed brought him wide awake, and a
single minute later he was dressed and out of the win-dow and creep-ing
along the roof of the “ell” on all fours. He “meow'd” with cau-tion once
or twice, as he went; then jumped to the roof of the wood-shed and thence
to the ground. Huckle-berry Finn was there, with his dead cat. The boys
moved off and dis-ap-peared in the gloom. At the end of half an hour they
were wad-ing through the tall grass of the grave-yard.

It was a grave-yard of the old-fash-ioned Western kind. It was on a hill,
about a mile and a half from the vil-lage. It had a crazy board fence
around it, which leaned in-ward in places, and out-ward the rest of the
time, but stood up-right nowhere. Grass and weeds grew rank over the
whole cemetery. All the old graves were sunken in, there was not a
tomb-stone on the place; round-topped, worm-eaten boards staggered over
the graves, lean-ing for sup-port and find-ing none. “Sacred to the memory
of” So-and-So had been painted on them once, but it could no longer have
been read, on the most of them, now, even if there had been light.

A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it might be the
spir-its of the dead, com-plain-ing at be-ing dis-turbed. The boys talked
little, and only un-der their breath, for the time and the place and the
per-vad-ing solem-nity and si-lence op-pressed their spir-its. They found the
sharp new heap they were seek-ing, and en-sconced them-selves within the
pro-tec-tion of three great elms that grew in a bunch within a few feet of
the grave.

Then they waited in si-lence for what seemed a long time. The hoot-ing of
a dis-tant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead still-ness. Tom's
re-flec-tions grew op-press-ive. He must force some talk. So he said in a
whis-per:

“Hucky, do you be-lieve the dead people like it for us to be here?”

Huckle-berry whispered:

“I wisht I knowed. It's aw-ful sol-emn like, _ain't_ it?”

“I bet it is.”

There was a con-sid-er-able pause, while the boys can-vassed this mat-ter
in-wardly. Then Tom whispered:

“Say, Hucky--do you reckon Hoss Wil-li-ams hears us talk-ing?”

“O' course he does. Least his sper-rit does.”

Tom, after a pause:

“I wish I'd said Mister Wil-li-ams. But I never meant any harm. Every-body
calls him Hoss.”

“A body can't be too par-tic'lar how they talk 'bout these-yer dead
people, Tom.”

This was a damper, and con-ver-sa-tion died again.

Presently Tom seized his com-rade's arm and said:

“Sh!”

“What is it, Tom?” And the two clung to-gether with beat-ing hearts.

“Sh! There 'tis again! Didn't you hear it?”

“I--”

“There! Now you hear it.”

“Lord, Tom, they're com-ing! They're com-ing, sure. What'll we do?”

“I dono. Think they'll see us?”

“Oh, Tom, they can see in the dark, same as cats. I wisht I hadn't
come.”

“Oh, don't be afeard. I don't be-lieve they'll bother us. We ain't do-ing
any harm. If we keep per-fectly still, maybe they won't no-tice us at
all.”

“I'll try to, Tom, but, Lord, I'm all of a shiver.”

“Listen!”

The boys bent their heads to-gether and scarcely breathed. A muffled
sound of voices floated up from the far end of the grave-yard.

“Look! See there!” whispered Tom. “What is it?”

“It's devil-fire. Oh, Tom, this is aw-ful.”

Some vague fig-ures ap-proached through the gloom, swinging an
old-fash-ioned tin lan-tern that freckled the ground with in-nu-mer-able
little spangles of light. Presently Huckle-berry whispered with a
shud-der:

“It's the dev-ils sure enough. Three of 'em! Lordy, Tom, we're gon-ers!
Can you pray?”

“I'll try, but don't you be afeard. They ain't go-ing to hurt us. 'Now I
lay me down to sleep, I--'”

“Sh!”

“What is it, Huck?”

“They're _hu-mans_! One of 'em is, any-way. One of 'em's old Muff Pot-ter's
voice.”

“No--'tain't so, is it?”

“I bet I know it. Don't you stir nor budge. He ain't sharp enough to
no-tice us. Drunk, the same as usual, likely--blamed old rip!”

“All right, I'll keep still. Now they're stuck. Can't find it. Here they
come again. Now they're hot. Cold again. Hot again. Red hot! They're
p'in-ted right, this time. Say, Huck, I know an-other o' them voices; it's
In-jun Joe.”

“That's so--that mur-derin' half-breed! I'd druther they was dev-ils a dern
sight. What kin they be up to?”

The whis-per died wholly out, now, for the three men had reached the
grave and stood within a few feet of the boys' hid-ing-place.

“Here it is,” said the third voice; and the owner of it held the lan-tern
up and re-vealed the face of young Doc-tor Robin-son.

Pot-ter and In-jun Joe were car-ry-ing a hand-bar-row with a rope and a couple
of shovels on it. They cast down their load and began to open the grave.
The doc-tor put the lan-tern at the head of the grave and came and sat
down with his back against one of the elm trees. He was so close the
boys could have touched him.

“Hurry, men!” he said, in a low voice; “the moon might come out at any
mo-ment.”

They growled a re-sponse and went on dig-ging. For some time there was no
noise but the grat-ing sound of the spades dis-char-ging their freight of
mould and gravel. It was very mono-ton-ous. Fin-ally a spade struck upon
the coffin with a dull woody ac-cent, and within an-other minute or two
the men had hois-ted it out on the ground. They pried off the lid with
their shovels, got out the body and dumped it rudely on the ground. The
moon drif-ted from be-hind the clouds and ex-posed the pal-lid face.
The bar-row was got ready and the corpse placed on it, covered with a
blanket, and bound to its place with the rope. Pot-ter took out a large
spring-knife and cut off the dangling end of the rope and then said:

“Now the cussed thing's ready, Sawbones, and you'll just out with
an-other five, or here she stays.”

“That's the talk!” said In-jun Joe.

“Look here, what does this mean?” said the doc-tor. “You re-quired your
pay in ad-vance, and I've paid you.”

“Yes, and you done more than that,” said In-jun Joe, ap-proach-ing the
doc-tor, who was now stand-ing. “Five years ago you drove me away from
your father's kit-chen one night, when I come to ask for some-thing to
eat, and you said I warn't there for any good; and when I swore I'd get
even with you if it took a hun-dred years, your father had me jailed for
a vag-rant. Did you think I'd for-get? The In-jun blood ain't in me for
noth-ing. And now I've _got_ you, and you got to _settle_, you know!”

He was threat-en-ing the doc-tor, with his fist in his face, by this time.
The doc-tor struck out sud-denly and stretched the ruf-fian on the ground.
Pot-ter dropped his knife, and ex-claimed:

“Here, now, don't you hit my pard!” and the next mo-ment he had grappled
with the doc-tor and the two were strug-gling with might and main,
tramp-ling the grass and tear-ing the ground with their heels. In-jun Joe
sprang to his feet, his eyes flam-ing with pas-sion, snatched up Pot-ter's
knife, and went creep-ing, cat-like and stoop-ing, round and round about
the com-batants, seek-ing an op-por-tun-ity. All at once the doc-tor flung
him-self free, seized the heavy head-board of Wil-li-ams' grave and felled
Pot-ter to the earth with it--and in the same in-stant the half-breed saw
his chance and drove the knife to the hilt in the young man's breast. He
reeled and fell partly upon Pot-ter, flood-ing him with his blood, and in
the same mo-ment the clouds blot-ted out the dread-ful spec-tacle and the
two frightened boys went speed-ing away in the dark.

Presently, when the moon emerged again, In-jun Joe was stand-ing over the
two forms, con-tem-plat-ing them. The doc-tor mur-mured in-ar-tic-u-lately, gave
a long gasp or two and was still. The half-breed muttered:

“_That_ score is settled--damn you.”

Then he robbed the body. After which he put the fatal knife in Pot-ter's
open right hand, and sat down on the dis-mantled coffin. Three--four--five
minutes passed, and then Pot-ter began to stir and moan. His hand closed
upon the knife; he raised it, glanced at it, and let it fall, with a
shud-der. Then he sat up, push-ing the body from him, and gazed at it, and
then around him, con-fusedly. His eyes met Joe's.

“Lord, how is this, Joe?” he said.

“It's a dirty busi-ness,” said Joe, without mov-ing.

“What did you do it for?”

“I! I never done it!”

“Look here! That kind of talk won't wash.”

Pot-ter trembled and grew white.

“I thought I'd got sober. I'd no busi-ness to drink to-night. But it's
in my head yet--worse'n when we star-ted here. I'm all in a muddle;
can't re-col-lect any-thing of it, hardly. Tell me, Joe--_hon-est_, now,
old feller--did I do it? Joe, I never meant to--'pon my soul and honor, I
never meant to, Joe. Tell me how it was, Joe. Oh, it's aw-ful--and him so
young and prom-ising.”

“Why, you two was scuff-ling, and he fetched you one with the head-board
and you fell flat; and then up you come, all reel-ing and stag-ger-ing
like, and snatched the knife and jammed it into him, just as he fetched
you an-other aw-ful clip--and here you've laid, as dead as a wedge til
now.”

“Oh, I didn't know what I was a-do-ing. I wish I may die this minute if I
did. It was all on ac-count of the whis-key and the ex-cite-ment, I reckon.
I never used a wee-pon in my life be-fore, Joe. I've fought, but never
with wee-pons. They'll all say that. Joe, don't tell! Say you won't tell,
Joe--that's a good feller. I al-ways liked you, Joe, and stood up for you,
too. Don't you re-mem-ber? You _won't_ tell, _will_ you, Joe?” And the
poor creature dropped on his knees be-fore the stolid mur-derer, and
clasped his ap-peal-ing hands.

“No, you've al-ways been fair and square with me, Muff Pot-ter, and I
won't go back on you. There, now, that's as fair as a man can say.”

“Oh, Joe, you're an an-gel. I'll bless you for this the longest day I
live.” And Pot-ter began to cry.

“Come, now, that's enough of that. This ain't any time for blub-ber-ing.
You be off yon-der way and I'll go this. Move, now, and don't leave any
tracks be-hind you.”

Pot-ter star-ted on a trot that quickly in-creased to a run. The half-breed
stood look-ing after him. He muttered:

“If he's as much stunned with the lick and fuddled with the rum as he
had the look of be-ing, he won't think of the knife till he's gone so
far he'll be afraid to come back after it to such a place by
him-self--chicken-heart!”

Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the blanketed corpse, the
lid-less coffin, and the open grave were un-der no in-spec-tion but the
moon's. The still-ness was com-plete again, too.




CHAPTER X

THE two boys flew on and on, to-ward the vil-lage, speech-less with
hor-ror. They glanced back-ward over their shoulders from time to time,
ap-pre-hens-ively, as if they feared they might be fol-lowed. Every stump
that star-ted up in their path seemed a man and an en-emy, and made them
catch their breath; and as they sped by some outly-ing cot-tages that lay
near the vil-lage, the bark-ing of the aroused watch-dogs seemed to give
wings to their feet.

“If we can only get to the old tan-nery be-fore we break down!” whispered
Tom, in short catches between breaths. “I can't stand it much longer.”

Huckle-berry's hard pant-ings were his only reply, and the boys fixed
their eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work to win it.
They gained stead-ily on it, and at last, breast to breast, they burst
through the open door and fell grate-ful and ex-hausted in the shel-ter-ing
shad-ows bey-ond. By and by their pulses slowed down, and Tom whispered:

“Huckle-berry, what do you reckon'll come of this?”

“If Doc-tor Robin-son dies, I reckon hanging'll come of it.”

“Do you though?”

“Why, I _know_ it, Tom.”

Tom thought a while, then he said:

“Who'll tell? We?”

“What are you talk-ing about? S'pose some-thing happened and In-jun Joe
_didn't_ hang? Why, he'd kill us some time or other, just as dead sure
as we're a lay-ing here.”

“That's just what I was think-ing to my-self, Huck.”

“If any-body tells, let Muff Pot-ter do it, if he's fool enough. He's
gen-er-ally drunk enough.”

Tom said noth-ing--went on think-ing. Presently he whispered:

“Huck, Muff Pot-ter don't know it. How can he tell?”

“What's the reason he don't know it?”

“Be-cause he'd just got that whack when In-jun Joe done it. D'you reckon
he could see any-thing? D'you reckon he knowed any-thing?”

“By hokey, that's so, Tom!”

“And be-sides, look-a-here--maybe that whack done for _him_!”

“No, 'taint likely, Tom. He had li-quor in him; I could see that; and
be-sides, he al-ways has. Well, when pap's full, you might take and belt
him over the head with a church and you couldn't phase him. He says so,
his own self. So it's the same with Muff Pot-ter, of course. But if a man
was dead sober, I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him; I dono.”

After an-other re-flect-ive si-lence, Tom said:

“Hucky, you sure you can keep mum?”

“Tom, we _got_ to keep mum. You know that. That In-jun devil wouldn't
make any more of drownd-ing us than a couple of cats, if we was to squeak
'bout this and they didn't hang him. Now, look-a-here, Tom, less take
and swear to one an-other--that's what we got to do--swear to keep mum.”

“I'm agreed. It's the best thing. Would you just hold hands and swear
that we--”

“Oh no, that wouldn't do for this. That's good enough for little
rub-bishy com-mon things--spe-cially with gals, cuz _they_ go back on you
any-way, and blab if they get in a huff--but there or-ter be writ-ing 'bout
a big thing like this. And blood.”

Tom's whole be-ing ap-plauded this idea. It was deep, and dark, and aw-ful;
the hour, the cir-cum-stances, the sur-round-ings, were in keep-ing with it.
He picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moon-light, took a
little frag-ment of “red keel” out of his pocket, got the moon on
his work, and pain-fully scrawled these lines, em-phas-iz-ing each slow
down-stroke by clamp-ing his tongue between his teeth, and let-ting up the
pres-sure on the up-strokes. [See next page.]

“Huck Finn and Tom Saw-yer swears they will keep mum about This and They
wish They may Drop down dead in Their Tracks if They ever Tell and Rot.”

Huckle-berry was filled with ad-mir-a-tion of Tom's fa-cil-ity in writ-ing, and
the sub-lim-ity of his lan-guage. He at once took a pin from his lapel and
was go-ing to prick his flesh, but Tom said:

“Hold on! Don't do that. A pin's brass. It might have ver-di-grease on
it.”

“What's ver-di-grease?”

“It's p'ison. That's what it is. You just swaller some of it once--you'll
see.”

So Tom un-wound the thread from one of his needles, and each boy pricked
the ball of his thumb and squeezed out a drop of blood. In time, after
many squeezes, Tom man-aged to sign his ini-tials, us-ing the ball of his
little fin-ger for a pen. Then he showed Huckle-berry how to make an H and
an F, and the oath was com-plete. They bur-ied the shingle close to the
wall, with some dis-mal ce-re-mon-ies and in-cant-a-tions, and the fet-ters
that bound their tongues were con-sidered to be locked and the key thrown
away.

A fig-ure crept stealth-ily through a break in the other end of the ruined
build-ing, now, but they did not no-tice it.

“Tom,” whispered Huckle-berry, “does this keep us from _ever_
telling--_al-ways_?”

“Of course it does. It don't make any dif-fer-ence _what_ hap-pens, we got
to keep mum. We'd drop down dead--don't _y-ou_ know that?”

“Yes, I reckon that's so.”

They con-tin-ued to whis-per for some little time. Presently a dog set up
a long, lugubri-ous howl just out-side--within ten feet of them. The boys
clasped each other sud-denly, in an agony of fright.

“Which of us does he mean?” gasped Huckle-berry.

“I dono--peep through the crack. Quick!”

“No, _y-ou_, Tom!”

“I can't--I can't _do_ it, Huck!”

“Please, Tom. There 'tis again!”

“Oh, lordy, I'm thank-ful!” whispered Tom. “I know his voice. It's Bull
Har-bison.” *

[* If Mr. Har-bison owned a slave named Bull, Tom would have spoken of
him as “Har-bison's Bull,” but a son or a dog of that name was “Bull
Har-bison.”]

“Oh, that's good--I tell you, Tom, I was most scared to death; I'd a bet
any-thing it was a _stray_ dog.”

The dog howled again. The boys' hearts sank once more.

“Oh, my! that ain't no Bull Har-bison!” whispered Huckle-berry. “_Do_,
Tom!”

Tom, quak-ing with fear, yiel-ded, and put his eye to the crack. His
whis-per was hardly aud-ible when he said:

“Oh, Huck, _its a stray dog_!”

“Quick, Tom, quick! Who does he mean?”

“Huck, he must mean us both--we're right to-gether.”

“Oh, Tom, I reckon we're gon-ers. I reckon there ain't no mis-take 'bout
where _I'll_ go to. I been so wicked.”

“Dad fetch it! This comes of play-ing hookey and do-ing everything a
feller's told _not_ to do. I might a been good, like Sid, if I'd a
tried--but no, I wouldn't, of course. But if ever I get off this time,
I lay I'll just _wall-er_ in Sunday-schools!” And Tom began to snuffle a
little.

“_You_ bad!” and Huckle-berry began to snuffle too. “Con-sound it, Tom
Saw-yer, you're just old pie, 'long-side o' what I am. Oh, _lordy_,
lordy, lordy, I wisht I only had half your chance.”

Tom choked off and whispered:

“Look, Hucky, look! He's got his _back_ to us!”

Hucky looked, with joy in his heart.

“Well, he has, by jin-goes! Did he be-fore?”

“Yes, he did. But I, like a fool, never thought. Oh, this is bully, you
know. _Now_ who can he mean?”

The howl-ing stopped. Tom pricked up his ears.

“Sh! What's that?” he whispered.

“Sounds like--like hogs grunt-ing. No--it's some-body snor-ing, Tom.”

“That _is_ it! Where 'bouts is it, Huck?”

“I bleeve it's down at 'tother end. Sounds so, any-way. Pap used to sleep
there, some-times, 'long with the hogs, but laws bless you, he just lifts
things when _he_ snores. Besides, I reckon he ain't ever com-ing back to
this town any more.”

The spirit of ad-ven-ture rose in the boys' souls once more.

“Hucky, do you das't to go if I lead?”

“I don't like to, much. Tom, s'pose it's In-jun Joe!”

Tom quailed. But presently the tempta-tion rose up strong again and the
boys agreed to try, with the un-der-stand-ing that they would take to their
heels if the snor-ing stopped. So they went tip-toe-ing stealth-ily down,
the one be-hind the other. When they had got to within five steps of the
snorer, Tom stepped on a stick, and it broke with a sharp snap. The man
moaned, writhed a little, and his face came into the moon-light. It was
Muff Pot-ter. The boys' hearts had stood still, and their hopes too,
when the man moved, but their fears passed away now. They tip-toed out,
through the broken weather-board-ing, and stopped at a little dis-tance
to ex-change a part-ing word. That long, lugubri-ous howl rose on the night
air again! They turned and saw the strange dog stand-ing within a few
feet of where Pot-ter was ly-ing, and _fa-cing_ Pot-ter, with his nose
point-ing heav-en-ward.

“Oh, geem-iny, it's _him_!” ex-claimed both boys, in a breath.

“Say, Tom--they say a stray dog come howl-ing around Johnny Miller's
house, 'bout mid-night, as much as two weeks ago; and a whip-poor-will come
in and lit on the ban-is-ters and sung, the very same even-ing; and there
ain't any-body dead there yet.”

“Well, I know that. And sup-pose there ain't. Didn't Gracie Miller fall
in the kit-chen fire and burn her-self ter-rible the very next Saturday?”

“Yes, but she ain't _dead_. And what's more, she's get-ting bet-ter, too.”

“All right, you wait and see. She's a goner, just as dead sure as Muff
Pot-ter's a goner. That's what the nig-gers say, and they know all about
these kind of things, Huck.”

Then they sep-ar-ated, co-git-at-ing. When Tom crept in at his bed-room win-dow
the night was al-most spent. He un-dressed with ex-cess-ive cau-tion, and
fell asleep con-grat-u-lat-ing him-self that nobody knew of his es-capade. He
was not aware that the gently-snor-ing Sid was awake, and had been so for
an hour.

When Tom awoke, Sid was dressed and gone. There was a late look in the
light, a late sense in the at-mo-sphere. He was startled. Why had he not
been called--per-se-cuted till he was up, as usual? The thought filled
him with bod-ings. Within five minutes he was dressed and down-stairs,
feel-ing sore and drowsy. The fam-ily were still at table, but they had
fin-ished break-fast. There was no voice of re-buke; but there were aver-ted
eyes; there was a si-lence and an air of solem-nity that struck a chill
to the cul-prit's heart. He sat down and tried to seem gay, but it
was up-hill work; it roused no smile, no re-sponse, and he lapsed into
si-lence and let his heart sink down to the depths.

After break-fast his aunt took him aside, and Tom al-most brightened in
the hope that he was go-ing to be flogged; but it was not so. His aunt
wept over him and asked him how he could go and break her old heart so;
and fi-nally told him to go on, and ruin him-self and bring her gray hairs
with sor-row to the grave, for it was no use for her to try any more.
This was worse than a thou-sand whip-pings, and Tom's heart was sorer now
than his body. He cried, he pleaded for for-give-ness, prom-ised to re-form
over and over again, and then re-ceived his dis-missal, feel-ing that
he had won but an im-per-fect for-give-ness and es-tab-lished but a feeble
con-fid-ence.

He left the pres-ence too miser-able to even feel re-venge-ful to-ward
Sid; and so the lat-ter's prompt re-treat through the back gate was
un-ne-ces-sary. He moped to school gloomy and sad, and took his flog-ging,
along with Joe Harper, for play-ing hookey the day be-fore, with the
air of one whose heart was busy with heav-ier woes and wholly dead to
trifles. Then he betook him-self to his seat, res-ted his el-bows on his
desk and his jaws in his hands, and stared at the wall with the stony
stare of suf-fer-ing that has reached the limit and can no fur-ther go.
His el-bow was press-ing against some hard sub-stance. After a long time
he slowly and sadly changed his po-s-i-tion, and took up this ob-ject with
a sigh. It was in a pa-per. He un-rolled it. A long, linger-ing, co-lossal
sigh fol-lowed, and his heart broke. It was his brass and-iron knob!

This fi-nal feather broke the camel's back.




CHAPTER XI

CLOSE upon the hour of noon the whole vil-lage was sud-denly elec-tri-fied
with the ghastly news. No need of the as yet un-dreamed-of tele-graph;
the tale flew from man to man, from group to group, from house to house,
with little less than tele-graphic speed. Of course the school-mas-ter gave
holi-day for that af-ter-noon; the town would have thought strangely of
him if he had not.

A gory knife had been found close to the murdered man, and it had been
re-cog-nized by some-body as be-long-ing to Muff Pot-ter--so the story ran. And
it was said that a be-lated cit-izen had come upon Pot-ter wash-ing him-self
in the “branch” about one or two o'clock in the morn-ing, and that Pot-ter
had at once sneaked off--sus-pi-cious cir-cum-stances, es-pe-cially the wash-ing
which was not a habit with Pot-ter. It was also said that the town had
been ran-sacked for this “mur-derer” (the pub-lic are not slow in the
mat-ter of sift-ing evid-ence and ar-riv-ing at a ver-dict), but that he
could not be found. Horse-men had de-par-ted down all the roads in every
dir-ec-tion, and the Sher-iff “was con-fid-ent” that he would be cap-tured
be-fore night.

All the town was drift-ing to-ward the grave-yard. Tom's heart-break
van-ished and he joined the pro-ces-sion, not be-cause he would not
a thou-sand times rather go any-where else, but be-cause an aw-ful,
un-ac-count-able fas-cin-a-tion drew him on. Ar-rived at the dread-ful place, he
wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dis-mal spec-tacle.
It seemed to him an age since he was there be-fore. Some-body pinched
his arm. He turned, and his eyes met Huckle-berry's. Then both looked
else-where at once, and wondered if any-body had no-ticed any-thing in their
mu-tual glance. But every-body was talk-ing, and in-tent upon the grisly
spec-tacle be-fore them.

“Poor fel-low!” “Poor young fel-low!” “This ought to be a les-son to grave
rob-bers!” “Muff Pot-ter'll hang for this if they catch him!” This was the
drift of re-mark; and the min-is-ter said, “It was a judg-ment; His hand is
here.”

Now Tom shivered from head to heel; for his eye fell upon the stolid
face of In-jun Joe. At this mo-ment the crowd began to sway and struggle,
and voices shouted, “It's him! it's him! he's com-ing him-self!”

“Who? Who?” from twenty voices.

“Muff Pot-ter!”

“Hallo, he's stopped!--Look out, he's turn-ing! Don't let him get away!”

People in the branches of the trees over Tom's head said he wasn't
try-ing to get away--he only looked doubt-ful and per-plexed.

“In-fernal im-pudence!” said a bystander; “wanted to come and take a quiet
look at his work, I reckon--didn't ex-pect any com-pany.”

The crowd fell apart, now, and the Sher-iff came through, os-ten-ta-tiously
lead-ing Pot-ter by the arm. The poor fel-low's face was hag-gard, and
his eyes showed the fear that was upon him. When he stood be-fore the
murdered man, he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face in his hands
and burst into tears.

“I didn't do it, friends,” he sobbed; “'pon my word and honor I never
done it.”

“Who's ac-cused you?” shouted a voice.

This shot seemed to carry home. Pot-ter lif-ted his face and looked around
him with a pathetic hope-less-ness in his eyes. He saw In-jun Joe, and
ex-claimed:

“Oh, In-jun Joe, you prom-ised me you'd never--”

“Is that your knife?” and it was thrust be-fore him by the Sher-iff.

Pot-ter would have fallen if they had not caught him and eased him to the
ground. Then he said:

“So-mething told me 't if I didn't come back and get--” He shuddered; then
waved his nerve-less hand with a van-quished ges-ture and said, “Tell 'em,
Joe, tell 'em--it ain't any use any more.”

Then Huckle-berry and Tom stood dumb and star-ing, and heard the
stony-hearted liar reel off his se-rene state-ment, they ex-pect-ing every
mo-ment that the clear sky would de-liver God's light-nings upon his head,
and won-der-ing to see how long the stroke was delayed. And when he had
fin-ished and still stood alive and whole, their waver-ing im-pulse to
break their oath and save the poor be-trayed pris-oner's life faded and
van-ished away, for plainly this miscre-ant had sold him-self to Satan and
it would be fatal to meddle with the prop-erty of such a power as that.

“Why didn't you leave? What did you want to come here for?” some-body
said.

“I couldn't help it--I couldn't help it,” Pot-ter moaned. “I wanted to
run away, but I couldn't seem to come any-where but here.” And he fell to
sob-bing again.

In-jun Joe re-peated his state-ment, just as calmly, a few minutes
af-ter-ward on the in-quest, un-der oath; and the boys, see-ing that the
light-nings were still with-held, were con-firmed in their be-lief that
Joe had sold him-self to the devil. He was now be-come, to them, the most
bale-fully in-ter-est-ing ob-ject they had ever looked upon, and they could
not take their fas-cin-ated eyes from his face.

They in-wardly re-solved to watch him nights, when op-por-tun-ity should
of-fer, in the hope of get-ting a glimpse of his dread mas-ter.

In-jun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man and put it in
a wagon for re-moval; and it was whispered through the shud-der-ing
crowd that the wound bled a little! The boys thought that this happy
cir-cum-stance would turn sus-pi-cion in the right dir-ec-tion; but they were
dis-ap-poin-ted, for more than one vil-la-ger re-marked:

“It was within three feet of Muff Pot-ter when it done it.”

Tom's fear-ful secret and gnaw-ing con-science dis-turbed his sleep for as
much as a week after this; and at break-fast one morn-ing Sid said:

“Tom, you pitch around and talk in your sleep so much that you keep me
awake half the time.”

Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.

“It's a bad sign,” said Aunt Polly, gravely. “What you got on your mind,
Tom?”

“Noth-ing. Noth-ing 't I know of.” But the boy's hand shook so that he
spilled his cof-fee.

“And you do talk such stuff,” Sid said. “Last night you said, 'It's
blood, it's blood, that's what it is!' You said that over and over.
And you said, 'Don't tor-ment me so--I'll tell!' Tell _what_? What is it
you'll tell?”

Everything was swim-ming be-fore Tom. There is no telling what might have
happened, now, but luck-ily the con-cern passed out of Aunt Polly's face
and she came to Tom's re-lief without know-ing it. She said:

“Sho! It's that dread-ful murder. I dream about it most every night
my-self. So-me-times I dream it's me that done it.”

Mary said she had been af-fected much the same way. Sid seemed sat-is-fied.
Tom got out of the pres-ence as quick as he plaus-ibly could, and after
that he com-plained of toothache for a week, and tied up his jaws every
night. He never knew that Sid lay nightly watch-ing, and fre-quently
slipped the band-age free and then leaned on his el-bow listen-ing a good
while at a time, and af-ter-ward slipped the band-age back to its place
again. Tom's dis-tress of mind wore off gradu-ally and the toothache grew
irk-some and was dis-carded. If Sid really man-aged to make any-thing out of
Tom's dis-join-ted mut-ter-ings, he kept it to him-self.

It seemed to Tom that his school-mates never would get done hold-ing
in-quests on dead cats, and thus keep-ing his trouble present to his mind.
Sid no-ticed that Tom never was cor-oner at one of these in-quir-ies,
though it had been his habit to take the lead in all new en-ter-prises;
he no-ticed, too, that Tom never ac-ted as a wit-ness--and that was strange;
and Sid did not over-look the fact that Tom even showed a marked aver-sion
to these in-quests, and al-ways avoided them when he could. Sid mar-velled,
but said noth-ing. However, even in-quests went out of vogue at last, and
ceased to tor-ture Tom's con-science.

Every day or two, dur-ing this time of sor-row, Tom watched his
op-por-tun-ity and went to the little grated jail-win-dow and smuggled such
small com-forts through to the “mur-derer” as he could get hold of. The
jail was a tri-fling little brick den that stood in a marsh at the edge
of the vil-lage, and no guards were af-forded for it; in-deed, it
was sel-dom oc-cu-pied. These of-fer-ings greatly helped to ease Tom's
con-science.

The vil-la-gers had a strong de-sire to tar-and-feather In-jun Joe and ride
him on a rail, for body-snatch-ing, but so for-mid-able was his char-ac-ter
that nobody could be found who was will-ing to take the lead in the
mat-ter, so it was dropped. He had been care-ful to be-gin both of his
in-quest-state-ments with the fight, without con-fess-ing the grave-rob-bery
that pre-ceded it; there-fore it was deemed wisest not to try the case in
the courts at present.




CHAPTER XII

ONE of the reas-ons why Tom's mind had drif-ted away from its secret
troubles was, that it had found a new and weighty mat-ter to in-terest
it-self about. Becky Thatcher had stopped com-ing to school. Tom had
struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to “whistle her down the
wind,” but failed. He began to find him-self hanging around her father's
house, nights, and feel-ing very miser-able. She was ill. What if she
should die! There was dis-trac-tion in the thought. He no longer took an
in-terest in war, nor even in pir-acy. The charm of life was gone; there
was noth-ing but drear-i-ness left. He put his hoop away, and his bat;
there was no joy in them any more. His aunt was con-cerned. She began to
try all man-ner of rem-ed-ies on him. She was one of those people who
are in-fatu-ated with pat-ent medi-cines and all new-fangled meth-ods of
pro-du-cing health or mend-ing it. She was an in-vet-er-ate ex-per-i-menter in
these things. When some-thing fresh in this line came out she was in a
fever, right away, to try it; not on her-self, for she was never ail-ing,
but on any-body else that came handy. She was a sub-scriber for all the
“Health” peri-od-ic-als and phren-o-lo-gical frauds; and the sol-emn ig-nor-ance
they were in-flated with was breath to her nos-trils. All the “rot” they
con-tained about vent-il-a-tion, and how to go to bed, and how to get up,
and what to eat, and what to drink, and how much ex-er-cise to take, and
what frame of mind to keep one's self in, and what sort of cloth-ing
to wear, was all gos-pel to her, and she never ob-served that her
health-journ-als of the cur-rent month cus-tom-ar-ily up-set everything they
had re-com-men-ded the month be-fore. She was as simple-hearted and hon-est
as the day was long, and so she was an easy vic-tim. She gathered
to-gether her quack peri-od-ic-als and her quack medi-cines, and thus armed
with death, went about on her pale horse, meta-phor-ic-ally speak-ing, with
“hell fol-low-ing after.” But she never sus-pec-ted that she was not an
an-gel of heal-ing and the balm of Gilead in dis-guise, to the suf-fer-ing
neigh-bors.

The wa-ter treat-ment was new, now, and Tom's low con-di-tion was a wind-fall
to her. She had him out at day-light every morn-ing, stood him up in the
wood-shed and drowned him with a de-luge of cold wa-ter; then she scrubbed
him down with a towel like a file, and so brought him to; then she
rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away un-der blankets till she
sweated his soul clean and “the yel-low stains of it came through his
pores”--as Tom said.

Yet not-with-stand-ing all this, the boy grew more and more mel-an-choly and
pale and de-jec-ted. She ad-ded hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths, and
plunges. The boy re-mained as dis-mal as a hearse. She began to as-sist the
wa-ter with a slim oat-meal diet and blister-plasters. She cal-cu-lated his
ca-pa-city as she would a jug's, and filled him up every day with quack
cure-alls.

Tom had be-come in-dif-fer-ent to per-se-cu-tion by this time. This phase
filled the old lady's heart with con-sterna-tion. This in-dif-fer-ence must
be broken up at any cost. Now she heard of Pain-killer for the first
time. She ordered a lot at once. She tasted it and was filled with
grat-it-ude. It was simply fire in a li-quid form. She dropped the wa-ter
treat-ment and everything else, and pinned her faith to Pain-killer.
She gave Tom a tea-spoon-ful and watched with the deep-est anxi-ety for the
res-ult. Her troubles were in-stantly at rest, her soul at peace again;
for the “in-dif-fer-ence” was broken up. The boy could not have shown a
wilder, heartier in-terest, if she had built a fire un-der him.

Tom felt that it was time to wake up; this sort of life might be
ro-mantic enough, in his blighted con-di-tion, but it was get-ting to have
too little sen-ti-ment and too much dis-tract-ing vari-ety about it. So he
thought over vari-ous plans for re-lief, and fi-nally hit upon that of
pro-fess-ing to be fond of Pain-killer. He asked for it so of-ten that he
be-came a nuis-ance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help him-self and
quit both-er-ing her. If it had been Sid, she would have had no mis-giv-ings
to al-loy her de-light; but since it was Tom, she watched the bottle
clandes-tinely. She found that the medi-cine did really di-min-ish, but it
did not oc-cur to her that the boy was mend-ing the health of a crack in
the sit-ting-room floor with it.

One day Tom was in the act of dos-ing the crack when his aunt's yel-low
cat came along, purring, eye-ing the tea-spoon av-ar-i-ciously, and beg-ging
for a taste. Tom said:

“Don't ask for it un-less you want it, Peter.”

But Peter sig-ni-fied that he did want it.

“You bet-ter make sure.”

Peter was sure.

“Now you've asked for it, and I'll give it to you, be-cause there ain't
any-thing mean about me; but if you find you don't like it, you mustn't
blame any-body but your own self.”

Peter was agree-able. So Tom pried his mouth open and poured down
the Pain-killer. Peter sprang a couple of yards in the air, and then
de-livered a war-whoop and set off round and round the room, banging
against fur-niture, up-set-ting flower-pots, and mak-ing gen-eral havoc. Next
he rose on his hind feet and pranced around, in a frenzy of en-joy-ment,
with his head over his shoulder and his voice pro-claim-ing his
un-ap-peas-able hap-pi-ness. Then he went tear-ing around the house again
spread-ing chaos and de-struc-tion in his path. Aunt Polly entered in time
to see him throw a few double sum-mer-sets, de-liver a fi-nal mighty hur-rah,
and sail through the open win-dow, car-ry-ing the rest of the flower-pots
with him. The old lady stood pet-ri-fied with as-ton-ish-ment, peer-ing over
her glasses; Tom lay on the floor ex-pir-ing with laughter.

“Tom, what on earth ails that cat?”

“I don't know, aunt,” gasped the boy.

“Why, I never see any-thing like it. What did make him act so?”

“Deed I don't know, Aunt Polly; cats al-ways act so when they're hav-ing a
good time.”

“They do, do they?” There was some-thing in the tone that made Tom
ap-pre-hens-ive.

“Yes'm. That is, I be-lieve they do.”

“You _do_?”

“Yes'm.”

The old lady was bend-ing down, Tom watch-ing, with in-terest em-phas-ized
by anxi-ety. Too late he di-vined her “drift.” The handle of the tell-tale
tea-spoon was vis-ible un-der the bed-val-ance. Aunt Polly took it, held it
up. Tom winced, and dropped his eyes. Aunt Polly raised him by the usual
handle--his ear--and cracked his head soundly with her thimble.

“Now, sir, what did you want to treat that poor dumb beast so, for?”

“I done it out of pity for him--be-cause he hadn't any aunt.”

“Hadn't any aunt!--you num-skull. What has that got to do with it?”

“Heaps. Be-cause if he'd had one she'd a burnt him out her-self! She'd a
roas-ted his bowels out of him 'thout any more feel-ing than if he was a
hu-man!”

Aunt Polly felt a sud-den pang of re-morse. This was put-ting the thing in
a new light; what was cruelty to a cat _might_ be cruelty to a boy, too.
She began to soften; she felt sorry. Her eyes watered a little, and she
put her hand on Tom's head and said gently:

“I was mean-ing for the best, Tom. And, Tom, it _did_ do you good.”

Tom looked up in her face with just a per-cept-ible twinkle peep-ing
through his grav-ity.

“I know you was mean-ing for the best, aunty, and so was I with Peter. It
done _him_ good, too. I never see him get around so since--”

“Oh, go 'long with you, Tom, be-fore you ag-grav-ate me again. And you try
and see if you can't be a good boy, for once, and you needn't take any
more medi-cine.”

Tom reached school ahead of time. It was no-ticed that this strange thing
had been oc-cur-ring every day lat-terly. And now, as usual of late,
he hung about the gate of the school-yard in-stead of play-ing with his
com-rades. He was sick, he said, and he looked it. He tried to seem to
be look-ing every-where but whither he really was look-ing--down the road.
Presently Jeff Thatcher hove in sight, and Tom's face lighted; he gazed
a mo-ment, and then turned sor-row-fully away. When Jeff ar-rived, Tom
ac-cos-ted him; and “led up” war-ily to op-por-tun-it-ies for re-mark about
Becky, but the giddy lad never could see the bait. Tom watched and
watched, hop-ing whenever a frisk-ing frock came in sight, and hat-ing the
owner of it as soon as he saw she was not the right one. At last frocks
ceased to ap-pear, and he dropped hope-lessly into the dumps; he entered
the empty school-house and sat down to suf-fer. Then one more frock passed
in at the gate, and Tom's heart gave a great bound. The next in-stant he
was out, and “go-ing on” like an In-dian; yelling, laugh-ing, chas-ing boys,
jump-ing over the fence at risk of life and limb, throw-ing hand-springs,
stand-ing on his head--do-ing all the heroic things he could con-ceive of,
and keep-ing a furt-ive eye out, all the while, to see if Becky Thatcher
was no-ti-cing. But she seemed to be un-con-scious of it all; she never
looked. Could it be pos-sible that she was not aware that he was there?
He car-ried his ex-ploits to her im-me-di-ate vi-cin-ity; came war-whoop-ing
around, snatched a boy's cap, hurled it to the roof of the school-house,
broke through a group of boys, tum-bling them in every dir-ec-tion, and
fell sprawl-ing, him-self, un-der Becky's nose, al-most up-set-ting her--and
she turned, with her nose in the air, and he heard her say: “Mf! some
people think they're mighty smart--al-ways show-ing off!”

Tom's cheeks burned. He gathered him-self up and sneaked off, crushed and
crest-fal-len.




CHAPTER XIII

TOM'S mind was made up now. He was gloomy and des-per-ate. He was a
for-saken, friend-less boy, he said; nobody loved him; when they found out
what they had driven him to, per-haps they would be sorry; he had tried
to do right and get along, but they would not let him; since noth-ing
would do them but to be rid of him, let it be so; and let them blame
_him_ for the con-sequences--why shouldn't they? What right had the
friend-less to com-plain? Yes, they had forced him to it at last: he would
lead a life of crime. There was no choice.

By this time he was far down Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to
“take up” tinkled faintly upon his ear. He sobbed, now, to think he
should never, never hear that old fa-mil-iar sound any more--it was very
hard, but it was forced on him; since he was driven out into the cold
world, he must sub-mit--but he for-gave them. Then the sobs came thick and
fast.

Just at this point he met his soul's sworn com-rade, Joe
Harper--hard-eyed, and with evid-ently a great and dis-mal pur-pose in his
heart. Plainly here were “two souls with but a single thought.” Tom,
wip-ing his eyes with his sleeve, began to blub-ber out some-thing about
a res-ol-u-tion to es-cape from hard us-age and lack of sym-pathy at home by
roam-ing abroad into the great world never to re-turn; and ended by hop-ing
that Joe would not for-get him.

But it tran-spired that this was a re-quest which Joe had just been go-ing
to make of Tom, and had come to hunt him up for that pur-pose. His mother
had whipped him for drink-ing some cream which he had never tasted and
knew noth-ing about; it was plain that she was tired of him and wished
him to go; if she felt that way, there was noth-ing for him to do but
suc-cumb; he hoped she would be happy, and never re-gret hav-ing driven her
poor boy out into the un-feel-ing world to suf-fer and die.

As the two boys walked sor-row-ing along, they made a new com-pact to stand
by each other and be broth-ers and never sep-ar-ate till death re-lieved
them of their troubles. Then they began to lay their plans. Joe was for
be-ing a her-mit, and liv-ing on crusts in a re-mote cave, and dy-ing,
some time, of cold and want and grief; but after listen-ing to Tom, he
con-ceded that there were some con-spicu-ous ad-vant-ages about a life of
crime, and so he con-sen-ted to be a pir-ate.

Three miles be-low St. Peters-burg, at a point where the Mis-sis-sippi River
was a trifle over a mile wide, there was a long, nar-row, wooded is-land,
with a shal-low bar at the head of it, and this offered well as a
ren-dez-vous. It was not in-hab-ited; it lay far over to-ward the fur-ther
shore, abreast a dense and al-most wholly un-peopled forest. So Jack-son's
Is-land was chosen. Who were to be the sub-jects of their pir-acies was a
mat-ter that did not oc-cur to them. Then they hunted up Huckle-berry Finn,
and he joined them promptly, for all ca-reers were one to him; he was
in-dif-fer-ent. They presently sep-ar-ated to meet at a lonely spot on the
river-bank two miles above the vil-lage at the fa-vor-ite hour--which was
mid-night. There was a small log raft there which they meant to cap-ture.
Each would bring hooks and lines, and such pro-vi-sion as he could steal
in the most dark and mys-ter-i-ous way--as be-came out-laws. And be-fore the
af-ter-noon was done, they had all man-aged to en-joy the sweet glory of
spread-ing the fact that pretty soon the town would “hear some-thing.” All
who got this vague hint were cau-tioned to “be mum and wait.”

About mid-night Tom ar-rived with a boiled ham and a few trifles,
and stopped in a dense un-der-growth on a small bluff over-look-ing the
meet-ing-place. It was star-light, and very still. The mighty river lay
like an ocean at rest. Tom listened a mo-ment, but no sound dis-turbed the
quiet. Then he gave a low, dis-tinct whistle. It was answered from un-der
the bluff. Tom whistled twice more; these sig-nals were answered in the
same way. Then a guarded voice said:

“Who goes there?”

“Tom Saw-yer, the Black Avenger of the Span-ish Main. Name your names.”

“Huck Finn the Red-Han-ded, and Joe Harper the Ter-ror of the Seas.” Tom
had fur-nished these titles, from his fa-vor-ite lit-er-at-ure.

“'Tis well. Give the coun-ter-sign.”

Two hoarse whis-pers de-livered the same aw-ful word sim-ul-tan-eously to the
brood-ing night:

“_Blood_!”

Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let him-self down after it,
tear-ing both skin and clothes to some ex-tent in the ef-fort. There was
an easy, com-fort-able path along the shore un-der the bluff, but it lacked
the ad-vant-ages of dif-fi-culty and danger so val-ued by a pir-ate.

The Ter-ror of the Seas had brought a side of ba-con, and had about worn
him-self out with get-ting it there. Finn the Red-Han-ded had stolen a
skil-let and a quant-ity of half-cured leaf to-bacco, and had also brought
a few corn-cobs to make pipes with. But none of the pir-ates smoked or
“chewed” but him-self. The Black Avenger of the Span-ish Main said it
would never do to start without some fire. That was a wise thought;
matches were hardly known there in that day. They saw a fire smoul-der-ing
upon a great raft a hun-dred yards above, and they went stealth-ily
thither and helped them-selves to a chunk. They made an im-pos-ing
ad-ven-ture of it, say-ing, “Hist!” every now and then, and sud-denly
halt-ing with fin-ger on lip; mov-ing with hands on ima-gin-ary dag-ger-hilts;
and giv-ing or-ders in dis-mal whis-pers that if “the foe” stirred, to “let
him have it to the hilt,” be-cause “dead men tell no tales.” They knew
well enough that the rafts-men were all down at the vil-lage lay-ing
in stores or hav-ing a spree, but still that was no ex-cuse for their
con-duct-ing this thing in an un-pir-at-ical way.

They shoved off, presently, Tom in com-mand, Huck at the after oar and
Joe at the for-ward. Tom stood amid-ships, gloomy-browed, and with fol-ded
arms, and gave his or-ders in a low, stern whis-per:

“Luff, and bring her to the wind!”

“Aye-aye, sir!”

“Steady, steady-y-y-y!”

“Steady it is, sir!”

“Let her go off a point!”

“Point it is, sir!”

As the boys stead-ily and mono-ton-ously drove the raft to-ward mid-stream
it was no doubt un-der-stood that these or-ders were given only for
“style,” and were not in-ten-ded to mean any-thing in par-tic-u-lar.

“What sail's she car-ry-ing?”

“Courses, tops'ls, and fly-ing-jib, sir.”

“Send the r'yals up! Lay out aloft, there, half a dozen of
ye--fore-top-mast-s-tuns'l! Lively, now!”

“Aye-aye, sir!”

“Shake out that main-togalans'l! Sheets and braces! _now_ my hearties!”

“Aye-aye, sir!”

“Hel-lum-a-lee--hard a port! Stand by to meet her when she comes! Port,
port! _Now_, men! With a will! Stead-y-y-y!”

“Steady it is, sir!”

The raft drew bey-ond the middle of the river; the boys poin-ted her head
right, and then lay on their oars. The river was not high, so there was
not more than a two or three mile cur-rent. Hardly a word was said dur-ing
the next three-quar-ters of an hour. Now the raft was passing be-fore
the dis-tant town. Two or three glim-mer-ing lights showed where it lay,
peace-fully sleep-ing, bey-ond the vague vast sweep of star-gemmed wa-ter,
un-con-scious of the tre-mend-ous event that was hap-pen-ing. The Black
Avenger stood still with fol-ded arms, “look-ing his last” upon the scene
of his former joys and his later suf-fer-ings, and wish-ing “she” could see
him now, abroad on the wild sea, fa-cing peril and death with daunt-less
heart, go-ing to his doom with a grim smile on his lips. It was but
a small strain on his ima-gin-a-tion to re-move Jack-son's Is-land bey-ond
eye-shot of the vil-lage, and so he “looked his last” with a broken and
sat-is-fied heart. The other pir-ates were look-ing their last, too; and
they all looked so long that they came near let-ting the cur-rent drift
them out of the range of the is-land. But they dis-covered the danger in
time, and made shift to avert it. About two o'clock in the morn-ing the
raft groun-ded on the bar two hun-dred yards above the head of the is-land,
and they waded back and forth un-til they had landed their freight. Part
of the little raft's be-long-ings con-sisted of an old sail, and this they
spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to shel-ter their pro-vi-sions;
but they them-selves would sleep in the open air in good weather, as
be-came out-laws.

They built a fire against the side of a great log twenty or thirty steps
within the sombre depths of the forest, and then cooked some ba-con in
the fry-ing-pan for sup-per, and used up half of the corn “pone” stock
they had brought. It seemed glor-i-ous sport to be feast-ing in that wild,
free way in the vir-gin forest of an un-ex-plored and un-in-hab-ited is-land,
far from the haunts of men, and they said they never would re-turn to
civil-iz-a-tion. The climb-ing fire lit up their faces and threw its ruddy
glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of their forest temple, and upon the
var-nished fo-liage and fes-toon-ing vines.

When the last crisp slice of ba-con was gone, and the last al-low-ance
of corn pone de-voured, the boys stretched them-selves out on the grass,
filled with con-tent-ment. They could have found a cooler place, but
they would not deny them-selves such a ro-mantic fea-ture as the roast-ing
camp-fire.

“_Ain't_ it gay?” said Joe.

“It's _nuts_!” said Tom. “What would the boys say if they could see us?”

“Say? Well, they'd just die to be here--hey, Hucky!”

“I reckon so,” said Huckle-berry; “any-ways, I'm suited. I don't want
noth-ing bet-ter'n this. I don't ever get enough to eat, gen'ally--and here
they can't come and pick at a feller and bul-ly-rag him so.”

“It's just the life for me,” said Tom. “You don't have to get up,
morn-ings, and you don't have to go to school, and wash, and all that
blame fool-ish-ness. You see a pir-ate don't have to do _anything_, Joe,
when he's ashore, but a her-mit _he_ has to be pray-ing con-sid-er-able, and
then he don't have any fun, any-way, all by him-self that way.”

“Oh yes, that's so,” said Joe, “but I hadn't thought much about it, you
know. I'd a good deal rather be a pir-ate, now that I've tried it.”

“You see,” said Tom, “people don't go much on her-mits, nowadays, like
they used to in old times, but a pir-ate's al-ways re-spec-ted. And
a her-mit's got to sleep on the hard-est place he can find, and put
sack-cloth and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and--”

“What does he put sack-cloth and ashes on his head for?” in-quired Huck.

“I dono. But they've _got_ to do it. Her-mits al-ways do. You'd have to do
that if you was a her-mit.”

“Dern'd if I would,” said Huck.

“Well, what would you do?”

“I dono. But I wouldn't do that.”

“Why, Huck, you'd _have_ to. How'd you get around it?”

“Why, I just wouldn't stand it. I'd run away.”

“Run away! Well, you _would_ be a nice old slouch of a her-mit. You'd be
a dis-grace.”

The Red-Han-ded made no re-sponse, be-ing bet-ter em-ployed. He had fin-ished
gou-ging out a cob, and now he fit-ted a weed stem to it, loaded it with
to-bacco, and was press-ing a coal to the charge and blow-ing a cloud of
fra-grant smoke--he was in the full bloom of lux-uri-ous con-tent-ment. The
other pir-ates en-vied him this majestic vice, and secretly re-solved to
ac-quire it shortly. Presently Huck said:

“What does pir-ates have to do?”

Tom said:

“Oh, they have just a bully time--take ships and burn them, and get the
money and bury it in aw-ful places in their is-land where there's ghosts
and things to watch it, and kill every-body in the ships--make 'em walk a
plank.”

“And they carry the wo-men to the is-land,” said Joe; “they don't kill the
wo-men.”

“No,” as-sen-ted Tom, “they don't kill the wo-men--they're too noble. And
the wo-men's al-ways beau-ti-ful, too.

“And don't they wear the bul-li-est clothes! Oh no! All gold and sil-ver
and di'monds,” said Joe, with en-thu-si-asm.

“Who?” said Huck.

“Why, the pir-ates.”

Huck scanned his own cloth-ing for-lornly.

“I reckon I ain't dressed fit-ten for a pir-ate,” said he, with a
re-gret-ful pathos in his voice; “but I ain't got none but these.”

But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough,
after they should have be-gun their ad-ven-tures. They made him un-der-stand
that his poor rags would do to be-gin with, though it was cus-tom-ary for
wealthy pir-ates to start with a proper ward-robe.

Gradu-ally their talk died out and drowsi-ness began to steal upon the
eye-lids of the little waifs. The pipe dropped from the fin-gers of the
Red-Han-ded, and he slept the sleep of the con-science-free and the weary.
The Ter-ror of the Seas and the Black Avenger of the Span-ish Main had
more dif-fi-culty in get-ting to sleep. They said their pray-ers in-wardly,
and ly-ing down, since there was nobody there with au-thor-ity to make them
kneel and re-cite aloud; in truth, they had a mind not to say them at
all, but they were afraid to pro-ceed to such lengths as that, lest they
might call down a sud-den and spe-cial thun-der-bolt from heaven. Then at
once they reached and hovered upon the im-min-ent verge of sleep--but an
in-truder came, now, that would not “down.” It was con-science. They began
to feel a vague fear that they had been do-ing wrong to run away; and
next they thought of the stolen meat, and then the real tor-ture came.
They tried to ar-gue it away by re-mind-ing con-science that they had
pur-loined sweet-meats and apples scores of times; but con-science was not
to be ap-peased by such thin plaus-ib-il-it-ies; it seemed to them, in the
end, that there was no get-ting around the stub-born fact that tak-ing
sweet-meats was only “hook-ing,” while tak-ing ba-con and hams and such
valu-ables was plain simple steal-ing--and there was a com-mand against that
in the Bible. So they in-wardly re-solved that so long as they re-mained in
the busi-ness, their pir-acies should not again be sul-lied with the
crime of steal-ing. Then con-science gran-ted a truce, and these curi-ously
in-con-sist-ent pir-ates fell peace-fully to sleep.




CHAPTER XIV

WHEN Tom awoke in the morn-ing, he wondered where he was. He sat up and
rubbed his eyes and looked around. Then he com-pre-hen-ded. It was the cool
gray dawn, and there was a de-li-cious sense of re-pose and peace in the
deep per-vad-ing calm and si-lence of the woods. Not a leaf stirred; not
a sound ob-truded upon great Nature's med-it-a-tion. Beaded dew-drops stood
upon the leaves and grasses. A white layer of ashes covered the fire,
and a thin blue breath of smoke rose straight into the air. Joe and Huck
still slept.

Now, far away in the woods a bird called; an-other answered; presently
the ham-mer-ing of a wood-pecker was heard. Gradu-ally the cool dim gray
of the morn-ing whitened, and as gradu-ally sounds mul-ti-plied and life
mani-fes-ted it-self. The mar-vel of Nature shak-ing off sleep and go-ing
to work un-fol-ded it-self to the mus-ing boy. A little green worm came
crawl-ing over a dewy leaf, lift-ing two-thirds of his body into the air
from time to time and “sniff-ing around,” then pro-ceed-ing again--for he
was meas-ur-ing, Tom said; and when the worm ap-proached him, of its own
ac-cord, he sat as still as a stone, with his hopes rising and fall-ing,
by turns, as the creature still came to-ward him or seemed in-clined to
go else-where; and when at last it con-sidered a pain-ful mo-ment with its
curved body in the air and then came de-cis-ively down upon Tom's leg and
began a jour-ney over him, his whole heart was glad--for that meant that
he was go-ing to have a new suit of clothes--without the shadow of a
doubt a gaudy pir-at-ical uni-form. Now a pro-ces-sion of ants ap-peared,
from nowhere in par-tic-u-lar, and went about their labors; one struggled
man-fully by with a dead spider five times as big as it-self in its arms,
and lugged it straight up a tree-trunk. A brown spot-ted lady-bug climbed
the dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom bent down close to it and
said, “Lady-bug, lady-bug, fly away home, your house is on fire, your
chil-dren's alone,” and she took wing and went off to see about it--which
did not sur-prise the boy, for he knew of old that this in-sect was
cred-u-lous about con-flag-ra-tions, and he had prac-tised upon its sim-pli-city
more than once. A tumble-bug came next, heav-ing sturdily at its ball, and
Tom touched the creature, to see it shut its legs against its body
and pre-tend to be dead. The birds were fairly ri-ot-ing by this time. A
cat-bird, the North-ern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom's head, and trilled
out her im-it-a-tions of her neigh-bors in a rap-ture of en-joy-ment; then
a shrill jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and stopped on a twig
al-most within the boy's reach, cocked his head to one side and eyed the
strangers with a con-sum-ing curi-os-ity; a gray squir-rel and a big fel-low
of the “fox” kind came skur-ry-ing along, sit-ting up at in-ter-vals to
in-spect and chat-ter at the boys, for the wild things had prob-ably never
seen a hu-man be-ing be-fore and scarcely knew whether to be afraid or not.
All Nature was wide awake and stir-ring, now; long lances of sun-light
pierced down through the dense fo-liage far and near, and a few
but-ter-flies came flut-ter-ing upon the scene.

Tom stirred up the other pir-ates and they all clattered away with
a shout, and in a minute or two were stripped and chas-ing after and
tum-bling over each other in the shal-low limpid wa-ter of the white
sand-bar. They felt no long-ing for the little vil-lage sleep-ing in the
dis-tance bey-ond the majestic waste of wa-ter. A vag-rant cur-rent or a
slight rise in the river had car-ried off their raft, but this only
grat-i-fied them, since its go-ing was some-thing like burn-ing the bridge
between them and civil-iz-a-tion.

They came back to camp won-der-fully re-freshed, glad-hearted, and
raven-ous; and they soon had the camp-fire blaz-ing up again. Huck found a
spring of clear cold wa-ter close by, and the boys made cups of broad oak
or hick-ory leaves, and felt that wa-ter, sweetened with such a wild-wood
charm as that, would be a good enough sub-sti-tute for cof-fee. While Joe
was sli-cing ba-con for break-fast, Tom and Huck asked him to hold on a
minute; they stepped to a prom-ising nook in the river-bank and threw in
their lines; al-most im-me-di-ately they had re-ward. Joe had not had time
to get im-pa-tient be-fore they were back again with some hand-some bass,
a couple of sun-perch and a small cat-fish--pro-vi-sions enough for quite a
fam-ily. They fried the fish with the ba-con, and were as-ton-ished; for
no fish had ever seemed so de-li-cious be-fore. They did not know that the
quicker a fresh-wa-ter fish is on the fire after he is caught the bet-ter
he is; and they re-flec-ted little upon what a sauce open-air sleep-ing,
open-air ex-er-cise, bathing, and a large in-gredi-ent of hun-ger make, too.

They lay around in the shade, after break-fast, while Huck had a smoke,
and then went off through the woods on an ex-plor-ing ex-ped-i-tion. They
tramped gayly along, over de-cay-ing logs, through tangled un-der-brush,
among sol-emn mon-archs of the forest, hung from their crowns to the
ground with a droop-ing re-galia of grape-vines. Now and then they came
upon snug nooks car-peted with grass and jeweled with flowers.

They found plenty of things to be de-lighted with, but noth-ing to be
as-ton-ished at. They dis-covered that the is-land was about three miles
long and a quarter of a mile wide, and that the shore it lay closest to
was only sep-ar-ated from it by a nar-row chan-nel hardly two hun-dred yards
wide. They took a swim about every hour, so it was close upon the middle
of the af-ter-noon when they got back to camp. They were too hungry to
stop to fish, but they fared sump-tu-ously upon cold ham, and then threw
them-selves down in the shade to talk. But the talk soon began to drag,
and then died. The still-ness, the solem-nity that brooded in the woods,
and the sense of loneli-ness, began to tell upon the spir-its of the boys.
They fell to think-ing. A sort of un-defined long-ing crept upon them. This
took dim shape, presently--it was bud-ding home-sick-ness. Even Finn the
Red-Han-ded was dream-ing of his door-steps and empty hogsheads. But they
were all ashamed of their weak-ness, and none was brave enough to speak
his thought.

For some time, now, the boys had been dully con-scious of a pe-cu-liar
sound in the dis-tance, just as one some-times is of the tick-ing of a
clock which he takes no dis-tinct note of. But now this mys-ter-i-ous sound
be-came more pro-nounced, and forced a re-cog-ni-tion. The boys star-ted,
glanced at each other, and then each as-sumed a listen-ing at-ti-tude. There
was a long si-lence, pro-found and un-broken; then a deep, sul-len boom came
float-ing down out of the dis-tance.

“What is it!” ex-claimed Joe, un-der his breath.

“I won-der,” said Tom in a whis-per.

“'Tain't thun-der,” said Huckle-berry, in an awed tone, “becuz thun-der--”

“Hark!” said Tom. “Listen--don't talk.”

They waited a time that seemed an age, and then the same muffled boom
troubled the sol-emn hush.

“Let's go and see.”

They sprang to their feet and hur-ried to the shore to-ward the town. They
par-ted the bushes on the bank and peered out over the wa-ter. The little
steam ferry-boat was about a mile be-low the vil-lage, drift-ing with the
cur-rent. Her broad deck seemed crowded with people. There were a great
many skiffs row-ing about or float-ing with the stream in the neigh-bor-hood
of the ferry-boat, but the boys could not de-term-ine what the men in
them were do-ing. Presently a great jet of white smoke burst from the
ferry-boat's side, and as it ex-pan-ded and rose in a lazy cloud, that same
dull throb of sound was borne to the listen-ers again.

“I know now!” ex-claimed Tom; “some-body's drown-ded!”

“That's it!” said Huck; “they done that last sum-mer, when Bill Turner
got drown-ded; they shoot a can-non over the wa-ter, and that makes
him come up to the top. Yes, and they take loaves of bread and put
quick-sil-ver in 'em and set 'em afloat, and wherever there's any-body
that's drown-ded, they'll float right there and stop.”

“Yes, I've heard about that,” said Joe. “I won-der what makes the bread
do that.”

“Oh, it ain't the bread, so much,” said Tom; “I reckon it's mostly what
they _say_ over it be-fore they start it out.”

“But they don't say any-thing over it,” said Huck. “I've seen 'em and
they don't.”

“Well, that's funny,” said Tom. “But maybe they say it to them-selves. Of
_course_ they do. Anybody might know that.”

The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said, be-cause
an ig-nor-ant lump of bread, un-in-struc-ted by an in-cant-a-tion, could not
be ex-pec-ted to act very in-tel-li-gently when set upon an er-rand of such
grav-ity.

“By jings, I wish I was over there, now,” said Joe.

“I do too” said Huck “I'd give heaps to know who it is.”

The boys still listened and watched. Presently a re-veal-ing thought
flashed through Tom's mind, and he ex-claimed:

“Boys, I know who's drown-ded--it's us!”

They felt like her-oes in an in-stant. Here was a gor-geous tri-umph; they
were missed; they were mourned; hearts were break-ing on their ac-count;
tears were be-ing shed; ac-cus-ing memor-ies of un-kind-ness to these poor
lost lads were rising up, and un-avail-ing re-grets and re-morse were be-ing
in-dulged; and best of all, the de-par-ted were the talk of the whole town,
and the envy of all the boys, as far as this dazzling no-tori-ety was
con-cerned. This was fine. It was worth while to be a pir-ate, after all.

As twi-light drew on, the ferry-boat went back to her ac-cus-tomed busi-ness
and the skiffs dis-ap-peared. The pir-ates re-turned to camp. They were
ju-bil-ant with van-ity over their new grandeur and the il-lus-tri-ous trouble
they were mak-ing. They caught fish, cooked sup-per and ate it, and then
fell to guess-ing at what the vil-lage was think-ing and say-ing about them;
and the pic-tures they drew of the pub-lic dis-tress on their ac-count were
grat-i-fy-ing to look upon--from their point of view. But when the shad-ows
of night closed them in, they gradu-ally ceased to talk, and sat gaz-ing
into the fire, with their minds evid-ently wan-der-ing else-where. The
ex-cite-ment was gone, now, and Tom and Joe could not keep back thoughts
of cer-tain per-sons at home who were not en-joy-ing this fine frolic as
much as they were. Mis-giv-ings came; they grew troubled and un-happy; a
sigh or two es-caped, un-awares. By and by Joe tim-idly ven-tured upon a
round-about “feeler” as to how the oth-ers might look upon a re-turn to
civil-iz-a-tion--not right now, but--

Tom withered him with de-ri-sion! Huck, be-ing un-com-mit-ted as yet, joined
in with Tom, and the waverer quickly “ex-plained,” and was glad to get
out of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted home-sick-ness
cling-ing to his gar-ments as he could. Mutiny was ef-fec-tu-ally laid to
rest for the mo-ment.

As the night deepened, Huck began to nod, and presently to snore.
Joe fol-lowed next. Tom lay upon his el-bow mo-tion-less, for some time,
watch-ing the two in-tently. At last he got up cau-tiously, on his knees,
and went search-ing among the grass and the flick-er-ing re-flec-tions flung
by the camp-fire. He picked up and in-spec-ted sev-eral large semi-cyl-in-ders
of the thin white bark of a sy-ca-more, and fi-nally chose two which seemed
to suit him. Then he knelt by the fire and pain-fully wrote some-thing
upon each of these with his “red keel”; one he rolled up and put in his
jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe's hat and re-moved it to a
little dis-tance from the owner. And he also put into the hat cer-tain
school-boy treas-ures of al-most in-es-tim-able value--among them a lump of
chalk, an In-dia-rub-ber ball, three fish-hooks, and one of that kind
of marbles known as a “sure 'nough crys-tal.” Then he tip-toed his way
cau-tiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hear-ing, and
straight-way broke into a keen run in the dir-ec-tion of the sand-bar.




CHAPTER XV

A few minutes later Tom was in the shoal wa-ter of the bar, wad-ing to-ward
the Illinois shore. Be-fore the depth reached his middle he was halfway
over; the cur-rent would per-mit no more wad-ing, now, so he struck out
con-fid-ently to swim the re-main-ing hun-dred yards. He swam quar-ter-ing
up-stream, but still was swept down-ward rather faster than he had
ex-pec-ted. However, he reached the shore fi-nally, and drif-ted along till
he found a low place and drew him-self out. He put his hand on his jacket
pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck through the woods,
fol-low-ing the shore, with stream-ing gar-ments. Shortly be-fore ten
o'clock he came out into an open place op-pos-ite the vil-lage, and saw the
ferry-boat ly-ing in the shadow of the trees and the high bank. Everything
was quiet un-der the blink-ing stars. He crept down the bank, watch-ing
with all his eyes, slipped into the wa-ter, swam three or four strokes
and climbed into the skiff that did “yawl” duty at the boat's stern. He
laid him-self down un-der the thwarts and waited, pant-ing.

Presently the cracked bell tapped and a voice gave the or-der to “cast
off.” A minute or two later the skiff's head was stand-ing high up,
against the boat's swell, and the voy-age was be-gun. Tom felt happy in
his suc-cess, for he knew it was the boat's last trip for the night. At
the end of a long twelve or fif-teen minutes the wheels stopped, and
Tom slipped over-board and swam ashore in the dusk, land-ing fifty yards
down-stream, out of danger of pos-sible strag-glers.

He flew along un-fre-quen-ted al-leys, and shortly found him-self at his
aunt's back fence. He climbed over, ap-proached the “ell,” and looked
in at the sit-ting-room win-dow, for a light was burn-ing there. There
sat Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper's mother, grouped to-gether,
talk-ing. They were by the bed, and the bed was between them and the
door. Tom went to the door and began to softly lift the latch; then
he pressed gently and the door yiel-ded a crack; he con-tin-ued push-ing
cau-tiously, and quak-ing every time it creaked, till he judged he might
squeeze through on his knees; so he put his head through and began,
war-ily.

“What makes the candle blow so?” said Aunt Polly. Tom hur-ried up. “Why,
that door's open, I be-lieve. Why, of course it is. No end of strange
things now. Go 'long and shut it, Sid.”

Tom dis-ap-peared un-der the bed just in time. He lay and “breathed”
 him-self for a time, and then crept to where he could al-most touch his
aunt's foot.

“But as I was say-ing,” said Aunt Polly, “he warn't _bad_, so to say--only
mis-ch_ee_-vous. Only just giddy, and harum-scarum, you know. He warn't
any more re-spons-ible than a colt. _He_ never meant any harm, and he was
the best-hearted boy that ever was”--and she began to cry.

“It was just so with my Joe--al-ways full of his dev-il-ment, and up to
every kind of mis-chief, but he was just as un-selfish and kind as he
could be--and laws bless me, to think I went and whipped him for tak-ing
that cream, never once re-col-lect-ing that I throwed it out my-self be-cause
it was sour, and I never to see him again in this world, never, never,
never, poor ab-used boy!” And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart would
break.

“I hope Tom's bet-ter off where he is,” said Sid, “but if he'd been
bet-ter in some ways--”

“_Sid!_” Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye, though he could not
see it. “Not a word against my Tom, now that he's gone! God'll take care
of _him_--never you trouble _y-our_-self, sir! Oh, Mrs. Harper, I don't
know how to give him up! I don't know how to give him up! He was such a
com-fort to me, al-though he tor-men-ted my old heart out of me, 'most.”

“The Lord giv-eth and the Lord hath taken away--Blessed be the name of
the Lord! But it's so hard--Oh, it's so hard! Only last Saturday my Joe
bus-ted a fire-cracker right un-der my nose and I knocked him sprawl-ing.
Little did I know then, how soon--Oh, if it was to do over again I'd hug
him and bless him for it.”

“Yes, yes, yes, I know just how you feel, Mrs. Harper, I know just
ex-actly how you feel. No longer ago than yes-ter-day noon, my Tom took
and filled the cat full of Pain-killer, and I did think the cre-tur would
tear the house down. And God for-give me, I cracked Tom's head with my
thimble, poor boy, poor dead boy. But he's out of all his troubles now.
And the last words I ever heard him say was to re-proach--”

But this memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke en-tirely
down. Tom was snuff-ling, now, him-self--and more in pity of him-self than
any-body else. He could hear Mary cry-ing, and put-ting in a kindly word
for him from time to time. He began to have a no-bler opin-ion of him-self
than ever be-fore. Still, he was suf-fi-ciently touched by his aunt's grief
to long to rush out from un-der the bed and over-whelm her with joy--and
the the-at-rical gor-geous-ness of the thing ap-pealed strongly to his
nature, too, but he res-isted and lay still.

He went on listen-ing, and gathered by odds and ends that it was
con-jec-tured at first that the boys had got drowned while tak-ing a swim;
then the small raft had been missed; next, cer-tain boys said the miss-ing
lads had prom-ised that the vil-lage should “hear some-thing” soon; the
wise-heads had “put this and that to-gether” and de-cided that the lads
had gone off on that raft and would turn up at the next town be-low,
presently; but to-ward noon the raft had been found, lodged against the
Mis-souri shore some five or six miles be-low the vil-lage--and then hope
per-ished; they must be drowned, else hun-ger would have driven them home
by night-fall if not sooner. It was be-lieved that the search for the
bod-ies had been a fruit-less ef-fort merely be-cause the drown-ing must
have oc-curred in mid-chan-nel, since the boys, be-ing good swim-mers, would
oth-er-wise have es-caped to shore. This was Wed-nes-day night. If the bod-ies
con-tin-ued miss-ing un-til Sunday, all hope would be given over, and the
fu-ner-als would be preached on that morn-ing. Tom shuddered.

Mrs. Harper gave a sob-bing good-night and turned to go. Then with a
mu-tual im-pulse the two be-reaved wo-men flung them-selves into each other's
arms and had a good, con-sol-ing cry, and then par-ted. Aunt Polly was
tender far bey-ond her wont, in her good-night to Sid and Mary. Sid
snuffled a bit and Mary went off cry-ing with all her heart.

Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touch-ingly, so ap-peal-ingly,
and with such meas-ure-less love in her words and her old trem-bling voice,
that he was wel-ter-ing in tears again, long be-fore she was through.

He had to keep still long after she went to bed, for she kept mak-ing
broken-hearted ejac-u-la-tions from time to time, toss-ing un-rest-fully, and
turn-ing over. But at last she was still, only moan-ing a little in her
sleep. Now the boy stole out, rose gradu-ally by the bed-side, shaded the
candle-light with his hand, and stood re-gard-ing her. His heart was full
of pity for her. He took out his sy-ca-more scroll and placed it by the
candle. But some-thing oc-curred to him, and he lingered con-sid-er-ing.
His face lighted with a happy solu-tion of his thought; he put the bark
hast-ily in his pocket. Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips, and
straight-way made his stealthy exit, latch-ing the door be-hind him.

He threaded his way back to the ferry land-ing, found nobody at large
there, and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was
ten-ant-less ex-cept that there was a watch-man, who al-ways turned in and
slept like a graven im-age. He un-tied the skiff at the stern, slipped
into it, and was soon row-ing cau-tiously up-stream. When he had pulled a
mile above the vil-lage, he star-ted quar-ter-ing across and bent him-self
stoutly to his work. He hit the land-ing on the other side neatly, for
this was a fa-mil-iar bit of work to him. He was moved to cap-ture
the skiff, ar-guing that it might be con-sidered a ship and there-fore
le-git-im-ate prey for a pir-ate, but he knew a thor-ough search would be
made for it and that might end in rev-el-a-tions. So he stepped ashore and
entered the woods.

He sat down and took a long rest, tor-tur-ing him-self mean-while to keep
awake, and then star-ted war-ily down the home-stretch. The night was far
spent. It was broad day-light be-fore he found him-self fairly abreast the
is-land bar. He res-ted again un-til the sun was well up and gild-ing the
great river with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream. A
little later he paused, drip-ping, upon the threshold of the camp, and
heard Joe say:

“No, Tom's true-blue, Huck, and he'll come back. He won't desert. He
knows that would be a dis-grace to a pir-ate, and Tom's too proud for that
sort of thing. He's up to some-thing or other. Now I won-der what?”

“Well, the things is ours, any-way, ain't they?”

“Pretty near, but not yet, Huck. The writ-ing says they are if he ain't
back here to break-fast.”

“Which he is!” ex-claimed Tom, with fine dra-matic ef-fect, step-ping
grandly into camp.

A sump-tu-ous break-fast of ba-con and fish was shortly provided, and as the
boys set to work upon it, Tom re-coun-ted (and ad-orned) his ad-ven-tures.
They were a vain and boast-ful com-pany of her-oes when the tale was done.
Then Tom hid him-self away in a shady nook to sleep till noon, and the
other pir-ates got ready to fish and ex-plore.




CHAPTER XVI

AFTER din-ner all the gang turned out to hunt for turtle eggs on the bar.
They went about pok-ing sticks into the sand, and when they found a soft
place they went down on their knees and dug with their hands. So-me-times
they would take fifty or sixty eggs out of one hole. They were per-fectly
round white things a trifle smal-ler than an Eng-lish wal-nut. They had a
fam-ous fried-egg feast that night, and an-other on Fri-day morn-ing.

After break-fast they went whoop-ing and pran-cing out on the bar, and
chased each other round and round, shed-ding clothes as they went, un-til
they were na-ked, and then con-tin-ued the frolic far away up the shoal
wa-ter of the bar, against the stiff cur-rent, which lat-ter tripped their
legs from un-der them from time to time and greatly in-creased the fun.
And now and then they stooped in a group and splashed wa-ter in each
other's faces with their palms, gradu-ally ap-proach-ing each other, with
aver-ted faces to avoid the strangling sprays, and fi-nally grip-ping and
strug-gling till the best man ducked his neigh-bor, and then they all
went un-der in a tangle of white legs and arms and came up blow-ing,
sput-ter-ing, laugh-ing, and gasp-ing for breath at one and the same time.

When they were well ex-hausted, they would run out and sprawl on the dry,
hot sand, and lie there and cover them-selves up with it, and by and by
break for the wa-ter again and go through the ori-ginal per-form-ance once
more. Fin-ally it oc-curred to them that their na-ked skin rep-res-en-ted
flesh-colored “tights” very fairly; so they drew a ring in the sand and
had a cir-cus--with three clowns in it, for none would yield this proudest
post to his neigh-bor.

Next they got their marbles and played “knucks” and “ringtaw” and
“keeps” till that amuse-ment grew stale. Then Joe and Huck had an-other
swim, but Tom would not ven-ture, be-cause he found that in kick-ing off
his trousers he had kicked his string of rattlesnake rattles off his
ankle, and he wondered how he had es-caped cramp so long without the
pro-tec-tion of this mys-ter-i-ous charm. He did not ven-ture again un-til he
had found it, and by that time the other boys were tired and ready to
rest. They gradu-ally wandered apart, dropped into the “dumps,” and
fell to gaz-ing long-ingly across the wide river to where the vil-lage lay
drows-ing in the sun. Tom found him-self writ-ing “BECKY” in the sand with
his big toe; he scratched it out, and was angry with him-self for his
weak-ness. But he wrote it again, nev-er-the-less; he could not help it. He
erased it once more and then took him-self out of tempta-tion by driv-ing
the other boys to-gether and join-ing them.

But Joe's spir-its had gone down al-most bey-ond re-sur-rec-tion. He was so
home-sick that he could hardly en-dure the misery of it. The tears lay
very near the sur-face. Huck was mel-an-choly, too. Tom was down-hearted,
but tried hard not to show it. He had a secret which he was not ready
to tell, yet, but if this mutin-ous de-pres-sion was not broken up soon, he
would have to bring it out. He said, with a great show of cheer-ful-ness:

“I bet there's been pir-ates on this is-land be-fore, boys. We'll ex-plore
it again. They've hid treas-ures here some-where. How'd you feel to light
on a rot-ten chest full of gold and sil-ver--hey?”

But it roused only faint en-thu-si-asm, which faded out, with no reply.
Tom tried one or two other se-duc-tions; but they failed, too. It was
dis-cour-aging work. Joe sat pok-ing up the sand with a stick and look-ing
very gloomy. Fin-ally he said:

“Oh, boys, let's give it up. I want to go home. It's so lone-some.”

“Oh no, Joe, you'll feel bet-ter by and by,” said Tom. “Just think of the
fish-ing that's here.”

“I don't care for fish-ing. I want to go home.”

“But, Joe, there ain't such an-other swim-ming-place any-where.”

“Swim-ming's no good. I don't seem to care for it, some-how, when there
ain't any-body to say I sha'n't go in. I mean to go home.”

“Oh, shucks! Baby! You want to see your mother, I reckon.”

“Yes, I _do_ want to see my mother--and you would, too, if you had one. I
ain't any more baby than you are.” And Joe snuffled a little.

“Well, we'll let the crybaby go home to his mother, won't we, Huck? Poor
thing--does it want to see its mother? And so it shall. You like it here,
don't you, Huck? We'll stay, won't we?”

Huck said, “Y-e-s”--without any heart in it.

“I'll never speak to you again as long as I live,” said Joe, rising.
“There now!” And he moved moodily away and began to dress him-self.

“Who cares!” said Tom. “Nobody wants you to. Go 'long home and get
laughed at. Oh, you're a nice pir-ate. Huck and me ain't cryb-a-bies. We'll
stay, won't we, Huck? Let him go if he wants to. I reckon we can get
along without him, per'aps.”

But Tom was un-easy, nev-er-the-less, and was alarmed to see Joe go sul-lenly
on with his dress-ing. And then it was dis-com-fort-ing to see Huck ey-ing
Joe's pre-par-a-tions so wist-fully, and keep-ing up such an omin-ous si-lence.
Presently, without a part-ing word, Joe began to wade off to-ward the
Illinois shore. Tom's heart began to sink. He glanced at Huck. Huck
could not bear the look, and dropped his eyes. Then he said:

“I want to go, too, Tom. It was get-ting so lone-some any-way, and now
it'll be worse. Let's us go, too, Tom.”

“I won't! You can all go, if you want to. I mean to stay.”

“Tom, I bet-ter go.”

“Well, go 'long--who's hen-de-r-ing you.”

Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes. He said:

“Tom, I wisht you'd come, too. Now you think it over. We'll wait for you
when we get to shore.”

“Well, you'll wait a blame long time, that's all.”

Huck star-ted sor-row-fully away, and Tom stood look-ing after him, with a
strong de-sire tug-ging at his heart to yield his pride and go along
too. He hoped the boys would stop, but they still waded slowly on. It
sud-denly dawned on Tom that it was be-come very lonely and still. He made
one fi-nal struggle with his pride, and then dar-ted after his com-rades,
yelling:

“Wait! Wait! I want to tell you some-thing!”

They presently stopped and turned around. When he got to where they
were, he began un-fold-ing his secret, and they listened moodily till
at last they saw the “point” he was driv-ing at, and then they set up a
war-whoop of ap-plause and said it was “splen-did!” and said if he had
told them at first, they wouldn't have star-ted away. He made a plaus-ible
ex-cuse; but his real reason had been the fear that not even the secret
would keep them with him any very great length of time, and so he had
meant to hold it in re-serve as a last se-duc-tion.

The lads came gayly back and went at their sports again with a will,
chat-ter-ing all the time about Tom's stu-pendous plan and ad-mir-ing the
genius of it. After a dainty egg and fish din-ner, Tom said he wanted to
learn to smoke, now. Joe caught at the idea and said he would like to
try, too. So Huck made pipes and filled them. These novices had never
smoked any-thing be-fore but ci-gars made of grapev-ine, and they “bit” the
tongue, and were not con-sidered manly any-way.

Now they stretched them-selves out on their el-bows and began to puff,
char-ily, and with slender con-fid-ence. The smoke had an un-pleas-ant taste,
and they gagged a little, but Tom said:

“Why, it's just as easy! If I'd a knowed this was all, I'd a learnt long
ago.”

“So would I,” said Joe. “It's just noth-ing.”

“Why, many a time I've looked at people smoking, and thought well I wish
I could do that; but I never thought I could,” said Tom.

“That's just the way with me, hain't it, Huck? You've heard me talk just
that way--haven't you, Huck? I'll leave it to Huck if I haven't.”

“Yes--heaps of times,” said Huck.

“Well, I have too,” said Tom; “oh, hun-dreds of times. Once down by the
slaughter-house. Don't you re-mem-ber, Huck? Bob Tan-ner was there, and
Johnny Miller, and Jeff Thatcher, when I said it. Don't you re-mem-ber,
Huck, 'bout me say-ing that?”

“Yes, that's so,” said Huck. “That was the day after I lost a white
al-ley. No, 'twas the day be-fore.”

“There--I told you so,” said Tom. “Huck re-col-lects it.”

“I bleeve I could smoke this pipe all day,” said Joe. “I don't feel
sick.”

“Neither do I,” said Tom. “I could smoke it all day. But I bet you Jeff
Thatcher couldn't.”

“Jeff Thatcher! Why, he'd keel over just with two draws. Just let him
try it once. _He'd_ see!”

“I bet he would. And Johnny Miller--I wish could see Johnny Miller tackle
it once.”

“Oh, don't I!” said Joe. “Why, I bet you Johnny Miller couldn't any more
do this than noth-ing. Just one little snifter would fetch _him_.”

“'Deed it would, Joe. Say--I wish the boys could see us now.”

“So do I.”

“Say--boys, don't say any-thing about it, and some time when they're
around, I'll come up to you and say, 'Joe, got a pipe? I want a smoke.'
And you'll say, kind of care-less like, as if it warn't any-thing, you'll
say, 'Yes, I got my _old_ pipe, and an-other one, but my to-backer ain't
very good.' And I'll say, 'Oh, that's all right, if it's _strong_
enough.' And then you'll out with the pipes, and we'll light up just as
ca'm, and then just see 'em look!”

“By jings, that'll be gay, Tom! I wish it was _now_!”

“So do I! And when we tell 'em we learned when we was off pir-at-ing,
won't they wish they'd been along?”

“Oh, I reckon not! I'll just _bet_ they will!”

So the talk ran on. But presently it began to flag a trifle, and
grow dis-join-ted. The si-lences widened; the ex-pect-or-a-tion mar-vel-lously
in-creased. Every pore in-side the boys' cheeks be-came a spout-ing
foun-tain; they could scarcely bail out the cel-lars un-der their tongues
fast enough to pre-vent an in-und-a-tion; little over-flow-ings down their
throats oc-curred in spite of all they could do, and sud-den retch-ings
fol-lowed every time. Both boys were look-ing very pale and miser-able,
now. Joe's pipe dropped from his nerve-less fin-gers. Tom's fol-lowed. Both
foun-tains were go-ing furi-ously and both pumps bail-ing with might and
main. Joe said feebly:

“I've lost my knife. I reckon I bet-ter go and find it.”

Tom said, with quiv-er-ing lips and halt-ing ut-ter-ance:

“I'll help you. You go over that way and I'll hunt around by the spring.
No, you needn't come, Huck--we can find it.”

So Huck sat down again, and waited an hour. Then he found it lone-some,
and went to find his com-rades. They were wide apart in the woods, both
very pale, both fast asleep. But some-thing in-formed him that if they had
had any trouble they had got rid of it.

They were not talk-at-ive at sup-per that night. They had a humble look,
and when Huck pre-pared his pipe after the meal and was go-ing to pre-pare
theirs, they said no, they were not feel-ing very well--some-thing they ate
at din-ner had dis-agreed with them.

About mid-night Joe awoke, and called the boys. There was a brood-ing
op-press-ive-ness in the air that seemed to bode some-thing. The boys
huddled them-selves to-gether and sought the friendly com-pan-ion-ship of
the fire, though the dull dead heat of the breath-less at-mo-sphere was
stifling. They sat still, in-tent and wait-ing. The sol-emn hush con-tin-ued.
Bey-ond the light of the fire everything was swal-lowed up in the
black-ness of dark-ness. Presently there came a quiv-er-ing glow that
vaguely re-vealed the fo-liage for a mo-ment and then van-ished. By and by
an-other came, a little stronger. Then an-other. Then a faint moan came
sigh-ing through the branches of the forest and the boys felt a fleet-ing
breath upon their cheeks, and shuddered with the fancy that the Spirit
of the Night had gone by. There was a pause. Now a weird flash turned
night into day and showed every little grass-blade, sep-ar-ate and
dis-tinct, that grew about their feet. And it showed three white,
startled faces, too. A deep peal of thun-der went rolling and tum-bling
down the heav-ens and lost it-self in sul-len rum-blings in the dis-tance. A
sweep of chilly air passed by, rust-ling all the leaves and snow-ing the
flaky ashes broad-cast about the fire. Another fierce glare lit up the
forest and an in-stant crash fol-lowed that seemed to rend the tree-tops
right over the boys' heads. They clung to-gether in ter-ror, in the thick
gloom that fol-lowed. A few big rain-drops fell pat-ter-ing upon the leaves.

“Quick! boys, go for the tent!” ex-claimed Tom.

They sprang away, stum-bling over roots and among vines in the dark, no
two plunging in the same dir-ec-tion. A furi-ous blast roared through
the trees, mak-ing everything sing as it went. One blind-ing flash after
an-other came, and peal on peal of deaf-en-ing thun-der. And now a drench-ing
rain poured down and the rising hur-ricane drove it in sheets along the
ground. The boys cried out to each other, but the roar-ing wind and the
boom-ing thun-der-blasts drowned their voices ut-terly. However, one by one
they straggled in at last and took shel-ter un-der the tent, cold, scared,
and stream-ing with wa-ter; but to have com-pany in misery seemed some-thing
to be grate-ful for. They could not talk, the old sail flapped so
furi-ously, even if the other noises would have al-lowed them. The tem-pest
rose higher and higher, and presently the sail tore loose from its
fasten-ings and went winging away on the blast. The boys seized each
oth-ers' hands and fled, with many tum-blings and bruises, to the shel-ter
of a great oak that stood upon the ri-verb-ank. Now the battle was at its
highest. Under the cease-less con-flag-ra-tion of light-ning that flamed
in the skies, everything be-low stood out in clean-cut and shad-ow-less
dis-tinct-ness: the bend-ing trees, the bil-lowy river, white with foam, the
driv-ing spray of spume-flakes, the dim out-lines of the high bluffs on
the other side, glimpsed through the drift-ing cloudrack and the slant-ing
veil of rain. Every little while some gi-ant tree yiel-ded the fight
and fell crash-ing through the younger growth; and the un-flag-ging
thun-der-peals came now in ear-split-ting ex-plos-ive bursts, keen and sharp,
and un-speak-ably ap-palling. The storm cul-min-ated in one match-less ef-fort
that seemed likely to tear the is-land to pieces, burn it up, drown it to
the tree-tops, blow it away, and deafen every creature in it, all at one
and the same mo-ment. It was a wild night for home-less young heads to be
out in.

But at last the battle was done, and the forces re-tired with weaker and
weaker threat-en-ings and grumblings, and peace re-sumed her sway. The
boys went back to camp, a good deal awed; but they found there was still
some-thing to be thank-ful for, be-cause the great sy-ca-more, the shel-ter
of their beds, was a ruin, now, blas-ted by the light-nings, and they were
not un-der it when the cata-strophe happened.

Everything in camp was drenched, the camp-fire as well; for they were but
heed-less lads, like their gen-er-a-tion, and had made no pro-vi-sion against
rain. Here was mat-ter for dis-may, for they were soaked through and
chilled. They were elo-quent in their dis-tress; but they presently
dis-covered that the fire had eaten so far up un-der the great log it had
been built against (where it curved up-ward and sep-ar-ated it-self from
the ground), that a hand-breadth or so of it had es-caped wet-ting; so they
pa-tiently wrought un-til, with shreds and bark gathered from the un-der
sides of sheltered logs, they coaxed the fire to burn again. Then they
piled on great dead boughs till they had a roar-ing fur-nace, and were
glad-hearted once more. They dried their boiled ham and had a feast,
and after that they sat by the fire and ex-pan-ded and glor-i-fied their
mid-night ad-ven-ture un-til morn-ing, for there was not a dry spot to sleep
on, any-where around.

As the sun began to steal in upon the boys, drowsi-ness came over
them, and they went out on the sand-bar and lay down to sleep. They got
scorched out by and by, and drear-ily set about get-ting break-fast. After
the meal they felt rusty, and stiff-join-ted, and a little home-sick once
more. Tom saw the signs, and fell to cheer-ing up the pir-ates as well as
he could. But they cared noth-ing for marbles, or cir-cus, or swim-ming, or
any-thing. He re-minded them of the im-pos-ing secret, and raised a ray of
cheer. While it las-ted, he got them in-ter-ested in a new device. This was
to knock off be-ing pir-ates, for a while, and be In-di-ans for a change.
They were at-trac-ted by this idea; so it was not long be-fore they were
stripped, and striped from head to heel with black mud, like so many
zebras--all of them chiefs, of course--and then they went tear-ing through
the woods to at-tack an Eng-lish set-tle-ment.

By and by they sep-ar-ated into three hos-tile tribes, and dar-ted upon each
other from am-bush with dread-ful war-whoops, and killed and scalped each
other by thou-sands. It was a gory day. Con-sequently it was an ex-tremely
sat-is-fact-ory one.

They as-sembled in camp to-ward sup-per-time, hungry and happy; but now
a dif-fi-culty arose--hos-tile In-di-ans could not break the bread of
hos-pit-al-ity to-gether without first mak-ing peace, and this was a simple
im-possib-il-ity without smoking a pipe of peace. There was no other
pro-cess that ever they had heard of. Two of the sav-ages al-most wished
they had re-mained pir-ates. However, there was no other way; so with such
show of cheer-ful-ness as they could muster they called for the pipe and
took their whiff as it passed, in due form.

And be-hold, they were glad they had gone into sav-agery, for they had
gained some-thing; they found that they could now smoke a little without
hav-ing to go and hunt for a lost knife; they did not get sick enough to
be ser-i-ously un-com-fort-able. They were not likely to fool away this high
prom-ise for lack of ef-fort. No, they prac-tised cau-tiously, after sup-per,
with right fair suc-cess, and so they spent a ju-bil-ant even-ing. They were
prouder and hap-pier in their new ac-quire-ment than they would have been
in the scalping and skin-ning of the Six Na-tions. We will leave them to
smoke and chat-ter and brag, since we have no fur-ther use for them at
present.




CHAPTER XVII

BUT there was no hil-ar-ity in the little town that same tran-quil Saturday
af-ter-noon. The Harp-ers, and Aunt Polly's fam-ily, were be-ing put into
mourn-ing, with great grief and many tears. An un-usual quiet pos-sessed
the vil-lage, al-though it was or-din-ar-ily quiet enough, in all con-science.
The vil-la-gers con-duc-ted their con-cerns with an ab-sent air, and talked
little; but they sighed of-ten. The Saturday hol-i-day seemed a bur-den to
the chil-dren. They had no heart in their sports, and gradu-ally gave them
up.

In the af-ter-noon Becky Thatcher found her-self mop-ing about the deser-ted
school-house yard, and feel-ing very mel-an-choly. But she found noth-ing
there to com-fort her. She so-li-lo-quized:

“Oh, if I only had a brass and-iron-knob again! But I haven't got
any-thing now to re-mem-ber him by.” And she choked back a little sob.

Presently she stopped, and said to her-self:

“It was right here. Oh, if it was to do over again, I wouldn't say
that--I wouldn't say it for the whole world. But he's gone now; I'll
never, never, never see him any more.”

This thought broke her down, and she wandered away, with tears rolling
down her cheeks. Then quite a group of boys and girls--play-mates of Tom's
and Joe's--came by, and stood look-ing over the pal-ing fence and talk-ing
in rev-er-ent tones of how Tom did so-and-so the last time they saw
him, and how Joe said this and that small trifle (preg-nant with aw-ful
proph-ecy, as they could eas-ily see now!)--and each speaker poin-ted out
the ex-act spot where the lost lads stood at the time, and then ad-ded
some-thing like “and I was a-stand-ing just so--just as I am now, and as if
you was him--I was as close as that--and he smiled, just this way--and then
some-thing seemed to go all over me, like--aw-ful, you know--and I never
thought what it meant, of course, but I can see now!”

Then there was a dis-pute about who saw the dead boys last in life, and
many claimed that dis-mal dis-tinc-tion, and offered evid-ences, more or
less tampered with by the wit-ness; and when it was ul-ti-mately de-cided
who _did_ see the de-par-ted last, and ex-changed the last words with them,
the lucky parties took upon them-selves a sort of sac-red im-port-ance,
and were gaped at and en-vied by all the rest. One poor chap, who had
no other grandeur to of-fer, said with tol-er-ably mani-fest pride in the
re-mem-brance:

“Well, Tom Saw-yer he licked me once.”

But that bid for glory was a fail-ure. Most of the boys could say that,
and so that cheapened the dis-tinc-tion too much. The group loitered away,
still re-call-ing memor-ies of the lost her-oes, in awed voices.

When the Sunday-school hour was fin-ished, the next morn-ing, the bell
began to toll, in-stead of ringing in the usual way. It was a very still
Sab-bath, and the mourn-ful sound seemed in keep-ing with the mus-ing hush
that lay upon nature. The vil-la-gers began to gather, loiter-ing a mo-ment
in the ves-ti-bule to con-verse in whis-pers about the sad event. But there
was no whis-per-ing in the house; only the fu-ner-eal rust-ling of dresses
as the wo-men gathered to their seats dis-turbed the si-lence there. None
could re-mem-ber when the little church had been so full be-fore. There
was fi-nally a wait-ing pause, an ex-pect-ant dumb-ness, and then Aunt Polly
entered, fol-lowed by Sid and Mary, and they by the Harper fam-ily, all in
deep black, and the whole con-greg-a-tion, the old min-is-ter as well, rose
rev-er-ently and stood un-til the mourn-ers were seated in the front pew.
There was an-other com-mun-ing si-lence, broken at in-ter-vals by muffled
sobs, and then the min-is-ter spread his hands abroad and prayed. A mov-ing
hymn was sung, and the text fol-lowed: “I am the Re-sur-rec-tion and the
Life.”

As the ser-vice pro-ceeded, the cler-gy-man drew such pic-tures of the
graces, the win-ning ways, and the rare prom-ise of the lost lads that
every soul there, think-ing he re-cog-nized these pic-tures, felt a pang
in re-mem-ber-ing that he had per-sist-ently blinded him-self to them al-ways
be-fore, and had as per-sist-ently seen only faults and flaws in the poor
boys. The min-is-ter re-lated many a touch-ing in-cid-ent in the lives of the
de-par-ted, too, which il-lus-trated their sweet, gen-er-ous natures, and the
people could eas-ily see, now, how noble and beau-ti-ful those epis-odes
were, and re-membered with grief that at the time they oc-curred they had
seemed rank ras-cal-it-ies, well de-serving of the cow-hide. The con-greg-a-tion
be-came more and more moved, as the pathetic tale went on, till at last
the whole com-pany broke down and joined the weep-ing mourn-ers in a chorus
of an-guished sobs, the preacher him-self giv-ing way to his feel-ings, and
cry-ing in the pul-pit.

There was a rustle in the gal-lery, which nobody no-ticed; a mo-ment later
the church door creaked; the min-is-ter raised his stream-ing eyes above
his handker-chief, and stood trans-fixed! First one and then an-other pair
of eyes fol-lowed the min-is-ter's, and then al-most with one im-pulse the
con-greg-a-tion rose and stared while the three dead boys came march-ing up
the aisle, Tom in the lead, Joe next, and Huck, a ruin of droop-ing rags,
sneak-ing sheep-ishly in the rear! They had been hid in the un-used gal-lery
listen-ing to their own fu-neral ser-mon!

Aunt Polly, Mary, and the Harp-ers threw them-selves upon their re-stored
ones, smothered them with kisses and poured out thanks-giv-ings, while
poor Huck stood abashed and un-com-fort-able, not know-ing ex-actly what
to do or where to hide from so many un-wel-com-ing eyes. He wavered, and
star-ted to slink away, but Tom seized him and said:

“Aunt Polly, it ain't fair. Some-body's got to be glad to see Huck.”

“And so they shall. I'm glad to see him, poor moth-er-less thing!” And
the lov-ing at-ten-tions Aunt Polly lav-ished upon him were the one thing
cap-able of mak-ing him more un-com-fort-able than he was be-fore.

Sud-denly the min-is-ter shouted at the top of his voice: “Praise God from
whom all bless-ings flow--_sing_!--and put your hearts in it!”

And they did. Old Hun-dred swelled up with a tri-umphant burst, and
while it shook the rafters Tom Saw-yer the Pir-ate looked around upon the
envy-ing ju-ven-iles about him and con-fessed in his heart that this was the
proudest mo-ment of his life.

As the “sold” con-greg-a-tion trooped out they said they would al-most be
will-ing to be made ri-dicu-lous again to hear Old Hun-dred sung like that
once more.

Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day--ac-cord-ing to Aunt Polly's vary-ing
moods--than he had earned be-fore in a year; and he hardly knew which
ex-pressed the most grate-ful-ness to God and af-fec-tion for him-self.




CHAPTER XVIII

THAT was Tom's great secret--the scheme to re-turn home with his brother
pir-ates and at-tend their own fu-ner-als. They had paddled over to the
Mis-souri shore on a log, at dusk on Saturday, land-ing five or six miles
be-low the vil-lage; they had slept in the woods at the edge of the town
till nearly day-light, and had then crept through back lanes and al-leys
and fin-ished their sleep in the gal-lery of the church among a chaos of
in-val-ided benches.

At break-fast, Monday morn-ing, Aunt Polly and Mary were very lov-ing to
Tom, and very at-tent-ive to his wants. There was an un-usual amount of
talk. In the course of it Aunt Polly said:

“Well, I don't say it wasn't a fine joke, Tom, to keep every-body
suf-fer-ing 'most a week so you boys had a good time, but it is a pity you
could be so hard-hearted as to let me suf-fer so. If you could come over
on a log to go to your fu-neral, you could have come over and give me a
hint some way that you warn't dead, but only run off.”

“Yes, you could have done that, Tom,” said Mary; “and I be-lieve you
would if you had thought of it.”

“Would you, Tom?” said Aunt Polly, her face light-ing wist-fully. “Say,
now, would you, if you'd thought of it?”

“I--well, I don't know. 'Twould 'a' spoiled everything.”

“Tom, I hoped you loved me that much,” said Aunt Polly, with a grieved
tone that dis-com-for-ted the boy. “It would have been some-thing if you'd
cared enough to _think_ of it, even if you didn't _do_ it.”

“Now, auntie, that ain't any harm,” pleaded Mary; “it's only Tom's giddy
way--he is al-ways in such a rush that he never thinks of any-thing.”

“More's the pity. Sid would have thought. And Sid would have come and
_done_ it, too. Tom, you'll look back, some day, when it's too late,
and wish you'd cared a little more for me when it would have cost you so
little.”

“Now, auntie, you know I do care for you,” said Tom.

“I'd know it bet-ter if you ac-ted more like it.”

“I wish now I'd thought,” said Tom, with a re-pent-ant tone; “but I dreamt
about you, any-way. That's some-thing, ain't it?”

“It ain't much--a cat does that much--but it's bet-ter than noth-ing. What
did you dream?”

“Why, Wed-nes-day night I dreamt that you was sit-ting over there by the
bed, and Sid was sit-ting by the wood-box, and Mary next to him.”

“Well, so we did. So we al-ways do. I'm glad your dreams could take even
that much trouble about us.”

“And I dreamt that Joe Harper's mother was here.”

“Why, she was here! Did you dream any more?”

“Oh, lots. But it's so dim, now.”

“Well, try to re-col-lect--can't you?”

“Some-how it seems to me that the wind--the wind blowed the--the--”

“Try harder, Tom! The wind did blow some-thing. Come!”

Tom pressed his fin-gers on his fore-head an anxious minute, and then
said:

“I've got it now! I've got it now! It blowed the candle!”

“Mercy on us! Go on, Tom--go on!”

“And it seems to me that you said, 'Why, I be-lieve that that door--'”

“Go _on_, Tom!”

“Just let me study a mo-ment--just a mo-ment. Oh, yes--you said you be-lieved
the door was open.”

“As I'm sit-ting here, I did! Didn't I, Mary! Go on!”

“And then--and then--well I won't be cer-tain, but it seems like as if you
made Sid go and--and--”

“Well? Well? What did I make him do, Tom? What did I make him do?”

“You made him--you--Oh, you made him shut it.”

“Well, for the land's sake! I never heard the beat of that in all my
days! Don't tell _me_ there ain't any-thing in dreams, any more. Ser-eny
Harper shall know of this be-fore I'm an hour older. I'd like to see her
get around _this_ with her rub-bage 'bout su-per-sti-tion. Go on, Tom!”

“Oh, it's all get-ting just as bright as day, now. Next you said I warn't
_bad_, only mis-chee-vous and harum-scarum, and not any more re-spons-ible
than--than--I think it was a colt, or some-thing.”

“And so it was! Well, good-ness gra-cious! Go on, Tom!”

“And then you began to cry.”

“So I did. So I did. Not the first time, neither. And then--”

“Then Mrs. Harper she began to cry, and said Joe was just the same, and
she wished she hadn't whipped him for tak-ing cream when she'd throwed it
out her own self--”

“Tom! The sper-rit was upon you! You was a proph-esy-ing--that's what you
was do-ing! Land alive, go on, Tom!”

“Then Sid he said--he said--”

“I don't think I said any-thing,” said Sid.

“Yes you did, Sid,” said Mary.

“Shut your heads and let Tom go on! What did he say, Tom?”

“He said--I _think_ he said he hoped I was bet-ter off where I was gone
to, but if I'd been bet-ter some-times--”

“_There_, d'you hear that! It was his very words!”

“And you shut him up sharp.”

“I lay I did! There must 'a' been an an-gel there. There _was_ an an-gel
there, some-wheres!”

“And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scar-ing her with a fire-cracker, and you
told about Peter and the Pain-killer--”

“Just as true as I live!”

“And then there was a whole lot of talk 'bout drag-ging the river for us,
and 'bout hav-ing the fu-neral Sunday, and then you and old Miss Harper
hugged and cried, and she went.”

“It happened just so! It happened just so, as sure as I'm a-sit-ting in
these very tracks. Tom, you couldn't told it more like if you'd 'a' seen
it! And then what? Go on, Tom!”

“Then I thought you prayed for me--and I could see you and hear every
word you said. And you went to bed, and I was so sorry that I took and
wrote on a piece of sy-ca-more bark, 'We ain't dead--we are only off be-ing
pir-ates,' and put it on the table by the candle; and then you looked
so good, lay-ing there asleep, that I thought I went and leaned over and
kissed you on the lips.”

“Did you, Tom, _did_ you! I just for-give you everything for that!” And
she seized the boy in a crush-ing em-brace that made him feel like the
guilti-est of vil-lains.

“It was very kind, even though it was only a--dream,” Sid so-li-lo-quized
just aud-ibly.

“Shut up, Sid! A body does just the same in a dream as he'd do if he was
awake. Here's a big Mi-lum apple I've been sav-ing for you, Tom, if you
was ever found again--now go 'long to school. I'm thank-ful to the good
God and Father of us all I've got you back, that's long-suf-fer-ing and
mer-ci-ful to them that be-lieve on Him and keep His word, though good-ness
knows I'm un-worthy of it, but if only the worthy ones got His bless-ings
and had His hand to help them over the rough places, there's few enough
would smile here or ever enter into His rest when the long night comes.
Go 'long Sid, Mary, Tom--take yourselves off--you've hende-red me long
enough.”

The chil-dren left for school, and the old lady to call on Mrs. Harper
and van-quish her real-ism with Tom's mar-vel-lous dream. Sid had bet-ter
judg-ment than to ut-ter the thought that was in his mind as he left the
house. It was this: “Pretty thin--as long a dream as that, without any
mis-takes in it!”

What a hero Tom was be-come, now! He did not go skip-ping and pran-cing,
but moved with a dig-ni-fied swag-ger as be-came a pir-ate who felt that the
pub-lic eye was on him. And in-deed it was; he tried not to seem to see
the looks or hear the re-marks as he passed along, but they were food and
drink to him. Smal-ler boys than him-self flocked at his heels, as proud
to be seen with him, and tol-er-ated by him, as if he had been the drum-mer
at the head of a pro-ces-sion or the ele-phant lead-ing a me-na-gerie into
town. Boys of his own size pre-ten-ded not to know he had been away at
all; but they were con-sum-ing with envy, nev-er-the-less. They would have
given any-thing to have that swarthy sun-tanned skin of his, and his
glit-ter-ing no-tori-ety; and Tom would not have par-ted with either for a
cir-cus.

At school the chil-dren made so much of him and of Joe, and de-livered
such elo-quent ad-mir-a-tion from their eyes, that the two her-oes were
not long in be-com-ing in-suf-fer-ably “stuck-up.” They began to tell their
ad-ven-tures to hungry listen-ers--but they only began; it was not a
thing likely to have an end, with ima-gin-a-tions like theirs to fur-nish
ma-ter-ial. And fi-nally, when they got out their pipes and went se-renely
puff-ing around, the very sum-mit of glory was reached.

Tom de-cided that he could be in-de-pend-ent of Becky Thatcher now. Glory
was suf-fi-cient. He would live for glory. Now that he was dis-tin-guished,
maybe she would be want-ing to “make up.” Well, let her--she should see
that he could be as in-dif-fer-ent as some other people. Presently she
ar-rived. Tom pre-ten-ded not to see her. He moved away and joined a group
of boys and girls and began to talk. Soon he ob-served that she was
trip-ping gayly back and forth with flushed face and dan-cing eyes,
pre-tend-ing to be busy chas-ing school-mates, and scream-ing with laughter
when she made a cap-ture; but he no-ticed that she al-ways made her
cap-tures in his vi-cin-ity, and that she seemed to cast a con-scious eye
in his dir-ec-tion at such times, too. It grat-i-fied all the vi-cious van-ity
that was in him; and so, in-stead of win-ning him, it only “set him up”
 the more and made him the more di-li-gent to avoid be-tray-ing that he
knew she was about. Presently she gave over sky-lark-ing, and moved
ir-res-ol-utely about, sigh-ing once or twice and glan-cing furt-ively and
wist-fully to-ward Tom. Then she ob-served that now Tom was talk-ing more
par-tic-u-larly to Amy Lawrence than to any one else. She felt a sharp pang
and grew dis-turbed and un-easy at once. She tried to go away, but her
feet were treach-er-ous, and car-ried her to the group in-stead. She said to
a girl al-most at Tom's el-bow--with sham vi-va-city:

“Why, Mary Austin! you bad girl, why didn't you come to Sunday-school?”

“I did come--didn't you see me?”

“Why, no! Did you? Where did you sit?”

“I was in Miss Peters' class, where I al-ways go. I saw _y-ou_.”

“Did you? Why, it's funny I didn't see you. I wanted to tell you about
the pic-nic.”

“Oh, that's jolly. Who's go-ing to give it?”

“My ma's go-ing to let me have one.”

“Oh, goody; I hope she'll let _me_ come.”

“Well, she will. The pic-nic's for me. She'll let any-body come that I
want, and I want you.”

“That's ever so nice. When is it go-ing to be?”

“By and by. Maybe about va-ca-tion.”

“Oh, won't it be fun! You go-ing to have all the girls and boys?”

“Yes, every one that's friends to me--or wants to be”; and she glanced
ever so furt-ively at Tom, but he talked right along to Amy Lawrence
about the ter-rible storm on the is-land, and how the light-ning tore the
great sy-ca-more tree “all to flinders” while he was “stand-ing within
three feet of it.”

“Oh, may I come?” said Grace Miller.

“Yes.”

“And me?” said Sally Ro-gers.

“Yes.”

“And me, too?” said Susy Harper. “And Joe?”

“Yes.”

And so on, with clap-ping of joy-ful hands till all the group had begged
for in-vit-a-tions but Tom and Amy. Then Tom turned coolly away, still
talk-ing, and took Amy with him. Becky's lips trembled and the tears
came to her eyes; she hid these signs with a forced gayety and went on
chat-ter-ing, but the life had gone out of the pic-nic, now, and out of
everything else; she got away as soon as she could and hid her-self and
had what her sex call “a good cry.” Then she sat moody, with wounded
pride, till the bell rang. She roused up, now, with a vin-dict-ive cast
in her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew what
_she'd_ do.

At re-cess Tom con-tin-ued his flir-ta-tion with Amy with ju-bil-ant
self-sat-is-fac-tion. And he kept drift-ing about to find Becky and la-cer-ate
her with the per-form-ance. At last he spied her, but there was a sud-den
fall-ing of his mer-cury. She was sit-ting co-sily on a little bench be-hind
the school-house look-ing at a pic-ture-book with Al-fred Temple--and so
ab-sorbed were they, and their heads so close to-gether over the book,
that they did not seem to be con-scious of any-thing in the world be-sides.
Jeal-ousy ran red-hot through Tom's veins. He began to hate him-self for
throw-ing away the chance Becky had offered for a re-con-cili-ation. He
called him-self a fool, and all the hard names he could think of. He
wanted to cry with vex-a-tion. Amy chat-ted hap-pily along, as they walked,
for her heart was singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its func-tion. He
did not hear what Amy was say-ing, and whenever she paused ex-pect-antly
he could only stam-mer an awk-ward as-sent, which was as of-ten mis-placed
as oth-er-wise. He kept drift-ing to the rear of the school-house, again and
again, to sear his eye-balls with the hate-ful spec-tacle there. He could
not help it. And it maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that
Becky Thatcher never once sus-pec-ted that he was even in the land of the
liv-ing. But she did see, nev-er-the-less; and she knew she was win-ning her
fight, too, and was glad to see him suf-fer as she had suffered.

Amy's happy prattle be-came in-tol-er-able. Tom hin-ted at things he had
to at-tend to; things that must be done; and time was fleet-ing. But in
vain--the girl chirped on. Tom thought, “Oh, hang her, ain't I ever go-ing
to get rid of her?” At last he must be at-tend-ing to those things--and she
said art-lessly that she would be “around” when school let out. And he
hastened away, hat-ing her for it.

“Any other boy!” Tom thought, grat-ing his teeth. “Any boy in the whole
town but that Saint Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is
ar-is-to-cracy! Oh, all right, I licked you the first day you ever saw this
town, mis-ter, and I'll lick you again! You just wait till I catch you
out! I'll just take and--”

And he went through the mo-tions of thrash-ing an ima-gin-ary boy--pum-mel-ling
the air, and kick-ing and gou-ging. “Oh, you do, do you? You holler
'nough, do you? Now, then, let that learn you!” And so the ima-gin-ary
flog-ging was fin-ished to his sat-is-fac-tion.

Tom fled home at noon. His con-science could not en-dure any more of Amy's
grate-ful hap-pi-ness, and his jeal-ousy could bear no more of the other
dis-tress. Becky re-sumed her pic-ture in-spec-tions with Al-fred, but as the
minutes dragged along and no Tom came to suf-fer, her tri-umph began to
cloud and she lost in-terest; grav-ity and ab-sent-minded-ness fol-lowed,
and then mel-an-choly; two or three times she pricked up her ear at
a foot-step, but it was a false hope; no Tom came. At last she grew
en-tirely miser-able and wished she hadn't car-ried it so far. When
poor Al-fred, see-ing that he was los-ing her, he did not know how, kept
ex-claim-ing: “Oh, here's a jolly one! look at this!” she lost pa-tience at
last, and said, “Oh, don't bother me! I don't care for them!” and burst
into tears, and got up and walked away.

Al-fred dropped along-side and was go-ing to try to com-fort her, but she
said:

“Go away and leave me alone, can't you! I hate you!”

So the boy hal-ted, won-der-ing what he could have done--for she had said
she would look at pic-tures all through the noon-ing--and she walked on,
cry-ing. Then Al-fred went mus-ing into the deser-ted school-house. He was
hu-mi-li-ated and angry. He eas-ily guessed his way to the truth--the girl
had simply made a con-veni-ence of him to vent her spite upon Tom Saw-yer.
He was far from hat-ing Tom the less when this thought oc-curred to him.
He wished there was some way to get that boy into trouble without much
risk to him-self. Tom's spelling-book fell un-der his eye. Here was his
op-por-tun-ity. He grate-fully opened to the les-son for the af-ter-noon and
poured ink upon the page.

Becky, glan-cing in at a win-dow be-hind him at the mo-ment, saw the act,
and moved on, without dis-cov-er-ing her-self. She star-ted home-ward, now,
in-tend-ing to find Tom and tell him; Tom would be thank-ful and their
troubles would be healed. Be-fore she was half way home, how-ever, she
had changed her mind. The thought of Tom's treat-ment of her when she was
talk-ing about her pic-nic came scorch-ing back and filled her with shame.
She re-solved to let him get whipped on the dam-aged spelling-book's
ac-count, and to hate him forever, into the bar-gain.




CHAPTER XIX

TOM ar-rived at home in a dreary mood, and the first thing his aunt said
to him showed him that he had brought his sor-rows to an un-prom-ising
mar-ket:

“Tom, I've a no-tion to skin you alive!”

“Auntie, what have I done?”

“Well, you've done enough. Here I go over to Ser-eny Harper, like an old
softy, ex-pect-ing I'm go-ing to make her be-lieve all that rub-bage about
that dream, when lo and be-hold you she'd found out from Joe that you was
over here and heard all the talk we had that night. Tom, I don't know
what is to be-come of a boy that will act like that. It makes me feel so
bad to think you could let me go to Ser-eny Harper and make such a fool
of my-self and never say a word.”

This was a new as-pect of the thing. His smart-ness of the morn-ing had
seemed to Tom a good joke be-fore, and very in-geni-ous. It merely looked
mean and shabby now. He hung his head and could not think of any-thing to
say for a mo-ment. Then he said:

“Auntie, I wish I hadn't done it--but I didn't think.”

“Oh, child, you never think. You never think of any-thing but your
own selfish-ness. You could think to come all the way over here from
Jack-son's Is-land in the night to laugh at our troubles, and you could
think to fool me with a lie about a dream; but you couldn't ever think
to pity us and save us from sor-row.”

“Auntie, I know now it was mean, but I didn't mean to be mean. I didn't,
hon-est. And be-sides, I didn't come over here to laugh at you that
night.”

“What did you come for, then?”

“It was to tell you not to be un-easy about us, be-cause we hadn't got
drown-ded.”

“Tom, Tom, I would be the thank-fullest soul in this world if I could
be-lieve you ever had as good a thought as that, but you know you never
did--and I know it, Tom.”

“Indeed and 'deed I did, auntie--I wish I may never stir if I didn't.”

“Oh, Tom, don't lie--don't do it. It only makes things a hun-dred times
worse.”

“It ain't a lie, auntie; it's the truth. I wanted to keep you from
griev-ing--that was all that made me come.”

“I'd give the whole world to be-lieve that--it would cover up a power
of sins, Tom. I'd 'most be glad you'd run off and ac-ted so bad. But it
ain't reas-on-able; be-cause, why didn't you tell me, child?”

“Why, you see, when you got to talk-ing about the fu-neral, I just got all
full of the idea of our com-ing and hid-ing in the church, and I couldn't
some-how bear to spoil it. So I just put the bark back in my pocket and
kept mum.”

“What bark?”

“The bark I had wrote on to tell you we'd gone pir-at-ing. I wish, now,
you'd waked up when I kissed you--I do, hon-est.”

The hard lines in his aunt's face re-laxed and a sud-den ten-der-ness dawned
in her eyes.

“_Did_ you kiss me, Tom?”

“Why, yes, I did.”

“Are you sure you did, Tom?”

“Why, yes, I did, auntie--cer-tain sure.”

“What did you kiss me for, Tom?”

“Be-cause I loved you so, and you laid there moan-ing and I was so sorry.”

The words soun-ded like truth. The old lady could not hide a tremor in
her voice when she said:

“Kiss me again, Tom!--and be off with you to school, now, and don't
bother me any more.”

The mo-ment he was gone, she ran to a closet and got out the ruin of a
jacket which Tom had gone pir-at-ing in. Then she stopped, with it in her
hand, and said to her-self:

“No, I don't dare. Poor boy, I reckon he's lied about it--but it's a
blessed, blessed lie, there's such a com-fort come from it. I hope
the Lord--I _know_ the Lord will for-give him, be-cause it was such
good-hearted-ness in him to tell it. But I don't want to find out it's a
lie. I won't look.”

She put the jacket away, and stood by mus-ing a minute. Twice she put out
her hand to take the gar-ment again, and twice she re-frained. Once more
she ven-tured, and this time she for-ti-fied her-self with the thought:
“It's a good lie--it's a good lie--I won't let it grieve me.” So she
sought the jacket pocket. A mo-ment later she was read-ing Tom's piece of
bark through flow-ing tears and say-ing: “I could for-give the boy, now, if
he'd com-mit-ted a mil-lion sins!”




CHAPTER XX

THERE was some-thing about Aunt Polly's man-ner, when she kissed Tom, that
swept away his low spir-its and made him light-hearted and happy again. He
star-ted to school and had the luck of com-ing upon Becky Thatcher at the
head of Meadow Lane. His mood al-ways de-term-ined his man-ner. Without a
mo-ment's hes-it-a-tion he ran to her and said:

“I ac-ted mighty mean today, Becky, and I'm so sorry. I won't ever, ever
do that way again, as long as ever I live--please make up, won't you?”

The girl stopped and looked him scorn-fully in the face:

“I'll thank you to keep your-self _to_ your-self, Mr. Tho-mas Saw-yer. I'll
never speak to you again.”

She tossed her head and passed on. Tom was so stunned that he had not
even pres-ence of mind enough to say “Who cares, Miss Smarty?” un-til the
right time to say it had gone by. So he said noth-ing. But he was in a
fine rage, nev-er-the-less. He moped into the school-yard wish-ing she were
a boy, and ima-gin-ing how he would trounce her if she were. He presently
en-countered her and de-livered a sting-ing re-mark as he passed. She hurled
one in re-turn, and the angry breach was com-plete. It seemed to Becky, in
her hot re-sent-ment, that she could hardly wait for school to “take in,”
 she was so im-pa-tient to see Tom flogged for the in-jured spelling-book.
If she had had any linger-ing no-tion of ex-pos-ing Al-fred Temple, Tom's
of-fens-ive fling had driven it en-tirely away.

Poor girl, she did not know how fast she was near-ing trouble her-self.
The mas-ter, Mr. Dob-bins, had reached middle age with an un-sat-is-fied
am-bi-tion. The darling of his de-sires was, to be a doc-tor, but
poverty had de-creed that he should be noth-ing higher than a vil-lage
school-mas-ter. Every day he took a mys-ter-i-ous book out of his desk and
ab-sorbed him-self in it at times when no classes were re-cit-ing. He kept
that book un-der lock and key. There was not an urchin in school but was
per-ish-ing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came. Every boy
and girl had a the-ory about the nature of that book; but no two the-or-ies
were alike, and there was no way of get-ting at the facts in the case.
Now, as Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the door, she
no-ticed that the key was in the lock! It was a pre-cious mo-ment. She
glanced around; found her-self alone, and the next in-stant she had the
book in her hands. The title-page--Pro-fessor Some-body's _An-a-tomy_--car-ried
no in-form-a-tion to her mind; so she began to turn the leaves. She came at
once upon a hand-somely en-graved and colored frontis-piece--a hu-man fig-ure,
stark na-ked. At that mo-ment a shadow fell on the page and Tom Saw-yer
stepped in at the door and caught a glimpse of the pic-ture. Becky
snatched at the book to close it, and had the hard luck to tear the
pic-tured page half down the middle. She thrust the volume into the desk,
turned the key, and burst out cry-ing with shame and vex-a-tion.

“Tom Saw-yer, you are just as mean as you can be, to sneak up on a per-son
and look at what they're look-ing at.”

“How could I know you was look-ing at any-thing?”

“You ought to be ashamed of your-self, Tom Saw-yer; you know you're
go-ing to tell on me, and oh, what shall I do, what shall I do! I'll be
whipped, and I never was whipped in school.”

Then she stamped her little foot and said:

“_Be_ so mean if you want to! I know some-thing that's go-ing to hap-pen.
You just wait and you'll see! Hate-ful, hate-ful, hate-ful!”--and she flung
out of the house with a new ex-plo-sion of cry-ing.

Tom stood still, rather flustered by this on-slaught. Presently he said
to him-self:

“What a curi-ous kind of a fool a girl is! Never been licked in
school! Shucks! What's a lick-ing! That's just like a girl--they're so
thin-skinned and chicken-hearted. Well, of course I ain't go-ing to tell
old Dob-bins on this little fool, be-cause there's other ways of get-ting
even on her, that ain't so mean; but what of it? Old Dob-bins will ask
who it was tore his book. Nobody'll an-swer. Then he'll do just the way
he al-ways does--ask first one and then t'other, and when he comes to the
right girl he'll know it, without any telling. Girls' faces al-ways tell
on them. They ain't got any back-bone. She'll get licked. Well, it's a
kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, be-cause there ain't any way
out of it.” Tom conned the thing a mo-ment longer, and then ad-ded: “All
right, though; she'd like to see me in just such a fix--let her sweat it
out!”

Tom joined the mob of sky-lark-ing schol-ars out-side. In a few mo-ments the
mas-ter ar-rived and school “took in.” Tom did not feel a strong in-terest
in his stud-ies. Every time he stole a glance at the girls' side of the
room Becky's face troubled him. Con-sid-er-ing all things, he did not want
to pity her, and yet it was all he could do to help it. He could get
up no ex-ulta-tion that was really worthy the name. Presently the
spelling-book dis-cov-ery was made, and Tom's mind was en-tirely full
of his own mat-ters for a while after that. Becky roused up from her
leth-argy of dis-tress and showed good in-terest in the pro-ceed-ings. She
did not ex-pect that Tom could get out of his trouble by deny-ing that he
spilt the ink on the book him-self; and she was right. The denial only
seemed to make the thing worse for Tom. Becky sup-posed she would be glad
of that, and she tried to be-lieve she was glad of it, but she found she
was not cer-tain. When the worst came to the worst, she had an im-pulse
to get up and tell on Al-fred Temple, but she made an ef-fort and forced
her-self to keep still--be-cause, said she to her-self, “he'll tell about me
tear-ing the pic-ture sure. I wouldn't say a word, not to save his life!”

Tom took his whip-ping and went back to his seat not at all
broken-hearted, for he thought it was pos-sible that he had un-know-ingly
up-set the ink on the spelling-book him-self, in some sky-lark-ing bout--he
had denied it for form's sake and be-cause it was cus-tom, and had stuck
to the denial from prin-ciple.

A whole hour drif-ted by, the mas-ter sat nod-ding in his throne, the air
was drowsy with the hum of study. By and by, Mr. Dob-bins straightened
him-self up, yawned, then un-locked his desk, and reached for his book,
but seemed un-de-cided whether to take it out or leave it. Most of the
pu-pils glanced up lan-guidly, but there were two among them that watched
his move-ments with in-tent eyes. Mr. Dob-bins fingered his book ab-sently
for a while, then took it out and settled him-self in his chair to read!
Tom shot a glance at Becky. He had seen a hunted and help-less rab-bit
look as she did, with a gun lev-elled at its head. In-stantly he for-got
his quar-rel with her. Quick--some-thing must be done! done in a flash,
too! But the very im-min-ence of the emer-gency para-lyzed his in-ven-tion.
Good!--he had an in-spir-a-tion! He would run and snatch the book, spring
through the door and fly. But his res-ol-u-tion shook for one little
in-stant, and the chance was lost--the mas-ter opened the volume. If Tom
only had the wasted op-por-tun-ity back again! Too late. There was no help
for Becky now, he said. The next mo-ment the mas-ter faced the school.
Every eye sank un-der his gaze. There was that in it which smote even
the in-no-cent with fear. There was si-lence while one might count ten--the
mas-ter was gath-er-ing his wrath. Then he spoke: “Who tore this book?”

There was not a sound. One could have heard a pin drop. The still-ness
con-tin-ued; the mas-ter searched face after face for signs of guilt.

“Ben-jamin Ro-gers, did you tear this book?”

A denial. Another pause.

“Joseph Harper, did you?”

Another denial. Tom's un-eas-i-ness grew more and more in-tense un-der the
slow tor-ture of these pro-ceed-ings. The mas-ter scanned the ranks of
boys--con-sidered a while, then turned to the girls:

“Amy Lawrence?”

A shake of the head.

“Gracie Miller?”

The same sign.

“Susan Harper, did you do this?”

Another neg-at-ive. The next girl was Becky Thatcher. Tom was trem-bling
from head to foot with ex-cite-ment and a sense of the hope-less-ness of the
situ-ation.

“Re-becca Thatcher” [Tom glanced at her face--it was white with
ter-ror]--“did you tear--no, look me in the face” [her hands rose in
ap-peal]--“did you tear this book?”

A thought shot like light-ning through Tom's brain. He sprang to his feet
and shouted--“I done it!”

The school stared in per-plex-ity at this in-cred-ible folly. Tom stood a
mo-ment, to gather his dis-membered fac-ulties; and when he stepped for-ward
to go to his pun-ish-ment the sur-prise, the grat-it-ude, the ad-or-a-tion that
shone upon him out of poor Becky's eyes seemed pay enough for a hun-dred
flog-gings. In-spired by the splendor of his own act, he took without
an out-cry the most mer-ci-less flay-ing that even Mr. Dob-bins had ever
ad-min-istered; and also re-ceived with in-dif-fer-ence the ad-ded cruelty of a
com-mand to re-main two hours after school should be dis-missed--for he
knew who would wait for him out-side till his cap-tiv-ity was done, and not
count the te-di-ous time as loss, either.

Tom went to bed that night plan-ning ven-geance against Al-fred Temple; for
with shame and re-pent-ance Becky had told him all, not for-get-ting her own
treach-ery; but even the long-ing for ven-geance had to give way, soon, to
pleas-anter mus-ings, and he fell asleep at last with Becky's latest words
linger-ing dream-ily in his ear--

“Tom, how _could_ you be so noble!”




CHAPTER XXI

VACATION was ap-proach-ing. The school-mas-ter, al-ways severe, grew severer
and more ex-act-ing than ever, for he wanted the school to make a good
show-ing on “Ex-am-in-a-tion” day. His rod and his fer-ule were sel-dom idle
now--at least among the smal-ler pu-pils. Only the biggest boys, and young
ladies of eight-een and twenty, es-caped lash-ing. Mr. Dob-bins' lash-ings
were very vig-or-ous ones, too; for al-though he car-ried, un-der his wig, a
per-fectly bald and shiny head, he had only reached middle age, and there
was no sign of feeble-ness in his muscle. As the great day ap-proached,
all the tyranny that was in him came to the sur-face; he seemed to take a
vin-dict-ive pleas-ure in pun-ish-ing the least short-com-ings. The con-sequence
was, that the smal-ler boys spent their days in ter-ror and suf-fer-ing and
their nights in plot-ting re-venge. They threw away no op-por-tun-ity to do
the mas-ter a mis-chief. But he kept ahead all the time. The re-tri-bu-tion
that fol-lowed every venge-ful suc-cess was so sweep-ing and majestic that
the boys al-ways re-tired from the field badly worsted. At last they
con-spired to-gether and hit upon a plan that prom-ised a dazzling vic-tory.
They swore in the sign-painter's boy, told him the scheme, and asked his
help. He had his own reas-ons for be-ing de-lighted, for the mas-ter boarded
in his father's fam-ily and had given the boy ample cause to hate him.
The mas-ter's wife would go on a visit to the coun-try in a few days, and
there would be noth-ing to in-ter-fere with the plan; the mas-ter al-ways
pre-pared him-self for great oc-ca-sions by get-ting pretty well fuddled, and
the sign-painter's boy said that when the dominie had reached the proper
con-di-tion on Ex-am-in-a-tion Even-ing he would “man-age the thing” while he
napped in his chair; then he would have him awakened at the right time
and hur-ried away to school.

In the ful-ness of time the in-ter-est-ing oc-ca-sion ar-rived. At eight in
the even-ing the school-house was bril-liantly lighted, and ad-orned with
wreaths and fes-toons of fo-liage and flowers. The mas-ter sat throned in
his great chair upon a raised plat-form, with his black-board be-hind him.
He was look-ing tol-er-ably mel-low. Three rows of benches on each side and
six rows in front of him were oc-cu-pied by the dig-nit-ar-ies of the town
and by the par-ents of the pu-pils. To his left, back of the rows of
cit-izens, was a spa-cious tem-por-ary plat-form upon which were seated the
schol-ars who were to take part in the ex-er-cises of the even-ing; rows of
small boys, washed and dressed to an in-tol-er-able state of dis-com-fort;
rows of gawky big boys; snow-banks of girls and young ladies clad in
lawn and muslin and con-spicu-ously con-scious of their bare arms, their
grand-moth-ers' an-cient trinkets, their bits of pink and blue rib-bon and
the flowers in their hair. All the rest of the house was filled with
non-par-ti-cip-at-ing schol-ars.

The ex-er-cises began. A very little boy stood up and sheep-ishly re-cited,
“You'd scarce ex-pect one of my age to speak in pub-lic on the stage,”
 etc.--ac-com-pa-ny-ing him-self with the pain-fully ex-act and spas-modic
ges-tures which a ma-chine might have used--sup-pos-ing the ma-chine to be a
trifle out of or-der. But he got through safely, though cruelly scared,
and got a fine round of ap-plause when he made his man-u-fac-tured bow and
re-tired.

A little shame-faced girl lisped, “Mary had a little lamb,” etc.,
per-formed a com-pas-sion-in-spir-ing curtsy, got her meed of ap-plause, and
sat down flushed and happy.

Tom Saw-yer stepped for-ward with con-ceited con-fid-ence and soared into
the un-quench-able and in-des-truct-ible “Give me liberty or give me death”
 speech, with fine fury and frantic ges-tic-u-la-tion, and broke down in the
middle of it. A ghastly stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked un-der
him and he was like to choke. True, he had the mani-fest sym-pathy of the
house but he had the house's si-lence, too, which was even worse than
its sym-pathy. The mas-ter frowned, and this com-pleted the dis-aster. Tom
struggled awhile and then re-tired, ut-terly de-feated. There was a weak
at-tempt at ap-plause, but it died early.

“The Boy Stood on the Burn-ing Deck” fol-lowed; also “The Assyr-ian Came
Down,” and other de-clam-at-ory gems. Then there were read-ing ex-er-cises,
and a spelling fight. The mea-gre Latin class re-cited with honor. The
prime fea-ture of the even-ing was in or-der, now--ori-ginal “com-pos-i-tions”
 by the young ladies. Each in her turn stepped for-ward to the edge of the
plat-form, cleared her throat, held up her ma-nu-script (tied with dainty
rib-bon), and pro-ceeded to read, with labored at-ten-tion to “ex-pres-sion”
 and punc-tu-ation. The themes were the same that had been il-lu-min-ated upon
sim-ilar oc-ca-sions by their moth-ers be-fore them, their grand-moth-ers,
and doubt-less all their an-cest-ors in the fe-male line clear back to the
Cru-sades. “Friend-ship” was one; “Memor-ies of Other Days”; “Re-li-gion in
His-tory”; “Dream Land”; “The Ad-vant-ages of Cul-ture”; “Forms of Polit-ical
Govern-ment Com-pared and Con-tras-ted”; “Mel-an-choly”; “Filial Love”; “Heart
Longings,” etc., etc.

A pre-val-ent fea-ture in these com-pos-i-tions was a nursed and pet-ted
mel-an-choly; an-other was a waste-ful and op-u-lent gush of “fine lan-guage”;
an-other was a tend-ency to lug in by the ears par-tic-u-larly prized words
and phrases un-til they were worn en-tirely out; and a pe-cu-li-ar-ity that
con-spicu-ously marked and marred them was the in-vet-er-ate and in-tol-er-able
ser-mon that wagged its crippled tail at the end of each and every one
of them. No mat-ter what the sub-ject might be, a brain-rack-ing ef-fort was
made to squirm it into some as-pect or other that the moral and re-li-gious
mind could con-tem-plate with edi-fic-a-tion. The glar-ing in-sin-cer-ity of
these ser-mons was not suf-fi-cient to com-pass the ban-ish-ment of the
fash-ion from the schools, and it is not suf-fi-cient today; it never will
be suf-fi-cient while the world stands, per-haps. There is no school in
all our land where the young ladies do not feel ob-liged to close their
com-pos-i-tions with a ser-mon; and you will find that the ser-mon of the
most frivol-ous and the least re-li-gious girl in the school is al-ways
the longest and the most re-lent-lessly pi-ous. But enough of this. Homely
truth is un-pal-at-able.

Let us re-turn to the “Ex-am-in-a-tion.” The first com-pos-i-tion that was read
was one en-titled “Is this, then, Life?” Per-haps the reader can en-dure an
ex-tract from it:

“In the com-mon walks of life, with what de-light-ful emo-tions does the
youth-ful mind look for-ward to some an-ti-cip-ated scene of fest-iv-ity!
Ima-gin-a-tion is busy sketch-ing rose-tin-ted pic-tures of joy. In fancy, the
vo-lup-tu-ous vo-tary of fash-ion sees her-self amid the fest-ive throng, 'the
ob-served of all ob-serv-ers.' Her grace-ful form, ar-rayed in snowy robes,
is whirl-ing through the mazes of the joy-ous dance; her eye is bright-est,
her step is light-est in the gay as-sembly.

“In such de-li-cious fan-cies time quickly glides by, and the wel-come hour
ar-rives for her en-trance into the Elysian world, of which she has
had such bright dreams. How fairy-like does everything ap-pear to her
en-chanted vis-ion! Each new scene is more charm-ing than the last. But
after a while she finds that be-neath this goodly ex-ter-ior, all is
van-ity, the flat-tery which once charmed her soul, now grates harshly
upon her ear; the ball-room has lost its charms; and with wasted health
and im-bittered heart, she turns away with the con-vic-tion that earthly
pleas-ures can-not sat-isfy the long-ings of the soul!”

And so forth and so on. There was a buzz of grat-i-fic-a-tion from time to
time dur-ing the read-ing, ac-com-pan-ied by whispered ejac-u-la-tions of “How
sweet!” “How elo-quent!” “So true!” etc., and after the thing had closed
with a pe-cu-li-arly af-flict-ing ser-mon the ap-plause was en-thu-si-astic.

Then arose a slim, mel-an-choly girl, whose face had the “in-ter-est-ing”
 pale-ness that comes of pills and in-di-ges-tion, and read a “poem.” Two
stan-zas of it will do:

“A MISSOURI MAIDEN'S FAREWELL TO ALABAMA

“Alabama, good-bye! I love thee well! But yet for a while do I leave thee
now! Sad, yes, sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell, And burn-ing
re-col-lec-tions throng my brow! For I have wandered through thy flowery
woods; Have roamed and read near Tal-lapoosa's stream; Have listened to
Tal-lassee's war-ring floods, And wooed on Coosa's side Aur-ora's beam.

“Yet shame I not to bear an o'er-full heart, Nor blush to turn be-hind
my tear-ful eyes; 'Tis from no stranger land I now must part, 'Tis to no
strangers left I yield these sighs. Wel-come and home were mine within
this State, Whose vales I leave--whose spires fade fast from me And cold
must be mine eyes, and heart, and tete, When, dear Alabama! they turn
cold on thee!” There were very few there who knew what “tete” meant, but
the poem was very sat-is-fact-ory, nev-er-the-less.

Next ap-peared a dark-com-plex-ioned, black-eyed, black-haired young lady,
who paused an im-press-ive mo-ment, as-sumed a tra-gic ex-pres-sion, and began
to read in a meas-ured, sol-emn tone:

“A VISION

“Dark and tem-pes-tu-ous was night. Around the throne on high not a single
star quivered; but the deep in-ton-a-tions of the heavy thun-der con-stantly
vi-brated upon the ear; whilst the ter-rific light-ning rev-elled in angry
mood through the cloudy cham-bers of heaven, seem-ing to scorn the power
ex-er-ted over its ter-ror by the il-lus-tri-ous Frank-lin! Even the bois-ter-ous
winds un-an-im-ously came forth from their mys-tic homes, and blustered
about as if to en-hance by their aid the wild-ness of the scene.

“At such a time, so dark, so dreary, for hu-man sym-pathy my very spirit
sighed; but in-stead thereof,

“'My dearest friend, my coun-sel-lor, my com-forter and guide--My joy in
grief, my second bliss in joy,' came to my side. She moved like one of
those bright be-ings pic-tured in the sunny walks of fancy's Eden by
the ro-mantic and young, a queen of beauty un-adorned save by her own
tran-scend-ent love-li-ness. So soft was her step, it failed to make even a
sound, and but for the ma-gical thrill im-par-ted by her gen-ial touch,
as other un-ob-trus-ive beau-ties, she would have glided away
un-per-ceived--un-sought. A strange sad-ness res-ted upon her fea-tures, like
icy tears upon the robe of Decem-ber, as she poin-ted to the con-tend-ing
ele-ments without, and bade me con-tem-plate the two be-ings presen-ted.”

This night-mare oc-cu-pied some ten pages of ma-nu-script and wound up with a
ser-mon so de-struct-ive of all hope to non-Pres-by-teri-ans that it took
the first prize. This com-pos-i-tion was con-sidered to be the very finest
ef-fort of the even-ing. The mayor of the vil-lage, in de-liv-er-ing the prize
to the au-thor of it, made a warm speech in which he said that it was by
far the most “elo-quent” thing he had ever listened to, and that Daniel
Web-ster him-self might well be proud of it.

It may be re-marked, in passing, that the num-ber of com-pos-i-tions in which
the word “beau-teous” was over-fondled, and hu-man ex-per-i-ence re-ferred to
as “life's page,” was up to the usual av-er-age.

Now the mas-ter, mel-low al-most to the verge of gen-i-al-ity, put his chair
aside, turned his back to the audi-ence, and began to draw a map of
Amer-ica on the black-board, to ex-er-cise the geo-graphy class upon. But he
made a sad busi-ness of it with his un-steady hand, and a smothered tit-ter
rippled over the house. He knew what the mat-ter was, and set him-self to
right it. He sponged out lines and re-made them; but he only dis-tor-ted
them more than ever, and the tit-ter-ing was more pro-nounced. He threw his
en-tire at-ten-tion upon his work, now, as if de-term-ined not to be put down
by the mirth. He felt that all eyes were fastened upon him; he ima-gined
he was suc-ceed-ing, and yet the tit-ter-ing con-tin-ued; it even mani-festly
in-creased. And well it might. There was a gar-ret above, pierced with
a scuttle over his head; and down through this scuttle came a cat,
sus-pen-ded around the haunches by a string; she had a rag tied about
her head and jaws to keep her from mew-ing; as she slowly des-cen-ded she
curved up-ward and clawed at the string, she swung down-ward and clawed
at the in-tan-gible air. The tit-ter-ing rose higher and higher--the cat was
within six inches of the ab-sorbed teacher's head--down, down, a little
lower, and she grabbed his wig with her des-per-ate claws, clung to it,
and was snatched up into the gar-ret in an in-stant with her trophy still
in her pos-ses-sion! And how the light did blaze abroad from the mas-ter's
bald pate--for the sign-painter's boy had _gil-ded_ it!

That broke up the meet-ing. The boys were avenged. Va-ca-tion had come.

NOTE:--The pre-ten-ded “com-pos-i-tions” quoted in this chapter are taken
without al-ter-a-tion from a volume en-titled “Prose and Po-etry, by a
Western Lady”--but they are ex-actly and pre-cisely after the school-girl
pat-tern, and hence are much hap-pier than any mere im-it-a-tions could be.




CHAPTER XXII

TOM joined the new or-der of Ca-dets of Tem-per-ance, be-ing at-trac-ted by the
showy char-ac-ter of their “re-galia.” He prom-ised to ab-stain from smoking,
chew-ing, and pro-fan-ity as long as he re-mained a mem-ber. Now he found out
a new thing--namely, that to prom-ise not to do a thing is the surest way
in the world to make a body want to go and do that very thing. Tom soon
found him-self tor-men-ted with a de-sire to drink and swear; the de-sire
grew to be so in-tense that noth-ing but the hope of a chance to dis-play
him-self in his red sash kept him from with-draw-ing from the or-der. Fourth
of July was com-ing; but he soon gave that up--gave it up be-fore he had
worn his shackles over forty-eight hours--and fixed his hopes upon old
Judge Frazer, justice of the peace, who was ap-par-ently on his deathbed
and would have a big pub-lic fu-neral, since he was so high an of-fi-cial.
Dur-ing three days Tom was deeply con-cerned about the Judge's con-di-tion
and hungry for news of it. So-me-times his hopes ran high--so high that
he would ven-ture to get out his re-galia and prac-tise be-fore the
look-ing-glass. But the Judge had a most dis-cour-aging way of fluc-tu-at-ing.
At last he was pro-nounced upon the mend--and then con-vales-cent. Tom was
dis-gus-ted; and felt a sense of in-jury, too. He handed in his resig-na-tion
at once--and that night the Judge suffered a re-lapse and died. Tom
re-solved that he would never trust a man like that again.

The fu-neral was a fine thing. The Ca-dets paraded in a style cal-cu-lated
to kill the late mem-ber with envy. Tom was a free boy again,
how-ever--there was some-thing in that. He could drink and swear, now--but
found to his sur-prise that he did not want to. The simple fact that he
could, took the de-sire away, and the charm of it.

Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted va-ca-tion was be-gin-ning
to hang a little heav-ily on his hands.

He at-temp-ted a di-ary--but noth-ing happened dur-ing three days, and so he
aban-doned it.

The first of all the negro min-strel shows came to town, and made a
sen-sa-tion. Tom and Joe Harper got up a band of per-formers and were happy
for two days.

Even the Glori-ous Fourth was in some sense a fail-ure, for it rained
hard, there was no pro-ces-sion in con-sequence, and the greatest man
in the world (as Tom sup-posed), Mr. Benton, an ac-tual Un-ited States
Sen-ator, proved an over-whelm-ing dis-ap-point-ment--for he was not
twenty-five feet high, nor even any-where in the neigh-bor-hood of it.

A cir-cus came. The boys played cir-cus for three days af-ter-ward in tents
made of rag car-pet-ing--ad-mis-sion, three pins for boys, two for girls--and
then cir-cus-ing was aban-doned.

A phren-o-lo-gist and a mes-mer-izer came--and went again and left the vil-lage
duller and drear-ier than ever.

There were some boys-and-girls' parties, but they were so few and so
de-light-ful that they only made the aching voids between ache the harder.

Becky Thatcher was gone to her Con-stantinople home to stay with her
par-ents dur-ing va-ca-tion--so there was no bright side to life any-where.

The dread-ful secret of the murder was a chronic misery. It was a very
can-cer for per-man-ency and pain.

Then came the measles.

Dur-ing two long weeks Tom lay a pris-oner, dead to the world and its
hap-pen-ings. He was very ill, he was in-ter-ested in noth-ing. When he got
upon his feet at last and moved feebly down-town, a mel-an-choly change had
come over everything and every creature. There had been a “re-vival,” and
every-body had “got re-li-gion,” not only the adults, but even the boys and
girls. Tom went about, hop-ing against hope for the sight of one blessed
sin-ful face, but dis-ap-point-ment crossed him every-where. He found Joe
Harper study-ing a Testa-ment, and turned sadly away from the de-press-ing
spec-tacle. He sought Ben Ro-gers, and found him vis-it-ing the poor with a
bas-ket of tracts. He hunted up Jim Hol-lis, who called his at-ten-tion to
the pre-cious bless-ing of his late measles as a warn-ing. Every boy
he en-countered ad-ded an-other ton to his de-pres-sion; and when, in
des-per-a-tion, he flew for refuge at last to the bosom of Huckle-berry Finn
and was re-ceived with a Scrip-tural quo-ta-tion, his heart broke and he
crept home and to bed real-iz-ing that he alone of all the town was lost,
forever and forever.

And that night there came on a ter-rific storm, with driv-ing rain, aw-ful
claps of thun-der and blind-ing sheets of light-ning. He covered his head
with the bed-clothes and waited in a hor-ror of sus-pense for his doom; for
he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hub-bub was about him.
He be-lieved he had taxed the for-bear-ance of the powers above to the
ex-tremity of en-dur-ance and that this was the res-ult. It might have
seemed to him a waste of pomp and am-muni-tion to kill a bug with a
bat-tery of ar-til-lery, but there seemed noth-ing in-con-gru-ous about the
get-ting up such an ex-pens-ive thun-der-storm as this to knock the turf from
un-der an in-sect like him-self.

By and by the tem-pest spent it-self and died without ac-com-plish-ing its
ob-ject. The boy's first im-pulse was to be grate-ful, and re-form. His
second was to wait--for there might not be any more storms.

The next day the doc-tors were back; Tom had re-lapsed. The three weeks he
spent on his back this time seemed an en-tire age. When he got abroad
at last he was hardly grate-ful that he had been spared, re-mem-ber-ing how
lonely was his es-tate, how com-pan-ion-less and for-lorn he was. He drif-ted
list-lessly down the street and found Jim Hol-lis act-ing as judge in a
ju-ven-ile court that was try-ing a cat for murder, in the pres-ence of her
vic-tim, a bird. He found Joe Harper and Huck Finn up an al-ley eat-ing a
stolen melon. Poor lads! they--like Tom--had suffered a re-lapse.




CHAPTER XXIII

AT last the sleepy at-mo-sphere was stirred--and vig-or-ously: the murder
trial came on in the court. It be-came the ab-sorb-ing topic of vil-lage
talk im-me-di-ately. Tom could not get away from it. Every ref-er-ence to
the murder sent a shud-der to his heart, for his troubled con-science
and fears al-most per-suaded him that these re-marks were put forth in
his hear-ing as “feel-ers”; he did not see how he could be sus-pec-ted of
know-ing any-thing about the murder, but still he could not be com-fort-able
in the midst of this gos-sip. It kept him in a cold shiver all the time.
He took Huck to a lonely place to have a talk with him. It would be some
re-lief to un-seal his tongue for a little while; to di-vide his bur-den of
dis-tress with an-other suf-ferer. Moreover, he wanted to as-sure him-self
that Huck had re-mained dis-creet.

“Huck, have you ever told any-body about--that?”

“'Bout what?”

“You know what.”

“Oh--'course I haven't.”

“Never a word?”

“Never a sol-it-ary word, so help me. What makes you ask?”

“Well, I was afeard.”

“Why, Tom Saw-yer, we wouldn't be alive two days if that got found out.
_You_ know that.”

Tom felt more com-fort-able. After a pause:

“Huck, they couldn't any-body get you to tell, could they?”

“Get me to tell? Why, if I wanted that half-breed devil to drownd me they
could get me to tell. They ain't no dif-fer-ent way.”

“Well, that's all right, then. I reckon we're safe as long as we keep
mum. But let's swear again, any-way. It's more surer.”

“I'm agreed.”

So they swore again with dread solem-nit-ies.

“What is the talk around, Huck? I've heard a power of it.”

“Talk? Well, it's just Muff Pot-ter, Muff Pot-ter, Muff Pot-ter all the
time. It keeps me in a sweat, con-stant, so's I want to hide som'ers.”

“That's just the same way they go on round me. I reckon he's a goner.
Don't you feel sorry for him, some-times?”

“Most al-ways--most al-ways. He ain't no ac-count; but then he hain't ever
done any-thing to hurt any-body. Just fishes a little, to get money to
get drunk on--and loafs around con-sid-er-able; but lord, we all do
that--least-ways most of us--preach-ers and such like. But he's kind of
good--he give me half a fish, once, when there warn't enough for two; and
lots of times he's kind of stood by me when I was out of luck.”

“Well, he's men-ded kites for me, Huck, and knit-ted hooks on to my line.
I wish we could get him out of there.”

“My! we couldn't get him out, Tom. And be-sides, 'twouldn't do any good;
they'd ketch him again.”

“Yes--so they would. But I hate to hear 'em ab-use him so like the dick-ens
when he never done--that.”

“I do too, Tom. Lord, I hear 'em say he's the blood-i-est look-ing vil-lain
in this coun-try, and they won-der he wasn't ever hung be-fore.”

“Yes, they talk like that, all the time. I've heard 'em say that if he
was to get free they'd lynch him.”

“And they'd do it, too.”

The boys had a long talk, but it brought them little com-fort. As the
twi-light drew on, they found them-selves hanging about the neigh-bor-hood
of the little isol-ated jail, per-haps with an un-defined hope that
some-thing would hap-pen that might clear away their dif-fi-culties. But
noth-ing happened; there seemed to be no an-gels or fair-ies in-ter-ested in
this luck-less cap-tive.

The boys did as they had of-ten done be-fore--went to the cell grat-ing and
gave Pot-ter some to-bacco and matches. He was on the ground floor and
there were no guards.

His grat-it-ude for their gifts had al-ways smote their con-sciences
be-fore--it cut deeper than ever, this time. They felt cow-ardly and
treach-er-ous to the last de-gree when Pot-ter said:

“You've been mighty good to me, boys--bet-ter'n any-body else in this town.
And I don't for-get it, I don't. Often I says to my-self, says I, 'I used
to mend all the boys' kites and things, and show 'em where the good
fishin' places was, and be-friend 'em what I could, and now they've
all for-got old Muff when he's in trouble; but Tom don't, and Huck
don't--_they_ don't for-get him, says I, 'and I don't for-get them.' Well,
boys, I done an aw-ful thing--drunk and crazy at the time--that's the only
way I ac-count for it--and now I got to swing for it, and it's right.
Right, and _be-st_, too, I reckon--hope so, any-way. Well, we won't talk
about that. I don't want to make _y-ou_ feel bad; you've be-friended me.
But what I want to say, is, don't _y-ou_ ever get drunk--then you won't
ever get here. Stand a lit-ter furder west--so--that's it; it's a prime
com-fort to see faces that's friendly when a body's in such a muck
of trouble, and there don't none come here but yourn. Good friendly
faces--good friendly faces. Git up on one an-other's backs and let me
touch 'em. That's it. Shake hands--yourn'll come through the bars, but
mine's too big. Little hands, and weak--but they've helped Muff Pot-ter a
power, and they'd help him more if they could.”

Tom went home miser-able, and his dreams that night were full of hor-rors.
The next day and the day after, he hung about the courtroom, drawn by an
al-most ir-res-ist-ible im-pulse to go in, but for-cing him-self to stay out.
Huck was hav-ing the same ex-per-i-ence. They stu-di-ously avoided each other.
Each wandered away, from time to time, but the same dis-mal fas-cin-a-tion
al-ways brought them back presently. Tom kept his ears open when idlers
sauntered out of the courtroom, but in-vari-ably heard dis-tress-ing
news--the toils were clos-ing more and more re-lent-lessly around poor
Pot-ter. At the end of the second day the vil-lage talk was to the ef-fect
that In-jun Joe's evid-ence stood firm and un-shaken, and that there was
not the slight-est ques-tion as to what the jury's ver-dict would be.

Tom was out late, that night, and came to bed through the win-dow. He
was in a tre-mend-ous state of ex-cite-ment. It was hours be-fore he got to
sleep. All the vil-lage flocked to the court-house the next morn-ing, for
this was to be the great day. Both sexes were about equally rep-res-en-ted
in the packed audi-ence. After a long wait the jury filed in and took
their places; shortly af-ter-ward, Pot-ter, pale and hag-gard, timid and
hope-less, was brought in, with chains upon him, and seated where all
the curi-ous eyes could stare at him; no less con-spicu-ous was In-jun Joe,
stolid as ever. There was an-other pause, and then the judge ar-rived and
the sher-iff pro-claimed the open-ing of the court. The usual whis-per-ings
among the law-yers and gath-er-ing to-gether of pa-pers fol-lowed. These
de-tails and ac-com-pa-ny-ing delays worked up an at-mo-sphere of pre-par-a-tion
that was as im-press-ive as it was fas-cin-at-ing.

Now a wit-ness was called who test-i-fied that he found Muff Pot-ter wash-ing
in the brook, at an early hour of the morn-ing that the murder was
dis-covered, and that he im-me-di-ately sneaked away. After some fur-ther
ques-tion-ing, coun-sel for the pro-sec-u-tion said:

“Take the wit-ness.”

The pris-oner raised his eyes for a mo-ment, but dropped them again when
his own coun-sel said:

“I have no ques-tions to ask him.”

The next wit-ness proved the find-ing of the knife near the corpse.
Coun-sel for the pro-sec-u-tion said:

“Take the wit-ness.”

“I have no ques-tions to ask him,” Pot-ter's law-yer replied.

A third wit-ness swore he had of-ten seen the knife in Pot-ter's
pos-ses-sion.

“Take the wit-ness.”

Coun-sel for Pot-ter de-clined to ques-tion him. The faces of the audi-ence
began to be-tray an-noy-ance. Did this at-tor-ney mean to throw away his
cli-ent's life without an ef-fort?

Several wit-nesses de-posed con-cern-ing Pot-ter's guilty be-ha-vior when
brought to the scene of the murder. They were al-lowed to leave the stand
without be-ing cross-ques-tioned.

Every de-tail of the dam-aging cir-cum-stances that oc-curred in the
grave-yard upon that morn-ing which all present re-membered so well was
brought out by cred-ible wit-nesses, but none of them were cross-ex-amined
by Pot-ter's law-yer. The per-plex-ity and dis-sat-is-fac-tion of the house
ex-pressed it-self in mur-murs and pro-voked a re-proof from the bench.
Coun-sel for the pro-sec-u-tion now said:

“By the oaths of cit-izens whose simple word is above sus-pi-cion, we have
fastened this aw-ful crime, bey-ond all pos-sib-il-ity of ques-tion, upon the
un-happy pris-oner at the bar. We rest our case here.”

A groan es-caped from poor Pot-ter, and he put his face in his hands and
rocked his body softly to and fro, while a pain-ful si-lence reigned
in the courtroom. Many men were moved, and many wo-men's com-pas-sion
test-i-fied it-self in tears. Coun-sel for the de-fence rose and said:

“Your honor, in our re-marks at the open-ing of this trial, we
fore-shad-owed our pur-pose to prove that our cli-ent did this fear-ful deed
while un-der the in-flu-ence of a blind and ir-re-spons-ible de-li-rium pro-duced
by drink. We have changed our mind. We shall not of-fer that plea.” [Then
to the clerk:] “Call Tho-mas Saw-yer!”

A puzzled amazement awoke in every face in the house, not even ex-cept-ing
Pot-ter's. Every eye fastened it-self with won-der-ing in-terest upon Tom as
he rose and took his place upon the stand. The boy looked wild enough,
for he was badly scared. The oath was ad-min-istered.

“Tho-mas Saw-yer, where were you on the sev-en-teenth of June, about the
hour of mid-night?”

Tom glanced at In-jun Joe's iron face and his tongue failed him. The
audi-ence listened breath-less, but the words re-fused to come. After a few
mo-ments, how-ever, the boy got a little of his strength back, and man-aged
to put enough of it into his voice to make part of the house hear:

“In the grave-yard!”

“A little bit louder, please. Don't be afraid. You were--”

“In the grave-yard.”

A con-temp-tu-ous smile flit-ted across In-jun Joe's face.

“Were you any-where near Horse Wil-li-ams' grave?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Speak up--just a trifle louder. How near were you?”

“Near as I am to you.”

“Were you hid-den, or not?”

“I was hid.”

“Where?”

“Be-hind the elms that's on the edge of the grave.”

In-jun Joe gave a barely per-cept-ible start.

“Any one with you?”

“Yes, sir. I went there with--”

“Wait--wait a mo-ment. Never mind men-tion-ing your com-pan-ion's name. We
will pro-duce him at the proper time. Did you carry any-thing there with
you.”

Tom hes-it-ated and looked con-fused.

“Speak out, my boy--don't be dif-fid-ent. The truth is al-ways re-spect-able.
What did you take there?”

“Only a--a--dead cat.”

There was a ripple of mirth, which the court checked.

“We will pro-duce the skel-eton of that cat. Now, my boy, tell us
everything that oc-curred--tell it in your own way--don't skip any-thing,
and don't be afraid.”

Tom began--hes-it-at-ingly at first, but as he warmed to his sub-ject his
words flowed more and more eas-ily; in a little while every sound ceased
but his own voice; every eye fixed it-self upon him; with par-ted lips and
bated breath the audi-ence hung upon his words, tak-ing no note of time,
rapt in the ghastly fas-cin-a-tions of the tale. The strain upon pent
emo-tion reached its cli-max when the boy said:

“--and as the doc-tor fetched the board around and Muff Pot-ter fell, In-jun
Joe jumped with the knife and--”

Crash! Quick as light-ning the half-breed sprang for a win-dow, tore his
way through all op-posers, and was gone!




CHAPTER XXIV

TOM was a glit-ter-ing hero once more--the pet of the old, the envy of the
young. His name even went into im-mor-tal print, for the vil-lage pa-per
mag-ni-fied him. There were some that be-lieved he would be Pres-id-ent, yet,
if he es-caped hanging.

As usual, the fickle, un-reas-on-ing world took Muff Pot-ter to its bosom
and fondled him as lav-ishly as it had ab-used him be-fore. But that sort
of con-duct is to the world's credit; there-fore it is not well to find
fault with it.

Tom's days were days of splendor and ex-ulta-tion to him, but his nights
were sea-sons of hor-ror. In-jun Joe in-fes-ted all his dreams, and al-ways
with doom in his eye. Hardly any tempta-tion could per-suade the boy
to stir abroad after night-fall. Poor Huck was in the same state of
wretched-ness and ter-ror, for Tom had told the whole story to the law-yer
the night be-fore the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid
that his share in the busi-ness might leak out, yet, not-with-stand-ing
In-jun Joe's flight had saved him the suf-fer-ing of testi-fy-ing in court.
The poor fel-low had got the at-tor-ney to prom-ise secrecy, but what of
that? Since Tom's har-assed con-science had man-aged to drive him to the
law-yer's house by night and wring a dread tale from lips that had
been sealed with the dis-malest and most for-mid-able of oaths, Huck's
con-fid-ence in the hu-man race was wellnigh ob-lit-er-ated.

Daily Muff Pot-ter's grat-it-ude made Tom glad he had spoken; but nightly
he wished he had sealed up his tongue.

Half the time Tom was afraid In-jun Joe would never be cap-tured; the
other half he was afraid he would be. He felt sure he never could draw a
safe breath again un-til that man was dead and he had seen the corpse.

Re-wards had been offered, the coun-try had been scoured, but no In-jun
Joe was found. One of those om-ni-scient and awein-spir-ing mar-vels, a
de-tect-ive, came up from St. Louis, moused around, shook his head, looked
wise, and made that sort of astound-ing suc-cess which mem-bers of that
craft usu-ally achieve. That is to say, he “found a clew.” But you can't
hang a “clew” for murder, and so after that de-tect-ive had got through
and gone home, Tom felt just as in-sec-ure as he was be-fore.

The slow days drif-ted on, and each left be-hind it a slightly lightened
weight of ap-pre-hen-sion.




CHAPTER XXV

THERE comes a time in every rightly-con-struc-ted boy's life when he has
a ra-ging de-sire to go some-where and dig for hid-den treas-ure. This de-sire
sud-denly came upon Tom one day. He sal-lied out to find Joe Harper,
but failed of suc-cess. Next he sought Ben Ro-gers; he had gone fish-ing.
Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red-Han-ded. Huck would
an-swer. Tom took him to a private place and opened the mat-ter to him
con-fid-en-tially. Huck was will-ing. Huck was al-ways will-ing to take a hand
in any en-ter-prise that offered en-ter-tain-ment and re-quired no cap-ital,
for he had a trouble-some su-per-abund-ance of that sort of time which is
not money. “Where'll we dig?” said Huck.

“Oh, most any-where.”

“Why, is it hid all around?”

“No, in-deed it ain't. It's hid in mighty par-tic-u-lar places,
Huck--some-times on is-lands, some-times in rot-ten chests un-der the end of
a limb of an old dead tree, just where the shadow falls at mid-night; but
mostly un-der the floor in ha'nted houses.”

“Who hides it?”

“Why, rob-bers, of course--who'd you reckon? Sunday-school
sup'rintend-ents?”

“I don't know. If 'twas mine I wouldn't hide it; I'd spend it and have a
good time.”

“So would I. But rob-bers don't do that way. They al-ways hide it and
leave it there.”

“Don't they come after it any more?”

“No, they think they will, but they gen-er-ally for-get the marks, or else
they die. Any-way, it lays there a long time and gets rusty; and by and
by some-body finds an old yel-low pa-per that tells how to find the marks--a
pa-per that's got to be ciphered over about a week be-cause it's mostly
signs and hy'ro-glyph-ics.”

“Hyro--which?”

“Hy'ro-glyph-ics--pic-tures and things, you know, that don't seem to mean
any-thing.”

“Have you got one of them pa-pers, Tom?”

“No.”

“Well then, how you go-ing to find the marks?”

“I don't want any marks. They al-ways bury it un-der a ha'nted house or on
an is-land, or un-der a dead tree that's got one limb stick-ing out. Well,
we've tried Jack-son's Is-land a little, and we can try it again some
time; and there's the old ha'nted house up the Still-House branch, and
there's lots of dead-limb trees--dead loads of 'em.”

“Is it un-der all of them?”

“How you talk! No!”

“Then how you go-ing to know which one to go for?”

“Go for all of 'em!”

“Why, Tom, it'll take all sum-mer.”

“Well, what of that? Sup-pose you find a brass pot with a hun-dred dol-lars
in it, all rusty and gray, or rot-ten chest full of di'monds. How's
that?”

Huck's eyes glowed.

“That's bully. Plenty bully enough for me. Just you gimme the hun-dred
dol-lars and I don't want no di'monds.”

“All right. But I bet you I ain't go-ing to throw off on di'monds. Some
of 'em's worth twenty dol-lars apiece--there ain't any, hardly, but's
worth six bits or a dol-lar.”

“No! Is that so?”

“Cert'nly--any-body'll tell you so. Hain't you ever seen one, Huck?”

“Not as I re-mem-ber.”

“Oh, kings have slath-ers of them.”

“Well, I don' know no kings, Tom.”

“I reckon you don't. But if you was to go to Europe you'd see a raft of
'em hop-ping around.”

“Do they hop?”

“Hop?--your granny! No!”

“Well, what did you say they did, for?”

“Shucks, I only meant you'd _see_ 'em--not hop-ping, of course--what do
they want to hop for?--but I mean you'd just see 'em--scattered around,
you know, in a kind of a gen-eral way. Like that old hump-backed Richard.”

“Richard? What's his other name?”

“He didn't have any other name. Kings don't have any but a given name.”

“No?”

“But they don't.”

“Well, if they like it, Tom, all right; but I don't want to be a king
and have only just a given name, like a nig-ger. But say--where you go-ing
to dig first?”

“Well, I don't know. S'pose we tackle that old dead-limb tree on the
hill t'other side of Still-House branch?”

“I'm agreed.”

So they got a crippled pick and a shovel, and set out on their
three-mile tramp. They ar-rived hot and pant-ing, and threw them-selves
down in the shade of a neigh-bor-ing elm to rest and have a smoke.

“I like this,” said Tom.

“So do I.”

“Say, Huck, if we find a treas-ure here, what you go-ing to do with your
share?”

“Well, I'll have pie and a glass of soda every day, and I'll go to every
cir-cus that comes along. I bet I'll have a gay time.”

“Well, ain't you go-ing to save any of it?”

“Save it? What for?”

“Why, so as to have some-thing to live on, by and by.”

“Oh, that ain't any use. Pap would come back to thish-yer town some day
and get his claws on it if I didn't hurry up, and I tell you he'd clean
it out pretty quick. What you go-ing to do with yourn, Tom?”

“I'm go-ing to buy a new drum, and a sure'nough sword, and a red neck-tie
and a bull pup, and get mar-ried.”

“Mar-ried!”

“That's it.”

“Tom, you--why, you ain't in your right mind.”

“Wait--you'll see.”

“Well, that's the fool-ishest thing you could do. Look at pap and my
mother. Fight! Why, they used to fight all the time. I re-mem-ber, mighty
well.”

“That ain't any-thing. The girl I'm go-ing to marry won't fight.”

“Tom, I reckon they're all alike. They'll all comb a body. Now you
bet-ter think 'bout this awhile. I tell you you bet-ter. What's the name
of the gal?”

“It ain't a gal at all--it's a girl.”

“It's all the same, I reckon; some says gal, some says girl--both's
right, like enough. Any-way, what's her name, Tom?”

“I'll tell you some time--not now.”

“All right--that'll do. Only if you get mar-ried I'll be more lone-somer
than ever.”

“No you won't. You'll come and live with me. Now stir out of this and
we'll go to dig-ging.”

They worked and sweated for half an hour. No res-ult. They toiled an-other
half-hour. Still no res-ult. Huck said:

“Do they al-ways bury it as deep as this?”

“So-me-times--not al-ways. Not gen-er-ally. I reckon we haven't got the right
place.”

So they chose a new spot and began again. The labor dragged a little,
but still they made pro-gress. They pegged away in si-lence for some time.
Fin-ally Huck leaned on his shovel, swabbed the beaded drops from his
brow with his sleeve, and said:

“Where you go-ing to dig next, after we get this one?”

“I reckon maybe we'll tackle the old tree that's over yon-der on Cardiff
Hill back of the widow's.”

“I reckon that'll be a good one. But won't the widow take it away from
us, Tom? It's on her land.”

“_She_ take it away! Maybe she'd like to try it once. Who-ever finds one
of these hid treas-ures, it be-longs to him. It don't make any dif-fer-ence
whose land it's on.”

That was sat-is-fact-ory. The work went on. By and by Huck said:

“Blame it, we must be in the wrong place again. What do you think?”

“It is mighty curi-ous, Huck. I don't un-der-stand it. So-me-times witches
in-ter-fere. I reckon maybe that's what's the trouble now.”

“Shucks! Witches ain't got no power in the day-time.”

“Well, that's so. I didn't think of that. Oh, I know what the mat-ter is!
What a blamed lot of fools we are! You got to find out where the shadow
of the limb falls at mid-night, and that's where you dig!”

“Then con-sound it, we've fooled away all this work for noth-ing. Now hang
it all, we got to come back in the night. It's an aw-ful long way. Can
you get out?”

“I bet I will. We've got to do it to-night, too, be-cause if some-body sees
these holes they'll know in a minute what's here and they'll go for it.”

“Well, I'll come around and maow to-night.”

“All right. Let's hide the tools in the bushes.”

The boys were there that night, about the ap-poin-ted time. They sat in
the shadow wait-ing. It was a lonely place, and an hour made sol-emn by
old tra-di-tions. Spir-its whispered in the rust-ling leaves, ghosts lurked
in the murky nooks, the deep bay-ing of a hound floated up out of the
dis-tance, an owl answered with his sepulchral note. The boys were
sub-dued by these solem-nit-ies, and talked little. By and by they judged
that twelve had come; they marked where the shadow fell, and began to
dig. Their hopes com-menced to rise. Their in-terest grew stronger, and
their in-dustry kept pace with it. The hole deepened and still deepened,
but every time their hearts jumped to hear the pick strike upon
some-thing, they only suffered a new dis-ap-point-ment. It was only a stone
or a chunk. At last Tom said:

“It ain't any use, Huck, we're wrong again.”

“Well, but we _can't_ be wrong. We spot-ted the shad-der to a dot.”

“I know it, but then there's an-other thing.”

“What's that?”.

“Why, we only guessed at the time. Like enough it was too late or too
early.”

Huck dropped his shovel.

“That's it,” said he. “That's the very trouble. We got to give this one
up. We can't ever tell the right time, and be-sides this kind of thing's
too aw-ful, here this time of night with witches and ghosts a-flut-ter-ing
around so. I feel as if some-thing's be-hind me all the time;  and I'm
afeard to turn around, becuz maybe there's oth-ers in front a-wait-ing for
a chance. I been creep-ing all over, ever since I got here.”

“Well, I've been pretty much so, too, Huck. They most al-ways put in a
dead man when they bury a treas-ure un-der a tree, to look out for it.”

“Lordy!”

“Yes, they do. I've al-ways heard that.”

“Tom, I don't like to fool around much where there's dead people. A
body's bound to get into trouble with 'em, sure.”

“I don't like to stir 'em up, either. S'pose this one here was to stick
his skull out and say some-thing!”

“Don't Tom! It's aw-ful.”

“Well, it just is. Huck, I don't feel com-fort-able a bit.”

“Say, Tom, let's give this place up, and try some-wheres else.”

“All right, I reckon we bet-ter.”

“What'll it be?”

Tom con-sidered awhile; and then said:

“The ha'nted house. That's it!”

“Blame it, I don't like ha'nted houses, Tom. Why, they're a dern sight
worse'n dead people. Dead people might talk, maybe, but they don't come
slid-ing around in a shroud, when you ain't no-ti-cing, and peep over your
shoulder all of a sud-den and grit their teeth, the way a ghost does. I
couldn't stand such a thing as that, Tom--nobody could.”

“Yes, but, Huck, ghosts don't travel around only at night. They won't
hender us from dig-ging there in the day-time.”

“Well, that's so. But you know mighty well people don't go about that
ha'nted house in the day nor the night.”

“Well, that's mostly be-cause they don't like to go where a man's been
murdered, any-way--but noth-ing's ever been seen around that house ex-cept
in the night--just some blue lights slip-ping by the win-dows--no reg-u-lar
ghosts.”

“Well, where you see one of them blue lights flick-er-ing around, Tom,
you can bet there's a ghost mighty close be-hind it. It stands to reason.
Becuz you know that they don't any-body but ghosts use 'em.”

“Yes, that's so. But any-way they don't come around in the day-time, so
what's the use of our be-ing afeard?”

“Well, all right. We'll tackle the ha'nted house if you say so--but I
reckon it's tak-ing chances.”

They had star-ted down the hill by this time. There in the middle of the
moon-lit val-ley be-low them stood the “ha'nted” house, ut-terly isol-ated,
its fences gone long ago, rank weeds smoth-er-ing the very door-steps, the
chim-ney crumbled to ruin, the win-dow-sashes va-cant, a corner of the roof
caved in. The boys gazed awhile, half ex-pect-ing to see a blue light flit
past a win-dow; then talk-ing in a low tone, as be-fit-ted the time and the
cir-cum-stances, they struck far off to the right, to give the haunted
house a wide berth, and took their way home-ward through the woods that
ad-orned the rear-ward side of Cardiff Hill.




CHAPTER XVI

ABOUT noon the next day the boys ar-rived at the dead tree; they had come
for their tools. Tom was im-pa-tient to go to the haunted house; Huck was
meas-ur-ably so, also--but sud-denly said:

“Looky-here, Tom, do you know what day it is?”

Tom men-tally ran over the days of the week, and then quickly lif-ted his
eyes with a startled look in them--

“My! I never once thought of it, Huck!”

“Well, I didn't neither, but all at once it popped onto me that it was
Fri-day.”

“Blame it, a body can't be too care-ful, Huck. We might 'a' got into an
aw-ful scrape, tack-ling such a thing on a Fri-day.”

“_Might_! Bet-ter say we _would_! There's some lucky days, maybe, but
Fri-day ain't.”

“Any fool knows that. I don't reckon _y-ou_ was the first that found it
out, Huck.”

“Well, I never said I was, did I? And Fri-day ain't all, neither. I had a
rot-ten bad dream last night--dreampt about rats.”

“No! Sure sign of trouble. Did they fight?”

“No.”

“Well, that's good, Huck. When they don't fight it's only a sign that
there's trouble around, you know. All we got to do is to look mighty
sharp and keep out of it. We'll drop this thing for today, and play. Do
you know Robin Hood, Huck?”

“No. Who's Robin Hood?”

“Why, he was one of the greatest men that was ever in Eng-land--and the
best. He was a rob-ber.”

“Cracky, I wisht I was. Who did he rob?”

“Only sher-iffs and bish-ops and rich people and kings, and such like. But
he never bothered the poor. He loved 'em. He al-ways di-vided up with 'em
per-fectly square.”

“Well, he must 'a' been a brick.”

“I bet you he was, Huck. Oh, he was the noblest man that ever was.
They ain't any such men now, I can tell you. He could lick any man in
Eng-land, with one hand tied be-hind him; and he could take his yew bow
and plug a ten-cent piece every time, a mile and a half.”

“What's a _yew_ bow?”

“I don't know. It's some kind of a bow, of course. And if he hit that
dime only on the edge he would set down and cry--and curse. But we'll
play Robin Hood--it's nobby fun. I'll learn you.”

“I'm agreed.”

So they played Robin Hood all the af-ter-noon, now and then cast-ing a
yearn-ing eye down upon the haunted house and passing a re-mark about the
mor-row's pro-spects and pos-sib-il-it-ies there. As the sun began to sink
into the west they took their way home-ward athwart the long shad-ows
of the trees and soon were bur-ied from sight in the forests of Cardiff
Hill.

On Saturday, shortly after noon, the boys were at the dead tree again.
They had a smoke and a chat in the shade, and then dug a little in their
last hole, not with great hope, but merely be-cause Tom said there were
so many cases where people had given up a treas-ure after get-ting down
within six inches of it, and then some-body else had come along and
turned it up with a single thrust of a shovel. The thing failed this
time, how-ever, so the boys shouldered their tools and went away feel-ing
that they had not trifled with for-tune, but had ful-filled all the
re-quire-ments that be-long to the busi-ness of treas-ure-hunt-ing.

When they reached the haunted house there was some-thing so weird and
grisly about the dead si-lence that reigned there un-der the bak-ing sun,
and some-thing so de-press-ing about the loneli-ness and des-ol-a-tion of the
place, that they were afraid, for a mo-ment, to ven-ture in. Then they
crept to the door and took a trem-bling peep. They saw a weedgrown,
floor-less room, un-plastered, an an-cient fire-place, va-cant win-dows,
a ru-in-ous stair-case; and here, there, and every-where hung ragged and
aban-doned cob-webs. They presently entered, softly, with quickened
pulses, talk-ing in whis-pers, ears alert to catch the slight-est sound,
and muscles tense and ready for in-stant re-treat.

In a little while fa-mili-ar-ity mod-i-fied their fears and they gave the
place a crit-ical and in-ter-ested ex-am-in-a-tion, rather ad-mir-ing their own
bold-ness, and won-der-ing at it, too. Next they wanted to look up-stairs.
This was some-thing like cut-ting off re-treat, but they got to dar-ing
each other, and of course there could be but one res-ult--they threw their
tools into a corner and made the as-cent. Up there were the same signs of
de-cay. In one corner they found a closet that prom-ised mys-tery, but the
prom-ise was a fraud--there was noth-ing in it. Their cour-age was up now
and well in hand. They were about to go down and be-gin work when--

“Sh!” said Tom.

“What is it?” whispered Huck, blanch-ing with fright.

“Sh!... There!... Hear it?”

“Yes!... Oh, my! Let's run!”

“Keep still! Don't you budge! They're com-ing right to-ward the door.”

The boys stretched them-selves upon the floor with their eyes to
knotholes in the plank-ing, and lay wait-ing, in a misery of fear.

“They've stopped.... No--com-ing.... Here they are. Don't whis-per an-other
word, Huck. My good-ness, I wish I was out of this!”

Two men entered. Each boy said to him-self: “There's the old deaf and
dumb Span-iard that's been about town once or twice lately--never saw
t'other man be-fore.”

“T'other” was a ragged, un-kempt creature, with noth-ing very pleas-ant
in his face. The Span-iard was wrapped in a serape; he had bushy white
whiskers; long white hair flowed from un-der his som-brero, and he wore
green goggles. When they came in, “t'other” was talk-ing in a low voice;
they sat down on the ground, fa-cing the door, with their backs to the
wall, and the speaker con-tin-ued his re-marks. His man-ner be-came less
guarded and his words more dis-tinct as he pro-ceeded:

“No,” said he, “I've thought it all over, and I don't like it. It's
dan-ger-ous.”

“Dan-ger-ous!” grunted the “deaf and dumb” Span-iard--to the vast sur-prise
of the boys. “Milk-sop!”

This voice made the boys gasp and quake. It was In-jun Joe's! There was
si-lence for some time. Then Joe said:

“What's any more dan-ger-ous than that job up yon-der--but noth-ing's come of
it.”

“That's dif-fer-ent. Away up the river so, and not an-other house about.
'Twon't ever be known that we tried, any-way, long as we didn't suc-ceed.”

“Well, what's more dan-ger-ous than com-ing here in the day-time!--any-body
would sus-pi-cion us that saw us.”

“I know that. But there warn't any other place as handy after that fool
of a job. I want to quit this shanty. I wanted to yes-ter-day, only it
warn't any use try-ing to stir out of here, with those in-fernal boys
play-ing over there on the hill right in full view.”

“Those in-fernal boys” quaked again un-der the in-spir-a-tion of this re-mark,
and thought how lucky it was that they had re-membered it was Fri-day and
con-cluded to wait a day. They wished in their hearts they had waited a
year.

The two men got out some food and made a lunch-eon. After a long and
thought-ful si-lence, In-jun Joe said:

“Look here, lad--you go back up the river where you be-long. Wait there
till you hear from me. I'll take the chances on drop-ping into this town
just once more, for a look. We'll do that 'dan-ger-ous' job after I've
spied around a little and think things look well for it. Then for Texas!
We'll leg it to-gether!”

This was sat-is-fact-ory. Both men presently fell to yawn-ing, and In-jun Joe
said:

“I'm dead for sleep! It's your turn to watch.”

He curled down in the weeds and soon began to snore. His com-rade stirred
him once or twice and he be-came quiet. Presently the watcher began to
nod; his head drooped lower and lower, both men began to snore now.

The boys drew a long, grate-ful breath. Tom whispered:

“Now's our chance--come!”

Huck said:

“I can't--I'd die if they was to wake.”

Tom urged--Huck held back. At last Tom rose slowly and softly, and
star-ted alone. But the first step he made wrung such a hideous creak
from the crazy floor that he sank down al-most dead with fright. He never
made a second at-tempt. The boys lay there count-ing the drag-ging mo-ments
till it seemed to them that time must be done and etern-ity grow-ing gray;
and then they were grate-ful to note that at last the sun was set-ting.

Now one snore ceased. In-jun Joe sat up, stared around--smiled grimly upon
his com-rade, whose head was droop-ing upon his knees--stirred him up with
his foot and said:

“Here! _You're_ a watch-man, ain't you! All right, though--noth-ing's
happened.”

“My! have I been asleep?”

“Oh, partly, partly. Nearly time for us to be mov-ing, pard. What'll we
do with what little swag we've got left?”

“I don't know--leave it here as we've al-ways done, I reckon. No use to
take it away till we start south. Six hun-dred and fifty in sil-ver's
some-thing to carry.”

“Well--all right--it won't mat-ter to come here once more.”

“No--but I'd say come in the night as we used to do--it's bet-ter.”

“Yes: but look here; it may be a good while be-fore I get the right
chance at that job; ac-ci-dents might hap-pen; 'tain't in such a very good
place; we'll just reg-u-larly bury it--and bury it deep.”

“Good idea,” said the com-rade, who walked across the room, knelt down,
raised one of the rear-ward hearth-stones and took out a bag that jingled
pleas-antly. He sub-trac-ted from it twenty or thirty dol-lars for him-self
and as much for In-jun Joe, and passed the bag to the lat-ter, who was on
his knees in the corner, now, dig-ging with his bowie-knife.

The boys for-got all their fears, all their miser-ies in an in-stant. With
gloat-ing eyes they watched every move-ment. Luck!--the splendor of it was
bey-ond all ima-gin-a-tion! Six hun-dred dol-lars was money enough to make
half a dozen boys rich! Here was treas-ure-hunt-ing un-der the hap-pi-est
aus-pices--there would not be any both-er-some un-cer-tainty as to where to
dig. They nudged each other every mo-ment--elo-quent nudges and eas-ily
un-der-stood, for they simply meant--“Oh, but ain't you glad _now_ we're
here!”

Joe's knife struck upon some-thing.

“Hello!” said he.

“What is it?” said his com-rade.

“Half-rot-ten plank--no, it's a box, I be-lieve. Here--bear a hand and we'll
see what it's here for. Never mind, I've broke a hole.”

He reached his hand in and drew it out--

“Man, it's money!”

The two men ex-amined the hand-ful of coins. They were gold. The boys
above were as ex-cited as them-selves, and as de-lighted.

Joe's com-rade said:

“We'll make quick work of this. There's an old rusty pick over amongst
the weeds in the corner the other side of the fire-place--I saw it a
minute ago.”

He ran and brought the boys' pick and shovel. In-jun Joe took the
pick, looked it over crit-ic-ally, shook his head, muttered some-thing to
him-self, and then began to use it. The box was soon un-earthed. It was
not very large; it was iron bound and had been very strong be-fore the
slow years had in-jured it. The men con-tem-plated the treas-ure awhile in
bliss-ful si-lence.

“Pard, there's thou-sands of dol-lars here,” said In-jun Joe.

“'Twas al-ways said that Mur-rel's gang used to be around here one
sum-mer,” the stranger ob-served.

“I know it,” said In-jun Joe; “and this looks like it, I should say.”

“Now you won't need to do that job.”

The half-breed frowned. Said he:

“You don't know me. Least you don't know all about that thing. 'Tain't
rob-bery al-to-gether--it's _re-venge_!” and a wicked light flamed in his
eyes. “I'll need your help in it. When it's fin-ished--then Texas. Go home
to your Nance and your kids, and stand by till you hear from me.”

“Well--if you say so; what'll we do with this--bury it again?”

“Yes. [Rav-ish-ing de-light over-head.] _No_! by the great Sa-chem, no!
[Pro-found dis-tress over-head.] I'd nearly for-got. That pick had fresh
earth on it! [The boys were sick with ter-ror in a mo-ment.] What busi-ness
has a pick and a shovel here? What busi-ness with fresh earth on
them? Who brought them here--and where are they gone? Have you heard
any-body?--seen any-body? What! bury it again and leave them to come and
see the ground dis-turbed? Not ex-actly--not ex-actly. We'll take it to my
den.”

“Why, of course! Might have thought of that be-fore. You mean Num-ber
One?”

“No--Num-ber Two--un-der the cross. The other place is bad--too com-mon.”

“All right. It's nearly dark enough to start.”

In-jun Joe got up and went about from win-dow to win-dow cau-tiously peep-ing
out. Presently he said:

“Who could have brought those tools here? Do you reckon they can be
up-stairs?”

The boys' breath for-sook them. In-jun Joe put his hand on his knife,
hal-ted a mo-ment, un-de-cided, and then turned to-ward the stair-way. The
boys thought of the closet, but their strength was gone. The steps came
creak-ing up the stairs--the in-tol-er-able dis-tress of the situ-ation woke
the stricken res-ol-u-tion of the lads--they were about to spring for the
closet, when there was a crash of rot-ten tim-bers and In-jun Joe landed on
the ground amid the debris of the ruined stair-way. He gathered him-self
up curs-ing, and his com-rade said:

“Now what's the use of all that? If it's any-body, and they're up there,
let them _stay_ there--who cares? If they want to jump down, now, and get
into trouble, who ob-jects? It will be dark in fif-teen minutes--and then
let them fol-low us if they want to. I'm will-ing. In my opin-ion, who-ever
hove those things in here caught a sight of us and took us for ghosts or
dev-ils or some-thing. I'll bet they're run-ning yet.”

Joe grumbled awhile; then he agreed with his friend that what day-light
was left ought to be eco-nom-ized in get-ting things ready for leav-ing.
Shortly af-ter-ward they slipped out of the house in the deep-en-ing
twi-light, and moved to-ward the river with their pre-cious box.

Tom and Huck rose up, weak but vastly re-lieved, and stared after them
through the chinks between the logs of the house. Fol-low? Not they. They
were con-tent to reach ground again without broken necks, and take the
town-ward track over the hill. They did not talk much. They were too much
ab-sorbed in hat-ing them-selves--hat-ing the ill luck that made them take
the spade and the pick there. But for that, In-jun Joe never would have
sus-pec-ted. He would have hid-den the sil-ver with the gold to wait
there till his “re-venge” was sat-is-fied, and then he would have had the
mis-for-tune to find that money turn up miss-ing. Bit-ter, bit-ter luck that
the tools were ever brought there!

They re-solved to keep a lookout for that Span-iard when he should come to
town spy-ing out for chances to do his re-venge-ful job, and fol-low him to
“Num-ber Two,” wherever that might be. Then a ghastly thought oc-curred to
Tom.

“Revenge? What if he means _us_, Huck!”

“Oh, don't!” said Huck, nearly faint-ing.

They talked it all over, and as they entered town they agreed to be-lieve
that he might pos-sibly mean some-body else--at least that he might at
least mean nobody but Tom, since only Tom had test-i-fied.

Very, very small com-fort it was to Tom to be alone in danger! Com-pany
would be a palp-able im-prove-ment, he thought.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE ad-ven-ture of the day migh-tily tor-men-ted Tom's dreams that night.
Four times he had his hands on that rich treas-ure and four times
it wasted to noth-ing-ness in his fin-gers as sleep for-sook him and
wake-ful-ness brought back the hard real-ity of his mis-for-tune. As he lay
in the early morn-ing re-call-ing the in-cid-ents of his great ad-ven-ture, he
no-ticed that they seemed curi-ously sub-dued and far away--some-what as if
they had happened in an-other world, or in a time long gone by. Then it
oc-curred to him that the great ad-ven-ture it-self must be a dream! There
was one very strong ar-gu-ment in fa-vor of this idea--namely, that the
quant-ity of coin he had seen was too vast to be real. He had never seen
as much as fifty dol-lars in one mass be-fore, and he was like all boys of
his age and sta-tion in life, in that he ima-gined that all ref-er-ences to
“hun-dreds” and “thou-sands” were mere fanci-ful forms of speech, and that
no such sums really ex-is-ted in the world. He never had sup-posed for
a mo-ment that so large a sum as a hun-dred dol-lars was to be found in
ac-tual money in any one's pos-ses-sion. If his no-tions of hid-den treas-ure
had been ana-lyzed, they would have been found to con-sist of a hand-ful of
real dimes and a bushel of vague, splen-did, un-grasp-able dol-lars.

But the in-cid-ents of his ad-ven-ture grew sens-ibly sharper and clearer
un-der the at-tri-tion of think-ing them over, and so he presently found
him-self lean-ing to the im-pres-sion that the thing might not have been a
dream, after all. This un-cer-tainty must be swept away. He would snatch a
hur-ried break-fast and go and find Huck. Huck was sit-ting on the gun-wale
of a flat-boat, list-lessly dangling his feet in the wa-ter and look-ing
very mel-an-choly. Tom con-cluded to let Huck lead up to the sub-ject. If
he did not do it, then the ad-ven-ture would be proved to have been only a
dream.

“Hello, Huck!”

“Hello, your-self.”

Si-lence, for a minute.

“Tom, if we'd 'a' left the blame tools at the dead tree, we'd 'a' got
the money. Oh, ain't it aw-ful!”

“'Tain't a dream, then, 'tain't a dream! Some-how I most wish it was.
Dog'd if I don't, Huck.”

“What ain't a dream?”

“Oh, that thing yes-ter-day. I been half think-ing it was.”

“Dream! If them stairs hadn't broke down you'd 'a' seen how much dream
it was! I've had dreams enough all night--with that patch-eyed Span-ish
devil go-ing for me all through 'em--rot him!”

“No, not rot him. _Find_ him! Track the money!”

“Tom, we'll never find him. A feller don't have only one chance for such
a pile--and that one's lost. I'd feel mighty shaky if I was to see him,
any-way.”

“Well, so'd I; but I'd like to see him, any-way--and track him out--to his
Num-ber Two.”

“Num-ber Two--yes, that's it. I been think-ing 'bout that. But I can't make
noth-ing out of it. What do you reckon it is?”

“I dono. It's too deep. Say, Huck--maybe it's the num-ber of a house!”

“Goody!... No, Tom, that ain't it. If it is, it ain't in this one-horse
town. They ain't no num-bers here.”

“Well, that's so. Lemme think a minute. Here--it's the num-ber of a
room--in a tav-ern, you know!”

“Oh, that's the trick! They ain't only two tav-erns. We can find out
quick.”

“You stay here, Huck, till I come.”

Tom was off at once. He did not care to have Huck's com-pany in pub-lic
places. He was gone half an hour. He found that in the best tav-ern, No.
2 had long been oc-cu-pied by a young law-yer, and was still so oc-cu-pied.
In the less os-ten-ta-tious house, No. 2 was a mys-tery. The tav-ern-keeper's
young son said it was kept locked all the time, and he never saw any-body
go into it or come out of it ex-cept at night; he did not know any
par-tic-u-lar reason for this state of things; had had some little
curi-os-ity, but it was rather feeble; had made the most of the mys-tery
by en-ter-tain-ing him-self with the idea that that room was “ha'nted”; had
no-ticed that there was a light in there the night be-fore.

“That's what I've found out, Huck. I reckon that's the very No. 2 we're
after.”

“I reckon it is, Tom. Now what you go-ing to do?”

“Lemme think.”

Tom thought a long time. Then he said:

“I'll tell you. The back door of that No. 2 is the door that comes out
into that little close al-ley between the tav-ern and the old rattle trap
of a brick store. Now you get hold of all the door-keys you can find, and
I'll nip all of auntie's, and the first dark night we'll go there and
try 'em. And mind you, keep a lookout for In-jun Joe, be-cause he said he
was go-ing to drop into town and spy around once more for a chance to get
his re-venge. If you see him, you just fol-low him; and if he don't go to
that No. 2, that ain't the place.”

“Lordy, I don't want to foller him by my-self!”

“Why, it'll be night, sure. He mightn't ever see you--and if he did,
maybe he'd never think any-thing.”

“Well, if it's pretty dark I reckon I'll track him. I dono--I dono. I'll
try.”

“You bet I'll fol-low him, if it's dark, Huck. Why, he might 'a' found
out he couldn't get his re-venge, and be go-ing right after that money.”

“It's so, Tom, it's so. I'll foller him; I will, by jin-goes!”

“Now you're _talk-ing_! Don't you ever weaken, Huck, and I won't.”




CHAPTER XXVIII

THAT night Tom and Huck were ready for their ad-ven-ture. They hung about
the neigh-bor-hood of the tav-ern un-til after nine, one watch-ing the al-ley
at a dis-tance and the other the tav-ern door. Nobody entered the al-ley or
left it; nobody re-sem-bling the Span-iard entered or left the tav-ern
door. The night prom-ised to be a fair one; so Tom went home with the
un-der-stand-ing that if a con-sid-er-able de-gree of dark-ness came on, Huck
was to come and “maow,” whereupon he would slip out and try the keys.
But the night re-mained clear, and Huck closed his watch and re-tired to
bed in an empty sugar hogshead about twelve.

Tues-day the boys had the same ill luck. Also Wed-nes-day. But Thursday
night prom-ised bet-ter. Tom slipped out in good sea-son with his aunt's
old tin lan-tern, and a large towel to blind-fold it with. He hid the
lan-tern in Huck's sugar hogshead and the watch began. An hour be-fore
mid-night the tav-ern closed up and its lights (the only ones there-abouts)
were put out. No Span-iard had been seen. Nobody had entered or left the
al-ley. Everything was aus-pi-cious. The black-ness of dark-ness reigned,
the per-fect still-ness was in-ter-rup-ted only by oc-ca-sional mut-ter-ings of
dis-tant thun-der.

Tom got his lan-tern, lit it in the hogshead, wrapped it closely in the
towel, and the two ad-ven-tur-ers crept in the gloom to-ward the tav-ern.
Huck stood sen-try and Tom felt his way into the al-ley. Then there was
a sea-son of wait-ing anxi-ety that weighed upon Huck's spir-its like a
moun-tain. He began to wish he could see a flash from the lan-tern--it
would frighten him, but it would at least tell him that Tom was alive
yet. It seemed hours since Tom had dis-ap-peared. Surely he must have
fain-ted; maybe he was dead; maybe his heart had burst un-der ter-ror and
ex-cite-ment. In his un-eas-i-ness Huck found him-self draw-ing closer
and closer to the al-ley; fear-ing all sorts of dread-ful things, and
mo-ment-ar-ily ex-pect-ing some cata-strophe to hap-pen that would take away
his breath. There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to
in-hale it by thimble-fuls, and his heart would soon wear it-self out, the
way it was beat-ing. Sud-denly there was a flash of light and Tom came
tear-ing by him: “Run!” said he; “run, for your life!”

He needn't have re-peated it; once was enough; Huck was mak-ing thirty or
forty miles an hour be-fore the re-pe-ti-tion was uttered. The boys never
stopped till they reached the shed of a deser-ted slaughter-house at the
lower end of the vil-lage. Just as they got within its shel-ter the storm
burst and the rain poured down. As soon as Tom got his breath he said:

“Huck, it was aw-ful! I tried two of the keys, just as soft as I could;
but they seemed to make such a power of racket that I couldn't hardly
get my breath I was so scared. They wouldn't turn in the lock, either.
Well, without no-ti-cing what I was do-ing, I took hold of the knob, and
open comes the door! It warn't locked! I hopped in, and shook off the
towel, and, _Great Caesar's Ghost!_”

“What!--what'd you see, Tom?”

“Huck, I most stepped onto In-jun Joe's hand!”

“No!”

“Yes! He was ly-ing there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old patch
on his eye and his arms spread out.”

“Lordy, what did you do? Did he wake up?”

“No, never budged. Drunk, I reckon. I just grabbed that towel and
star-ted!”

“I'd never 'a' thought of the towel, I bet!”

“Well, I would. My aunt would make me mighty sick if I lost it.”

“Say, Tom, did you see that box?”

“Huck, I didn't wait to look around. I didn't see the box, I didn't see
the cross. I didn't see any-thing but a bottle and a tin cup on the floor
by In-jun Joe; yes, I saw two bar-rels and lots more bottles in the room.
Don't you see, now, what's the mat-ter with that ha'nted room?”

“How?”

“Why, it's ha'nted with whis-key! Maybe _all_ the Tem-per-ance Tav-erns have
got a ha'nted room, hey, Huck?”

“Well, I reckon maybe that's so. Who'd 'a' thought such a thing? But
say, Tom, now's a mighty good time to get that box, if In-jun Joe's
drunk.”

“It is, that! You try it!”

Huck shuddered.

“Well, no--I reckon not.”

“And I reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle along-side of In-jun Joe ain't
enough. If there'd been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it.”

There was a long pause for re-flec-tion, and then Tom said:

“Looky-here, Huck, less not try that thing any more till we know In-jun
Joe's not in there. It's too scary. Now, if we watch every night, we'll
be dead sure to see him go out, some time or other, and then we'll
snatch that box quicker'n light-ning.”

“Well, I'm agreed. I'll watch the whole night long, and I'll do it every
night, too, if you'll do the other part of the job.”

“All right, I will. All you got to do is to trot up Hooper Street a
block and maow--and if I'm asleep, you throw some gravel at the win-dow
and that'll fetch me.”

“Agreed, and good as wheat!”

“Now, Huck, the storm's over, and I'll go home. It'll be-gin to be
day-light in a couple of hours. You go back and watch that long, will
you?”

“I said I would, Tom, and I will. I'll ha'nt that tav-ern every night for
a year! I'll sleep all day and I'll stand watch all night.”

“That's all right. Now, where you go-ing to sleep?”

“In Ben Ro-gers' hayloft. He lets me, and so does his pap's nig-ger man,
Uncle Jake. I tote wa-ter for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any
time I ask him he gives me a little some-thing to eat if he can spare it.
That's a mighty good nig-ger, Tom. He likes me, becuz I don't ever act as
if I was above him. So-me-time I've set right down and eat _with_ him. But
you needn't tell that. A body's got to do things when he's aw-ful hungry
he wouldn't want to do as a steady thing.”

“Well, if I don't want you in the day-time, I'll let you sleep. I won't
come both-er-ing around. Any time you see some-thing's up, in the night,
just skip right around and maow.”




CHAPTER XXIX

THE first thing Tom heard on Fri-day morn-ing was a glad piece of
news--Judge Thatcher's fam-ily had come back to town the night be-fore.
Both In-jun Joe and the treas-ure sunk into sec-ond-ary im-port-ance for a
mo-ment, and Becky took the chief place in the boy's in-terest. He saw her
and they had an ex-haust-ing good time play-ing “hispy” and “gully-keeper”
 with a crowd of their school-mates. The day was com-pleted and crowned in
a pe-cu-li-arly sat-is-fact-ory way: Becky teased her mother to ap-point
the next day for the long-prom-ised and long-delayed pic-nic, and she
con-sen-ted. The child's de-light was bound-less; and Tom's not more
mod-er-ate. The in-vit-a-tions were sent out be-fore sun-set, and straight-way
the young folks of the vil-lage were thrown into a fever of pre-par-a-tion
and pleas-ur-able an-ti-cip-a-tion. Tom's ex-cite-ment en-abled him to keep
awake un-til a pretty late hour, and he had good hopes of hear-ing Huck's
“maow,” and of hav-ing his treas-ure to as-ton-ish Becky and the pic-nick-ers
with, next day; but he was dis-ap-poin-ted. No sig-nal came that night.

Morn-ing came, even-tu-ally, and by ten or el-even o'clock a giddy and
rol-lick-ing com-pany were gathered at Judge Thatcher's, and everything was
ready for a start. It was not the cus-tom for eld-erly people to mar the
pic-nics with their pres-ence. The chil-dren were con-sidered safe enough
un-der the wings of a few young ladies of eight-een and a few young
gen-tle-men of twenty-three or there-abouts. The old steam ferry-boat was
chartered for the oc-ca-sion; presently the gay throng filed up the main
street laden with pro-vi-sion-bas-kets. Sid was sick and had to miss
the fun; Mary re-mained at home to en-ter-tain him. The last thing Mrs.
Thatcher said to Becky, was:

“You'll not get back till late. Per-haps you'd bet-ter stay all night with
some of the girls that live near the ferry-land-ing, child.”

“Then I'll stay with Susy Harper, mamma.”

“Very well. And mind and be-have your-self and don't be any trouble.”

Presently, as they tripped along, Tom said to Becky:

“Say--I'll tell you what we'll do. 'Stead of go-ing to Joe Harper's we'll
climb right up the hill and stop at the Widow Douglas'. She'll have
ice-cream! She has it most every day--dead loads of it. And she'll be
aw-ful glad to have us.”

“Oh, that will be fun!”

Then Becky re-flec-ted a mo-ment and said:

“But what will mamma say?”

“How'll she ever know?”

The girl turned the idea over in her mind, and said re-luct-antly:

“I reckon it's wrong--but--”

“But shucks! Your mother won't know, and so what's the harm? All she
wants is that you'll be safe; and I bet you she'd 'a' said go there if
she'd 'a' thought of it. I know she would!”

The Widow Douglas' splen-did hos-pit-al-ity was a tempt-ing bait. It and
Tom's per-sua-sions presently car-ried the day. So it was de-cided to say
noth-ing to any-body about the night's pro-gramme. Presently it oc-curred to
Tom that maybe Huck might come this very night and give the sig-nal. The
thought took a deal of the spirit out of his an-ti-cip-a-tions. Still he
could not bear to give up the fun at Widow Douglas'. And why should he
give it up, he reasoned--the sig-nal did not come the night be-fore, so
why should it be any more likely to come to-night? The sure fun of the
even-ing out-weighed the un-cer-tain treas-ure; and, boy-like, he de-term-ined
to yield to the stronger in-clin-a-tion and not al-low him-self to think of
the box of money an-other time that day.

Three miles be-low town the ferry-boat stopped at the mouth of a woody
hol-low and tied up. The crowd swarmed ashore and soon the forest
dis-tances and craggy heights echoed far and near with shout-ings and
laughter. All the dif-fer-ent ways of get-ting hot and tired were gone
through with, and by-and-by the rovers straggled back to camp for-ti-fied
with re-spons-ible ap-pet-ites, and then the de-struc-tion of the good things
began. After the feast there was a re-fresh-ing sea-son of rest and chat in
the shade of spread-ing oaks. By-and-by some-body shouted:

“Who's ready for the cave?”

Every-body was. Bundles of candles were pro-cured, and straight-way there
was a gen-eral scamper up the hill. The mouth of the cave was up the
hill-side--an open-ing shaped like a let-ter A. Its massive oaken door stood
un-barred. Within was a small cham-ber, chilly as an ice-house, and walled
by Nature with solid lime-stone that was dewy with a cold sweat. It was
ro-mantic and mys-ter-i-ous to stand here in the deep gloom and look out
upon the green val-ley shin-ing in the sun. But the im-press-ive-ness of the
situ-ation quickly wore off, and the romp-ing began again. The mo-ment
a candle was lighted there was a gen-eral rush upon the owner of it; a
struggle and a gal-lant de-fence fol-lowed, but the candle was soon knocked
down or blown out, and then there was a glad clamor of laughter and a
new chase. But all things have an end. By-and-by the pro-ces-sion went
fil-ing down the steep des-cent of the main av-enue, the flick-er-ing rank of
lights dimly re-veal-ing the lofty walls of rock al-most to their point of
junc-tion sixty feet over-head. This main av-enue was not more than
eight or ten feet wide. Every few steps other lofty and still nar-rower
crevices branched from it on either hand--for McDou-gal's cave was but a
vast labyrinth of crooked aisles that ran into each other and out again
and led nowhere. It was said that one might wander days and nights
to-gether through its in-tric-ate tangle of rifts and chasms, and never
find the end of the cave; and that he might go down, and down, and
still down, into the earth, and it was just the same--labyrinth un-der
labyrinth, and no end to any of them. No man “knew” the cave. That was
an im-possible thing. Most of the young men knew a por-tion of it, and it
was not cus-tom-ary to ven-ture much bey-ond this known por-tion. Tom Saw-yer
knew as much of the cave as any one.

The pro-ces-sion moved along the main av-enue some three-quar-ters of
a mile, and then groups and couples began to slip aside into branch
av-en-ues, fly along the dis-mal cor-ridors, and take each other by sur-prise
at points where the cor-ridors joined again. Parties were able to elude
each other for the space of half an hour without go-ing bey-ond the
“known” ground.

By-and-by, one group after an-other came strag-gling back to the mouth
of the cave, pant-ing, hil-ari-ous, smeared from head to foot with tal-low
drip-pings, daubed with clay, and en-tirely de-lighted with the suc-cess of
the day. Then they were as-ton-ished to find that they had been tak-ing
no note of time and that night was about at hand. The clanging bell had
been call-ing for half an hour. However, this sort of close to the day's
ad-ven-tures was ro-mantic and there-fore sat-is-fact-ory. When the ferry-boat
with her wild freight pushed into the stream, nobody cared six-pence for
the wasted time but the cap-tain of the craft.

Huck was already upon his watch when the ferry-boat's lights went
glint-ing past the wharf. He heard no noise on board, for the young
people were as sub-dued and still as people usu-ally are who are nearly
tired to death. He wondered what boat it was, and why she did not
stop at the wharf--and then he dropped her out of his mind and put his
at-ten-tion upon his busi-ness. The night was grow-ing cloudy and dark. Ten
o'clock came, and the noise of vehicles ceased, scattered lights began
to wink out, all strag-gling foot-pas-sen-gers dis-ap-peared, the vil-lage
betook it-self to its slum-bers and left the small watcher alone with the
si-lence and the ghosts. Eleven o'clock came, and the tav-ern lights were
put out; dark-ness every-where, now. Huck waited what seemed a weary long
time, but noth-ing happened. His faith was weak-en-ing. Was there any use?
Was there really any use? Why not give it up and turn in?

A noise fell upon his ear. He was all at-ten-tion in an in-stant. The al-ley
door closed softly. He sprang to the corner of the brick store. The next
mo-ment two men brushed by him, and one seemed to have some-thing un-der
his arm. It must be that box! So they were go-ing to re-move the treas-ure.
Why call Tom now? It would be ab-surd--the men would get away with the box
and never be found again. No, he would stick to their wake and fol-low
them; he would trust to the dark-ness for se-cur-ity from dis-cov-ery. So
com-mun-ing with him-self, Huck stepped out and glided along be-hind the
men, cat-like, with bare feet, al-low-ing them to keep just far enough
ahead not to be in-vis-ible.

They moved up the river street three blocks, then turned to the left up
a crossstreet. They went straight ahead, then, un-til they came to the
path that led up Cardiff Hill; this they took. They passed by the old
Welsh-man's house, halfway up the hill, without hes-it-at-ing, and still
climbed up-ward. Good, thought Huck, they will bury it in the old quarry.
But they never stopped at the quarry. They passed on, up the sum-mit.
They plunged into the nar-row path between the tall sumach bushes, and
were at once hid-den in the gloom. Huck closed up and shortened his
dis-tance, now, for they would never be able to see him. He trot-ted along
awhile; then slackened his pace, fear-ing he was gain-ing too fast; moved
on a piece, then stopped al-to-gether; listened; no sound; none, save that
he seemed to hear the beat-ing of his own heart. The hoot-ing of an
owl came over the hill--omin-ous sound! But no foot-steps. Heavens, was
everything lost! He was about to spring with winged feet, when a man
cleared his throat not four feet from him! Huck's heart shot into his
throat, but he swal-lowed it again; and then he stood there shak-ing as
if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at once, and so weak that he
thought he must surely fall to the ground. He knew where he was. He
knew he was within five steps of the stile lead-ing into Widow Douglas'
grounds. Very well, he thought, let them bury it there; it won't be hard
to find.

Now there was a voice--a very low voice--In-jun Joe's:

“Damn her, maybe she's got com-pany--there's lights, late as it is.”

“I can't see any.”

This was that stranger's voice--the stranger of the haunted house. A
deadly chill went to Huck's heart--this, then, was the “re-venge” job! His
thought was, to fly. Then he re-membered that the Widow Douglas had been
kind to him more than once, and maybe these men were go-ing to murder
her. He wished he dared ven-ture to warn her; but he knew he didn't
dare--they might come and catch him. He thought all this and more in
the mo-ment that elapsed between the stranger's re-mark and In-jun Joe's
next--which was--

“Be-cause the bush is in your way. Now--this way--now you see, don't you?”

“Yes. Well, there _is_ com-pany there, I reckon. Bet-ter give it up.”

“Give it up, and I just leav-ing this coun-try forever! Give it up and
maybe never have an-other chance. I tell you again, as I've told you
be-fore, I don't care for her swag--you may have it. But her hus-band was
rough on me--many times he was rough on me--and mainly he was the justice
of the peace that jugged me for a vag-rant. And that ain't all. It ain't
a mil-lionth part of it! He had me _horse-whipped_!--horse-whipped in
front of the jail, like a nig-ger!--with all the town look-ing on!
_Horse-whipped_!--do you un-der-stand? He took ad-vant-age of me and died. But
I'll take it out of _her_.”

“Oh, don't kill her! Don't do that!”

“Kill? Who said any-thing about killing? I would kill _him_ if he was
here; but not her. When you want to get re-venge on a wo-man you don't
kill her--bosh! you go for her looks. You slit her nos-trils--you notch her
ears like a sow!”

“By God, that's--”

“Keep your opin-ion to your-self! It will be safest for you. I'll tie her
to the bed. If she bleeds to death, is that my fault? I'll not cry, if
she does. My friend, you'll help me in this thing--for _my_ sake--that's
why you're here--I mightn't be able alone. If you flinch, I'll kill you.
Do you un-der-stand that? And if I have to kill you, I'll kill her--and
then I reckon nobody'll ever know much about who done this busi-ness.”

“Well, if it's got to be done, let's get at it. The quicker the
bet-ter--I'm all in a shiver.”

“Do it _now_? And com-pany there? Look here--I'll get sus-pi-cious of you,
first thing you know. No--we'll wait till the lights are out--there's no
hurry.”

Huck felt that a si-lence was go-ing to en-sue--a thing still more aw-ful
than any amount of mur-der-ous talk; so he held his breath and stepped
gingerly back; planted his foot care-fully and firmly, after bal-an-cing,
one-legged, in a pre-cari-ous way and al-most top-pling over, first on one
side and then on the other. He took an-other step back, with the same
elab-or-a-tion and the same risks; then an-other and an-other, and--a twig
snapped un-der his foot! His breath stopped and he listened. There was no
sound--the still-ness was per-fect. His grat-it-ude was meas-ure-less. Now he
turned in his tracks, between the walls of sumach bushes--turned
him-self as care-fully as if he were a ship--and then stepped quickly but
cau-tiously along. When he emerged at the quarry he felt se-cure, and
so he picked up his nimble heels and flew. Down, down he sped, till he
reached the Welsh-man's. He banged at the door, and presently the heads
of the old man and his two stal-wart sons were thrust from win-dows.

“What's the row there? Who's banging? What do you want?”

“Let me in--quick! I'll tell everything.”

“Why, who are you?”

“Huckle-berry Finn--quick, let me in!”

“Huckle-berry Finn, in-deed! It ain't a name to open many doors, I judge!
But let him in, lads, and let's see what's the trouble.”

“Please don't ever tell I told you,” were Huck's first words when he got
in. “Please don't--I'd be killed, sure--but the widow's been good friends
to me some-times, and I want to tell--I _will_ tell if you'll prom-ise you
won't ever say it was me.”

“By Ge-orge, he _has_ got some-thing to tell, or he wouldn't act so!”
 ex-claimed the old man; “out with it and nobody here'll ever tell, lad.”

Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed, were up the
hill, and just en-ter-ing the sumach path on tip-toe, their weapons in
their hands. Huck ac-com-pan-ied them no fur-ther. He hid be-hind a great
bowlder and fell to listen-ing. There was a lag-ging, anxious si-lence, and
then all of a sud-den there was an ex-plo-sion of fire-arms and a cry.

Huck waited for no par-tic-u-lars. He sprang away and sped down the hill as
fast as his legs could carry him.




CHAPTER XXX

AS the earli-est sus-pi-cion of dawn ap-peared on Sunday morn-ing, Huck came
grop-ing up the hill and rapped gently at the old Welsh-man's door. The
in-mates were asleep, but it was a sleep that was set on a hair-trig-ger,
on ac-count of the ex-cit-ing epis-ode of the night. A call came from a
win-dow:

“Who's there!”

Huck's scared voice answered in a low tone:

“Please let me in! It's only Huck Finn!”

“It's a name that can open this door night or day, lad!--and wel-come!”

These were strange words to the vag-a-bond boy's ears, and the pleas-antest
he had ever heard. He could not re-col-lect that the clos-ing word had ever
been ap-plied in his case be-fore. The door was quickly un-locked, and he
entered. Huck was given a seat and the old man and his brace of tall
sons speedily dressed them-selves.

“Now, my boy, I hope you're good and hungry, be-cause break-fast will be
ready as soon as the sun's up, and we'll have a pip-ing hot one, too--make
your-self easy about that! I and the boys hoped you'd turn up and stop
here last night.”

“I was aw-ful scared,” said Huck, “and I run. I took out when the pis-tols
went off, and I didn't stop for three mile. I've come now becuz I wanted
to know about it, you know; and I come be-fore day-light becuz I didn't
want to run across them dev-ils, even if they was dead.”

“Well, poor chap, you do look as if you'd had a hard night of it--but
there's a bed here for you when you've had your break-fast. No, they
ain't dead, lad--we are sorry enough for that. You see we knew right
where to put our hands on them, by your de-scrip-tion; so we crept along
on tip-toe till we got within fif-teen feet of them--dark as a cel-lar that
sumach path was--and just then I found I was go-ing to sneeze. It was the
mean-est kind of luck! I tried to keep it back, but no use--'twas bound to
come, and it did come! I was in the lead with my pis-tol raised, and when
the sneeze star-ted those scoun-drels a-rust-ling to get out of the path,
I sung out, 'Fire boys!' and blazed away at the place where the rust-ling
was. So did the boys. But they were off in a jiffy, those vil-lains, and
we after them, down through the woods. I judge we never touched them.
They fired a shot apiece as they star-ted, but their bul-lets whizzed by
and didn't do us any harm. As soon as we lost the sound of their feet
we quit chas-ing, and went down and stirred up the con-stables. They got a
posse to-gether, and went off to guard the river bank, and as soon as it
is light the sher-iff and a gang are go-ing to beat up the woods. My boys
will be with them presently. I wish we had some sort of de-scrip-tion of
those ras-cals--'twould help a good deal. But you couldn't see what they
were like, in the dark, lad, I sup-pose?”

“Oh yes; I saw them down-town and follered them.”

“Splen-did! Describe them--de-scribe them, my boy!”

“One's the old deaf and dumb Span-iard that's ben around here once or
twice, and t'other's a mean-look-ing, ragged--”

“That's enough, lad, we know the men! Happened on them in the woods back
of the widow's one day, and they slunk away. Off with you, boys, and
tell the sher-iff--get your break-fast to-mor-row morn-ing!”

The Welsh-man's sons de-par-ted at once. As they were leav-ing the room Huck
sprang up and ex-claimed:

“Oh, please don't tell _any_body it was me that blowed on them! Oh,
please!”

“All right if you say it, Huck, but you ought to have the credit of what
you did.”

“Oh no, no! Please don't tell!”

When the young men were gone, the old Welsh-man said:

“They won't tell--and I won't. But why don't you want it known?”

Huck would not ex-plain, fur-ther than to say that he already knew too
much about one of those men and would not have the man know that he knew
any-thing against him for the whole world--he would be killed for know-ing
it, sure.

The old man prom-ised secrecy once more, and said:

“How did you come to fol-low these fel-lows, lad? Were they look-ing
sus-pi-cious?”

Huck was si-lent while he framed a duly cau-tious reply. Then he said:

“Well, you see, I'm a kind of a hard lot,--least every-body says so, and
I don't see noth-ing agin it--and some-times I can't sleep much, on ac-count
of think-ing about it and sort of try-ing to strike out a new way of
do-ing. That was the way of it last night. I couldn't sleep, and so I
come along up-street 'bout mid-night, a-turn-ing it all over, and when I
got to that old shackly brick store by the Tem-per-ance Tav-ern, I backed
up agin the wall to have an-other think. Well, just then along comes
these two chaps slip-ping along close by me, with some-thing un-der their
arm, and I reckoned they'd stole it. One was a-smoking, and t'other one
wanted a light; so they stopped right be-fore me and the ci-gars lit up
their faces and I see that the big one was the deaf and dumb Span-iard,
by his white whiskers and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a
rusty, ragged-look-ing devil.”

“Could you see the rags by the light of the ci-gars?”

This staggered Huck for a mo-ment. Then he said:

“Well, I don't know--but some-how it seems as if I did.”

“Then they went on, and you--”

“Follered 'em--yes. That was it. I wanted to see what was up--they sneaked
along so. I dogged 'em to the wid-der's stile, and stood in the dark and
heard the ragged one beg for the wid-der, and the Span-iard swear he'd
spile her looks just as I told you and your two--”

“What! The _deaf and dumb_ man said all that!”

Huck had made an-other ter-rible mis-take! He was try-ing his best to keep
the old man from get-ting the faintest hint of who the Span-iard might be,
and yet his tongue seemed de-term-ined to get him into trouble in spite of
all he could do. He made sev-eral ef-forts to creep out of his scrape,
but the old man's eye was upon him and he made blun-der after blun-der.
Presently the Welsh-man said:

“My boy, don't be afraid of me. I wouldn't hurt a hair of your head for
all the world. No--I'd pro-tect you--I'd pro-tect you. This Span-iard is
not deaf and dumb; you've let that slip without in-tend-ing it; you can't
cover that up now. You know some-thing about that Span-iard that you want
to keep dark. Now trust me--tell me what it is, and trust me--I won't
be-tray you.”

Huck looked into the old man's hon-est eyes a mo-ment, then bent over and
whispered in his ear:

“'Tain't a Span-iard--it's In-jun Joe!”

The Welsh-man al-most jumped out of his chair. In a mo-ment he said:

“It's all plain enough, now. When you talked about notch-ing ears and
slit-ting noses I judged that that was your own em-bel-lish-ment, be-cause
white men don't take that sort of re-venge. But an In-jun! That's a
dif-fer-ent mat-ter al-to-gether.”

Dur-ing break-fast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man
said that the last thing which he and his sons had done, be-fore go-ing
to bed, was to get a lan-tern and ex-am-ine the stile and its vi-cin-ity for
marks of blood. They found none, but cap-tured a bulky bundle of--

“Of _what_?”

If the words had been light-ning they could not have leaped with a more
stun-ning sud-den-ness from Huck's blanched lips. His eyes were star-ing
wide, now, and his breath sus-pen-ded--wait-ing for the an-swer. The Welsh-man
star-ted--stared in re-turn--three seconds--five seconds--ten--then replied:

“Of burg-lar's tools. Why, what's the _mat-ter_ with you?”

Huck sank back, pant-ing gently, but deeply, un-ut-ter-ably grate-ful. The
Welsh-man eyed him gravely, curi-ously--and presently said:

“Yes, burg-lar's tools. That ap-pears to re-lieve you a good deal. But what
did give you that turn? What were _y-ou_ ex-pect-ing we'd found?”

Huck was in a close place--the in-quir-ing eye was upon him--he would have
given any-thing for ma-ter-ial for a plaus-ible an-swer--noth-ing sug-ges-ted
it-self--the in-quir-ing eye was bor-ing deeper and deeper--a sense-less
reply offered--there was no time to weigh it, so at a ven-ture he uttered
it--feebly:

“Sunday-school books, maybe.”

Poor Huck was too dis-tressed to smile, but the old man laughed loud and
joy-ously, shook up the de-tails of his ana-tomy from head to foot, and
ended by say-ing that such a laugh was money in a-man's pocket, be-cause
it cut down the doc-tor's bill like everything. Then he ad-ded:

“Poor old chap, you're white and jaded--you ain't well a bit--no won-der
you're a little flighty and off your bal-ance. But you'll come out of it.
Rest and sleep will fetch you out all right, I hope.”

Huck was ir-rit-ated to think he had been such a goose and be-trayed such
a sus-pi-cious ex-cite-ment, for he had dropped the idea that the par-cel
brought from the tav-ern was the treas-ure, as soon as he had heard the
talk at the widow's stile. He had only thought it was not the treas-ure,
how-ever--he had not known that it wasn't--and so the sug-ges-tion of a
cap-tured bundle was too much for his self-pos-ses-sion. But on the whole
he felt glad the little epis-ode had happened, for now he knew bey-ond all
ques-tion that that bundle was not _the_ bundle, and so his mind was
at rest and ex-ceed-ingly com-fort-able. In fact, everything seemed to be
drift-ing just in the right dir-ec-tion, now; the treas-ure must be still
in No. 2, the men would be cap-tured and jailed that day, and he and
Tom could seize the gold that night without any trouble or any fear of
in-ter-rup-tion.

Just as break-fast was com-pleted there was a knock at the door. Huck
jumped for a hid-ing-place, for he had no mind to be con-nec-ted even
re-motely with the late event. The Welsh-man ad-mit-ted sev-eral ladies and
gen-tle-men, among them the Widow Douglas, and no-ticed that groups of
cit-izens were climb-ing up the hill--to stare at the stile. So the news
had spread. The Welsh-man had to tell the story of the night to the
vis-it-ors. The widow's grat-it-ude for her pre-ser-va-tion was out-spoken.

“Don't say a word about it, madam. There's an-other that you're more
be-holden to than you are to me and my boys, maybe, but he don't al-low me
to tell his name. We wouldn't have been there but for him.”

Of course this ex-cited a curi-os-ity so vast that it al-most be-littled the
main mat-ter--but the Welsh-man al-lowed it to eat into the vi-tals of his
vis-it-ors, and through them be trans-mit-ted to the whole town, for he
re-fused to part with his secret. When all else had been learned, the
widow said:

“I went to sleep read-ing in bed and slept straight through all that
noise. Why didn't you come and wake me?”

“We judged it warn't worth while. Those fel-lows warn't likely to come
again--they hadn't any tools left to work with, and what was the use of
wak-ing you up and scar-ing you to death? My three negro men stood guard
at your house all the rest of the night. They've just come back.”

More vis-it-ors came, and the story had to be told and re-told for a couple
of hours more.

There was no Sab-bath-school dur-ing day-school va-ca-tion, but every-body
was early at church. The stir-ring event was well can-vassed. News came
that not a sign of the two vil-lains had been yet dis-covered. When the
ser-mon was fin-ished, Judge Thatcher's wife dropped along-side of Mrs.
Harper as she moved down the aisle with the crowd and said:

“Is my Becky go-ing to sleep all day? I just ex-pec-ted she would be tired
to death.”

“Your Becky?”

“Yes,” with a startled look--“didn't she stay with you last night?”

“Why, no.”

Mrs. Thatcher turned pale, and sank into a pew, just as Aunt Polly,
talk-ing briskly with a friend, passed by. Aunt Polly said:

“Good-morn-ing, Mrs. Thatcher. Good-morn-ing, Mrs. Harper. I've got a boy
that's turned up miss-ing. I reckon my Tom stayed at your house last
night--one of you. And now he's afraid to come to church. I've got to
settle with him.”

Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever.

“He didn't stay with us,” said Mrs. Harper, be-gin-ning to look un-easy. A
marked anxi-ety came into Aunt Polly's face.

“Joe Harper, have you seen my Tom this morn-ing?”

“No'm.”

“When did you see him last?”

Joe tried to re-mem-ber, but was not sure he could say. The people had
stopped mov-ing out of church. Whis-pers passed along, and a bod-ing
un-eas-i-ness took pos-ses-sion of every coun-ten-ance. Chil-dren were anxiously
ques-tioned, and young teach-ers. They all said they had not no-ticed
whether Tom and Becky were on board the ferry-boat on the home-ward trip;
it was dark; no one thought of in-quir-ing if any one was miss-ing. One
young man fi-nally blur-ted out his fear that they were still in the cave!
Mrs. Thatcher swooned away. Aunt Polly fell to cry-ing and wringing her
hands.

The alarm swept from lip to lip, from group to group, from street to
street, and within five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and
the whole town was up! The Cardiff Hill epis-ode sank into in-stant
in-sig-ni-fic-ance, the burg-lars were for-got-ten, horses were saddled, skiffs
were manned, the ferry-boat ordered out, and be-fore the hor-ror was half
an hour old, two hun-dred men were pour-ing down highroad and river to-ward
the cave.

All the long af-ter-noon the vil-lage seemed empty and dead. Many wo-men
vis-ited Aunt Polly and Mrs. Thatcher and tried to com-fort them. They
cried with them, too, and that was still bet-ter than words. All the
te-di-ous night the town waited for news; but when the morn-ing dawned at
last, all the word that came was, “Send more candles--and send food.”
 Mrs. Thatcher was al-most crazed; and Aunt Polly, also. Judge Thatcher
sent mes-sages of hope and en-cour-age-ment from the cave, but they con-veyed
no real cheer.

The old Welsh-man came home to-ward day-light, spattered with
candle-grease, smeared with clay, and al-most worn out. He found Huck
still in the bed that had been provided for him, and de-li-ri-ous with
fever. The phys-i-cians were all at the cave, so the Widow Douglas came
and took charge of the pa-tient. She said she would do her best by him,
be-cause, whether he was good, bad, or in-dif-fer-ent, he was the Lord's,
and noth-ing that was the Lord's was a thing to be neg-lected. The
Welsh-man said Huck had good spots in him, and the widow said:

“You can de-pend on it. That's the Lord's mark. He don't leave it off.
He never does. Puts it some-where on every creature that comes from his
hands.”

Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the
vil-lage, but the strongest of the cit-izens con-tin-ued search-ing. All the
news that could be gained was that re-mote-nesses of the cav-ern were be-ing
ran-sacked that had never been vis-ited be-fore; that every corner and
crevice was go-ing to be thor-oughly searched; that wherever one wandered
through the maze of pas-sages, lights were to be seen flit-ting hither
and thither in the dis-tance, and shout-ings and pis-tol-shots sent their
hol-low re-ver-ber-a-tions to the ear down the sombre aisles. In one place,
far from the sec-tion usu-ally tra-versed by tour-ists, the names “BECKY &
TOM” had been found traced upon the rocky wall with candle-smoke, and
near at hand a grease-soiled bit of rib-bon. Mrs. Thatcher re-cog-nized the
rib-bon and cried over it. She said it was the last relic she should ever
have of her child; and that no other me-morial of her could ever be so
pre-cious, be-cause this one par-ted latest from the liv-ing body be-fore the
aw-ful death came. Some said that now and then, in the cave, a far-away
speck of light would glim-mer, and then a glor-i-ous shout would burst
forth and a score of men go troop-ing down the echo-ing aisle--and then a
sick-en-ing dis-ap-point-ment al-ways fol-lowed; the chil-dren were not there;
it was only a searcher's light.

Three dread-ful days and nights dragged their te-di-ous hours along, and
the vil-lage sank into a hope-less stupor. No one had heart for any-thing.
The ac-ci-dental dis-cov-ery, just made, that the pro-pri-etor of the
Tem-per-ance Tav-ern kept li-quor on his premises, scarcely fluttered the
pub-lic pulse, tre-mend-ous as the fact was. In a lu-cid in-ter-val, Huck
feebly led up to the sub-ject of tav-erns, and fi-nally asked--dimly
dread-ing the worst--if any-thing had been dis-covered at the Tem-per-ance
Tav-ern since he had been ill.

“Yes,” said the widow.

Huck star-ted up in bed, wildeyed:

“What? What was it?”

“Liquor!--and the place has been shut up. Lie down, child--what a turn you
did give me!”

“Only tell me just one thing--only just one--please! Was it Tom Saw-yer
that found it?”

The widow burst into tears. “Hush, hush, child, hush! I've told you
be-fore, you must _not_ talk. You are very, very sick!”

Then noth-ing but li-quor had been found; there would have been a great
pow-wow if it had been the gold. So the treas-ure was gone forever--gone
forever! But what could she be cry-ing about? Curi-ous that she should
cry.

These thoughts worked their dim way through Huck's mind, and un-der the
wear-i-ness they gave him he fell asleep. The widow said to her-self:

“There--he's asleep, poor wreck. Tom Saw-yer find it! Pity but some-body
could find Tom Saw-yer! Ah, there ain't many left, now, that's got hope
enough, or strength enough, either, to go on search-ing.”




CHAPTER XXXI

NOW to re-turn to Tom and Becky's share in the pic-nic. They tripped along
the murky aisles with the rest of the com-pany, vis-it-ing the fa-mil-iar
won-ders of the cave--won-ders dubbed with rather over-de-script-ive names,
such as “The Draw-ing-Room,” “The Cathed-ral,” “Alad-din's Palace,” and
so on. Presently the hide-and-seek frol-ick-ing began, and Tom and Becky
en-gaged in it with zeal un-til the ex-er-tion began to grow a trifle
wear-i-some; then they wandered down a sinu-ous av-enue hold-ing their
candles aloft and read-ing the tangled web-work of names, dates,
postof-fice ad-dresses, and mot-toes with which the rocky walls had been
fres-coed (in candle-smoke). Still drift-ing along and talk-ing, they
scarcely no-ticed that they were now in a part of the cave whose walls
were not fres-coed. They smoked their own names un-der an over-hanging
shelf and moved on. Presently they came to a place where a little stream
of wa-ter, trick-ling over a ledge and car-ry-ing a lime-stone sed-i-ment with
it, had, in the slow-drag-ging ages, formed a laced and ruffled Niagara
in gleam-ing and im-per-ish-able stone. Tom squeezed his small body be-hind
it in or-der to il-lu-min-ate it for Becky's grat-i-fic-a-tion. He found that
it cur-tained a sort of steep nat-ural stair-way which was en-closed between
nar-row walls, and at once the am-bi-tion to be a dis-coverer seized him.

Becky re-spon-ded to his call, and they made a smoke-mark for fu-ture
guid-ance, and star-ted upon their quest. They wound this way and that,
far down into the secret depths of the cave, made an-other mark, and
branched off in search of nov-el-ties to tell the up-per world about. In
one place they found a spa-cious cav-ern, from whose ceil-ing de-pended a
mul-ti-tude of shin-ing stalac-tites of the length and cir-cum-fer-ence of
a man's leg; they walked all about it, won-der-ing and ad-mir-ing, and
presently left it by one of the nu-mer-ous pas-sages that opened into
it. This shortly brought them to a be-witch-ing spring, whose basin was
in-crus-ted with a frost-work of glit-ter-ing crys-tals; it was in the midst
of a cav-ern whose walls were sup-por-ted by many fant-astic pil-lars which
had been formed by the join-ing of great stalac-tites and stalag-mites
to-gether, the res-ult of the cease-less wa-ter-drip of cen-tur-ies. Under the
roof vast knots of bats had packed them-selves to-gether, thou-sands in a
bunch; the lights dis-turbed the creatures and they came flock-ing down by
hun-dreds, squeak-ing and dart-ing furi-ously at the candles. Tom knew their
ways and the danger of this sort of con-duct. He seized Becky's hand and
hur-ried her into the first cor-ridor that offered; and none too soon, for
a bat struck Becky's light out with its wing while she was passing out
of the cav-ern. The bats chased the chil-dren a good dis-tance; but the
fu-git-ives plunged into every new pas-sage that offered, and at last got
rid of the per-il-ous things. Tom found a sub-ter-ranean lake, shortly,
which stretched its dim length away un-til its shape was lost in the
shad-ows. He wanted to ex-plore its bor-ders, but con-cluded that it would
be best to sit down and rest awhile, first. Now, for the first time, the
deep still-ness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spir-its of the
chil-dren. Becky said:

“Why, I didn't no-tice, but it seems ever so long since I heard any of
the oth-ers.”

“Come to think, Becky, we are away down be-low them--and I don't know how
far away north, or south, or east, or whichever it is. We couldn't hear
them here.”

Becky grew ap-pre-hens-ive.

“I won-der how long we've been down here, Tom? We bet-ter start back.”

“Yes, I reckon we bet-ter. P'raps we bet-ter.”

“Can you find the way, Tom? It's all a mixed-up crooked-ness to me.”

“I reckon I could find it--but then the bats. If they put our candles
out it will be an aw-ful fix. Let's try some other way, so as not to go
through there.”

“Well. But I hope we won't get lost. It would be so aw-ful!” and the girl
shuddered at the thought of the dread-ful pos-sib-il-it-ies.

They star-ted through a cor-ridor, and tra-versed it in si-lence a long
way, glan-cing at each new open-ing, to see if there was any-thing fa-mil-iar
about the look of it; but they were all strange. Every time Tom made an
ex-am-in-a-tion, Becky would watch his face for an en-cour-aging sign, and he
would say cheer-ily:

“Oh, it's all right. This ain't the one, but we'll come to it right
away!”

But he felt less and less hope-ful with each fail-ure, and presently began
to turn off into di-ver-ging av-en-ues at sheer ran-dom, in des-per-ate hope of
find-ing the one that was wanted. He still said it was “all right,” but
there was such a leaden dread at his heart that the words had lost their
ring and soun-ded just as if he had said, “All is lost!” Becky clung to
his side in an an-guish of fear, and tried hard to keep back the tears,
but they would come. At last she said:

“Oh, Tom, never mind the bats, let's go back that way! We seem to get
worse and worse off all the time.”

“Listen!” said he.

Pro-found si-lence; si-lence so deep that even their breath-ings were
con-spicu-ous in the hush. Tom shouted. The call went echo-ing down
the empty aisles and died out in the dis-tance in a faint sound that
re-sembled a ripple of mock-ing laughter.

“Oh, don't do it again, Tom, it is too hor-rid,” said Becky.

“It is hor-rid, but I bet-ter, Becky; they might hear us, you know,” and
he shouted again.

The “might” was even a chil-lier hor-ror than the ghostly laughter, it so
con-fessed a per-ish-ing hope. The chil-dren stood still and listened; but
there was no res-ult. Tom turned upon the back track at once, and hur-ried
his steps. It was but a little while be-fore a cer-tain in-de-cision in his
man-ner re-vealed an-other fear-ful fact to Becky--he could not find his way
back!

“Oh, Tom, you didn't make any marks!”

“Becky, I was such a fool! Such a fool! I never thought we might want to
come back! No--I can't find the way. It's all mixed up.”

“Tom, Tom, we're lost! we're lost! We never can get out of this aw-ful
place! Oh, why _did_ we ever leave the oth-ers!”

She sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of cry-ing that Tom
was ap-palled with the idea that she might die, or lose her reason. He
sat down by her and put his arms around her; she bur-ied her face in
his bosom, she clung to him, she poured out her ter-rors, her un-avail-ing
re-grets, and the far echoes turned them all to jeer-ing laughter. Tom
begged her to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not. He fell
to blam-ing and ab-us-ing him-self for get-ting her into this miser-able
situ-ation; this had a bet-ter ef-fect. She said she would try to hope
again, she would get up and fol-low wherever he might lead if only he
would not talk like that any more. For he was no more to blame than she,
she said.

So they moved on again--aim-lessly--simply at ran-dom--all they could do
was to move, keep mov-ing. For a little while, hope made a show of
re-viv-ing--not with any reason to back it, but only be-cause it is its
nature to re-vive when the spring has not been taken out of it by age and
fa-mili-ar-ity with fail-ure.

By-and-by Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out. This eco-nomy meant so
much! Words were not needed. Becky un-der-stood, and her hope died again.
She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in his
pock-ets--yet he must eco-nom-ize.

By-and-by, fa-tigue began to as-sert its claims; the chil-dren tried to pay
at-ten-tion, for it was dread-ful to think of sit-ting down when time was
grown to be so pre-cious, mov-ing, in some dir-ec-tion, in any dir-ec-tion,
was at least pro-gress and might bear fruit; but to sit down was to
in-vite death and shorten its pur-suit.

At last Becky's frail limbs re-fused to carry her farther. She sat down.
Tom res-ted with her, and they talked of home, and the friends there,
and the com-fort-able beds and, above all, the light! Becky cried, and Tom
tried to think of some way of com-fort-ing her, but all his en-cour-age-ments
were grown thread-bare with use, and soun-ded like sar-casms. Fa-tigue bore
so heav-ily upon Becky that she drowsed off to sleep. Tom was grate-ful.
He sat look-ing into her drawn face and saw it grow smooth and nat-ural
un-der the in-flu-ence of pleas-ant dreams; and by-and-by a smile dawned and
res-ted there. The peace-ful face re-flec-ted some-what of peace and heal-ing
into his own spirit, and his thoughts wandered away to by-gone times and
dreamy memor-ies. While he was deep in his mus-ings, Becky woke up with a
breezy little laugh--but it was stricken dead upon her lips, and a groan
fol-lowed it.

“Oh, how _could_ I sleep! I wish I never, never had waked! No! No, I
don't, Tom! Don't look so! I won't say it again.”

“I'm glad you've slept, Becky; you'll feel res-ted, now, and we'll find
the way out.”

“We can try, Tom; but I've seen such a beau-ti-ful coun-try in my dream. I
reckon we are go-ing there.”

“Maybe not, maybe not. Cheer up, Becky, and let's go on try-ing.”

They rose up and wandered along, hand in hand and hope-less. They tried
to es-tim-ate how long they had been in the cave, but all they knew was
that it seemed days and weeks, and yet it was plain that this could not
be, for their candles were not gone yet. A long time after this--they
could not tell how long--Tom said they must go softly and listen for
drip-ping wa-ter--they must find a spring. They found one presently, and
Tom said it was time to rest again. Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky
said she thought she could go a little farther. She was sur-prised to
hear Tom dis-sent. She could not un-der-stand it. They sat down, and Tom
fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay. Thought
was soon busy; noth-ing was said for some time. Then Becky broke the
si-lence:

“Tom, I am so hungry!”

Tom took some-thing out of his pocket.

“Do you re-mem-ber this?” said he.

Becky al-most smiled.

“It's our wed-ding-cake, Tom.”

“Yes--I wish it was as big as a bar-rel, for it's all we've got.”

“I saved it from the pic-nic for us to dream on, Tom, the way grownup
people do with wed-ding-cake--but it'll be our--”

She dropped the sen-tence where it was. Tom di-vided the cake and Becky
ate with good ap-pet-ite, while Tom nibbled at his moi-ety. There was
abund-ance of cold wa-ter to fin-ish the feast with. By-and-by Becky
sug-ges-ted that they move on again. Tom was si-lent a mo-ment. Then he
said:

“Becky, can you bear it if I tell you some-thing?”

Becky's face paled, but she thought she could.

“Well, then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's wa-ter to drink.
That little piece is our last candle!”

Becky gave loose to tears and wail-ings. Tom did what he could to com-fort
her, but with little ef-fect. At length Becky said:

“Tom!”

“Well, Becky?”

“They'll miss us and hunt for us!”

“Yes, they will! Cer-tainly they will!”

“Maybe they're hunt-ing for us now, Tom.”

“Why, I reckon maybe they are. I hope they are.”

“When would they miss us, Tom?”

“When they get back to the boat, I reckon.”

“Tom, it might be dark then--would they no-tice we hadn't come?”

“I don't know. But any-way, your mother would miss you as soon as they
got home.”

A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses and he saw
that he had made a blun-der. Becky was not to have gone home that night!
The chil-dren be-came si-lent and thought-ful. In a mo-ment a new burst of
grief from Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers
also--that the Sab-bath morn-ing might be half spent be-fore Mrs. Thatcher
dis-covered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's.

The chil-dren fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle and watched it
melt slowly and piti-lessly away; saw the half inch of wick stand alone
at last; saw the feeble flame rise and fall, climb the thin column of
smoke, linger at its top a mo-ment, and then--the hor-ror of ut-ter dark-ness
reigned!

How long af-ter-ward it was that Becky came to a slow con-scious-ness that
she was cry-ing in Tom's arms, neither could tell. All that they knew
was, that after what seemed a mighty stretch of time, both awoke out of
a dead stupor of sleep and re-sumed their miser-ies once more. Tom said
it might be Sunday, now--maybe Monday. He tried to get Becky to talk, but
her sor-rows were too op-press-ive, all her hopes were gone. Tom said that
they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt the search was go-ing
on. He would shout and maybe some one would come. He tried it; but in
the dark-ness the dis-tant echoes soun-ded so hideously that he tried it no
more.

The hours wasted away, and hun-ger came to tor-ment the cap-tives again. A
por-tion of Tom's half of the cake was left; they di-vided and ate it. But
they seemed hun-grier than be-fore. The poor morsel of food only whetted
de-sire.

By-and-by Tom said:

“SH! Did you hear that?”

Both held their breath and listened. There was a sound like the
faintest, far-off shout. In-stantly Tom answered it, and lead-ing Becky by
the hand, star-ted grop-ing down the cor-ridor in its dir-ec-tion. Presently
he listened again; again the sound was heard, and ap-par-ently a little
nearer.

“It's them!” said Tom; “they're com-ing! Come along, Becky--we're all
right now!”

The joy of the pris-on-ers was al-most over-whelm-ing. Their speed was slow,
how-ever, be-cause pit-falls were some-what com-mon, and had to be guarded
against. They shortly came to one and had to stop. It might be three
feet deep, it might be a hun-dred--there was no passing it at any rate.
Tom got down on his breast and reached as far down as he could. No
bot-tom. They must stay there and wait un-til the search-ers came. They
listened; evid-ently the dis-tant shout-ings were grow-ing more dis-tant!
a mo-ment or two more and they had gone al-to-gether. The heart-sink-ing
misery of it! Tom whooped un-til he was hoarse, but it was of no use. He
talked hope-fully to Becky; but an age of anxious wait-ing passed and no
sounds came again.

The chil-dren groped their way back to the spring. The weary time dragged
on; they slept again, and awoke fam-ished and woe-stricken. Tom be-lieved
it must be Tues-day by this time.

Now an idea struck him. There were some side pas-sages near at hand. It
would be bet-ter to ex-plore some of these than bear the weight of the
heavy time in idle-ness. He took a kite-line from his pocket, tied it to
a pro-jec-tion, and he and Becky star-ted, Tom in the lead, un-wind-ing the
line as he groped along. At the end of twenty steps the cor-ridor ended
in a “jump-ing-off place.” Tom got down on his knees and felt be-low,
and then as far around the corner as he could reach with his hands
con-veni-ently; he made an ef-fort to stretch yet a little farther to the
right, and at that mo-ment, not twenty yards away, a hu-man hand, hold-ing
a candle, ap-peared from be-hind a rock! Tom lif-ted up a glor-i-ous shout,
and in-stantly that hand was fol-lowed by the body it be-longed to--In-jun
Joe's! Tom was para-lyzed; he could not move. He was vastly grat-i-fied the
next mo-ment, to see the “Span-iard” take to his heels and get him-self out
of sight. Tom wondered that Joe had not re-cog-nized his voice and come
over and killed him for testi-fy-ing in court. But the echoes must have
dis-guised the voice. Without doubt, that was it, he reasoned. Tom's
fright weakened every muscle in his body. He said to him-self that if he
had strength enough to get back to the spring he would stay there, and
noth-ing should tempt him to run the risk of meet-ing In-jun Joe again. He
was care-ful to keep from Becky what it was he had seen. He told her he
had only shouted “for luck.”

But hun-ger and wretched-ness rise su-per-ior to fears in the long run.
Another te-di-ous wait at the spring and an-other long sleep brought
changes. The chil-dren awoke tor-tured with a ra-ging hun-ger. Tom be-lieved
that it must be Wed-nes-day or Thursday or even Fri-day or Saturday, now,
and that the search had been given over. He pro-posed to ex-plore an-other
pas-sage. He felt will-ing to risk In-jun Joe and all other ter-rors. But
Becky was very weak. She had sunk into a dreary apathy and would not be
roused. She said she would wait, now, where she was, and die--it would
not be long. She told Tom to go with the kite-line and ex-plore if he
chose; but she im-plored him to come back every little while and speak
to her; and she made him prom-ise that when the aw-ful time came, he would
stay by her and hold her hand un-til all was over.

Tom kissed her, with a chok-ing sen-sa-tion in his throat, and made a show
of be-ing con-fid-ent of find-ing the search-ers or an es-cape from the cave;
then he took the kite-line in his hand and went grop-ing down one of the
pas-sages on his hands and knees, dis-tressed with hun-ger and sick with
bod-ings of com-ing doom.




CHAPTER XXXII

TUESDAY af-ter-noon came, and waned to the twi-light. The vil-lage of St.
Peters-burg still mourned. The lost chil-dren had not been found. Public
pray-ers had been offered up for them, and many and many a private prayer
that had the pe-ti-tioner's whole heart in it; but still no good news came
from the cave. The ma-jor-ity of the search-ers had given up the quest
and gone back to their daily avoca-tions, say-ing that it was plain the
chil-dren could never be found. Mrs. Thatcher was very ill, and a great
part of the time de-li-ri-ous. People said it was heart-break-ing to hear her
call her child, and raise her head and listen a whole minute at a time,
then lay it wear-ily down again with a moan. Aunt Polly had drooped into
a settled mel-an-choly, and her gray hair had grown al-most white. The
vil-lage went to its rest on Tues-day night, sad and for-lorn.

Away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the vil-lage
bells, and in a mo-ment the streets were swarm-ing with frantic half-clad
people, who shouted, “Turn out! turn out! they're found! they're found!”
 Tin pans and horns were ad-ded to the din, the pop-u-la-tion massed it-self
and moved to-ward the river, met the chil-dren com-ing in an open car-riage
drawn by shout-ing cit-izens, thronged around it, joined its home-ward
march, and swept mag-ni-fi-cently up the main street roar-ing huzzah after
huzzah!

The vil-lage was il-lu-min-ated; nobody went to bed again; it was the
greatest night the little town had ever seen. Dur-ing the first half-hour
a pro-ces-sion of vil-la-gers filed through Judge Thatcher's house, seized
the saved ones and kissed them, squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried to
speak but couldn't--and drif-ted out rain-ing tears all over the place.

Aunt Polly's hap-pi-ness was com-plete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so. It
would be com-plete, how-ever, as soon as the mes-sen-ger dis-patched with the
great news to the cave should get the word to her hus-band. Tom lay upon
a sofa with an eager aud-it-ory about him and told the his-tory of the
won-der-ful ad-ven-ture, put-ting in many strik-ing ad-di-tions to ad-orn it
withal; and closed with a de-scrip-tion of how he left Becky and went
on an ex-plor-ing ex-ped-i-tion; how he fol-lowed two av-en-ues as far as his
kite-line would reach; how he fol-lowed a third to the fullest stretch
of the kite-line, and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off
speck that looked like day-light; dropped the line and groped to-ward it,
pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the broad
Mis-sis-sippi rolling by!

And if it had only happened to be night he would not have seen that
speck of day-light and would not have ex-plored that pas-sage any more! He
told how he went back for Becky and broke the good news and she told
him not to fret her with such stuff, for she was tired, and knew she was
go-ing to die, and wanted to. He de-scribed how he labored with her and
con-vinced her; and how she al-most died for joy when she had groped to
where she ac-tu-ally saw the blue speck of day-light; how he pushed his way
out at the hole and then helped her out; how they sat there and cried
for glad-ness; how some men came along in a skiff and Tom hailed them
and told them their situ-ation and their fam-ished con-di-tion; how the men
didn't be-lieve the wild tale at first, “be-cause,” said they, “you are
five miles down the river be-low the val-ley the cave is in”--then took
them aboard, rowed to a house, gave them sup-per, made them rest till two
or three hours after dark and then brought them home.

Be-fore day-dawn, Judge Thatcher and the hand-ful of search-ers with him
were tracked out, in the cave, by the twine clews they had strung be-hind
them, and in-formed of the great news.

Three days and nights of toil and hun-ger in the cave were not to
be shaken off at once, as Tom and Becky soon dis-covered. They were
bedrid-den all of Wed-nes-day and Thursday, and seemed to grow more and
more tired and worn, all the time. Tom got about, a little, on Thursday,
was down-town Fri-day, and nearly as whole as ever Saturday; but Becky
did not leave her room un-til Sunday, and then she looked as if she had
passed through a wast-ing ill-ness.

Tom learned of Huck's sick-ness and went to see him on Fri-day, but could
not be ad-mit-ted to the bed-room; neither could he on Saturday or Sunday.
He was ad-mit-ted daily after that, but was warned to keep still about his
ad-ven-ture and in-tro-duce no ex-cit-ing topic. The Widow Douglas stayed by
to see that he obeyed. At home Tom learned of the Cardiff Hill event;
also that the “ragged man's” body had even-tu-ally been found in the river
near the ferry-land-ing; he had been drowned while try-ing to es-cape,
per-haps.

About a fort-night after Tom's res-cue from the cave, he star-ted off to
visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear ex-cit-ing
talk, and Tom had some that would in-terest him, he thought. Judge
Thatcher's house was on Tom's way, and he stopped to see Becky. The
Judge and some friends set Tom to talk-ing, and some one asked him
iron-ic-ally if he wouldn't like to go to the cave again. Tom said he
thought he wouldn't mind it. The Judge said:

“Well, there are oth-ers just like you, Tom, I've not the least doubt.
But we have taken care of that. Nobody will get lost in that cave any
more.”

“Why?”

“Be-cause I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago, and
triple-locked--and I've got the keys.”

Tom turned as white as a sheet.

“What's the mat-ter, boy! Here, run, some-body! Fetch a glass of wa-ter!”

The wa-ter was brought and thrown into Tom's face.

“Ah, now you're all right. What was the mat-ter with you, Tom?”

“Oh, Judge, In-jun Joe's in the cave!”




CHAPTER XXXIII

WITHIN a few minutes the news had spread, and a dozen skiff-loads of
men were on their way to McDou-gal's cave, and the ferry-boat, well filled
with pas-sen-gers, soon fol-lowed. Tom Saw-yer was in the skiff that bore
Judge Thatcher.

When the cave door was un-locked, a sor-row-ful sight presen-ted it-self in
the dim twi-light of the place. In-jun Joe lay stretched upon the ground,
dead, with his face close to the crack of the door, as if his long-ing
eyes had been fixed, to the latest mo-ment, upon the light and the cheer
of the free world out-side. Tom was touched, for he knew by his own
ex-per-i-ence how this wretch had suffered. His pity was moved, but
nev-er-the-less he felt an abound-ing sense of re-lief and se-cur-ity, now,
which re-vealed to him in a de-gree which he had not fully ap-pre-ci-ated
be-fore how vast a weight of dread had been ly-ing upon him since the day
he lif-ted his voice against this bloody-minded out-cast.

In-jun Joe's bowie-knife lay close by, its blade broken in two. The great
found-a-tion-beam of the door had been chipped and hacked through, with
te-di-ous labor; use-less labor, too, it was, for the nat-ive rock formed a
sill out-side it, and upon that stub-born ma-ter-ial the knife had wrought
no ef-fect; the only dam-age done was to the knife it-self. But if there
had been no stony ob-struc-tion there the labor would have been use-less
still, for if the beam had been wholly cut away In-jun Joe could not have
squeezed his body un-der the door, and he knew it. So he had only hacked
that place in or-der to be do-ing some-thing--in or-der to pass the weary
time--in or-der to em-ploy his tor-tured fac-ulties. Ordin-ar-ily one could
find half a dozen bits of candle stuck around in the crevices of this
ves-ti-bule, left there by tour-ists; but there were none now. The pris-oner
had searched them out and eaten them. He had also con-trived to catch a
few bats, and these, also, he had eaten, leav-ing only their claws. The
poor un-for-tu-nate had starved to death. In one place, near at hand, a
stalag-mite had been slowly grow-ing up from the ground for ages, buil-ded
by the wa-ter-drip from a stalac-tite over-head. The cap-tive had broken off
the stalag-mite, and upon the stump had placed a stone, wherein he had
scooped a shal-low hol-low to catch the pre-cious drop that fell once
in every three minutes with the dreary reg-u-lar-ity of a clock-tick--a
dessert-spoon-ful once in four and twenty hours. That drop was fall-ing
when the Pyr-am-ids were new; when Troy fell; when the found-a-tions of Rome
were laid; when Christ was cru-ci-fied; when the Con-queror cre-ated the
Brit-ish em-pire; when Colum-bus sailed; when the mas-sacre at Lex-ing-ton was
“news.”

It is fall-ing now; it will still be fall-ing when all these things shall
have sunk down the af-ter-noon of his-tory, and the twi-light of tra-di-tion,
and been swal-lowed up in the thick night of ob-li-vion. Has everything a
pur-pose and a mis-sion? Did this drop fall pa-tiently dur-ing five thou-sand
years to be ready for this flit-ting hu-man in-sect's need? and has it
an-other im-port-ant ob-ject to ac-com-plish ten thou-sand years to come? No
mat-ter. It is many and many a year since the hap-less half-breed scooped
out the stone to catch the price-less drops, but to this day the tour-ist
stares longest at that pathetic stone and that slow-drop-ping wa-ter when
he comes to see the won-ders of McDou-gal's cave. In-jun Joe's cup stands
first in the list of the cav-ern's mar-vels; even “Alad-din's Palace”
 can-not rival it.

In-jun Joe was bur-ied near the mouth of the cave; and people flocked
there in boats and wag-ons from the towns and from all the farms and
ham-lets for seven miles around; they brought their chil-dren, and
all sorts of pro-vi-sions, and con-fessed that they had had al-most as
sat-is-fact-ory a time at the fu-neral as they could have had at the
hanging.

This fu-neral stopped the fur-ther growth of one thing--the pe-ti-tion to the
gov-ernor for In-jun Joe's par-don. The pe-ti-tion had been largely signed;
many tear-ful and elo-quent meet-ings had been held, and a com-mit-tee of
sappy wo-men been ap-poin-ted to go in deep mourn-ing and wail around the
gov-ernor, and im-plore him to be a mer-ci-ful ass and trample his duty
un-der foot. In-jun Joe was be-lieved to have killed five cit-izens of the
vil-lage, but what of that? If he had been Satan him-self there would
have been plenty of weak-lings ready to scribble their names to a
par-don-pe-ti-tion, and drip a tear on it from their per-man-ently im-paired
and leaky wa-ter-works.

The morn-ing after the fu-neral Tom took Huck to a private place to have
an im-port-ant talk. Huck had learned all about Tom's ad-ven-ture from the
Welsh-man and the Widow Douglas, by this time, but Tom said he reckoned
there was one thing they had not told him; that thing was what he wanted
to talk about now. Huck's face saddened. He said:

“I know what it is. You got into No. 2 and never found any-thing but
whis-key. Nobody told me it was you; but I just knowed it must 'a' ben
you, soon as I heard 'bout that whis-key busi-ness; and I knowed you
hadn't got the money becuz you'd 'a' got at me some way or other and
told me even if you was mum to every-body else. Tom, some-thing's al-ways
told me we'd never get holt of that swag.”

“Why, Huck, I never told on that tav-ern-keeper. _You_ know his tav-ern
was all right the Saturday I went to the pic-nic. Don't you re-mem-ber you
was to watch there that night?”

“Oh yes! Why, it seems 'bout a year ago. It was that very night that I
follered In-jun Joe to the wid-der's.”

“_You_ fol-lowed him?”

“Yes--but you keep mum. I reckon In-jun Joe's left friends be-hind him, and
I don't want 'em sour-ing on me and do-ing me mean tricks. If it hadn't
ben for me he'd be down in Texas now, all right.”

Then Huck told his en-tire ad-ven-ture in con-fid-ence to Tom, who had only
heard of the Welsh-man's part of it be-fore.

“Well,” said Huck, presently, com-ing back to the main ques-tion, “who-ever
nipped the whis-key in No. 2, nipped the money, too, I reckon--any-ways
it's a goner for us, Tom.”

“Huck, that money wasn't ever in No. 2!”

“What!” Huck searched his com-rade's face keenly. “Tom, have you got on
the track of that money again?”

“Huck, it's in the cave!”

Huck's eyes blazed.

“Say it again, Tom.”

“The money's in the cave!”

“Tom--hon-est in-jun, now--is it fun, or earn-est?”

“Earn-est, Huck--just as earn-est as ever I was in my life. Will you go in
there with me and help get it out?”

“I bet I will! I will if it's where we can blaze our way to it and not
get lost.”

“Huck, we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the
world.”

“Good as wheat! What makes you think the money's--”

“Huck, you just wait till we get in there. If we don't find it I'll
agree to give you my drum and every thing I've got in the world. I will,
by jings.”

“All right--it's a whiz. When do you say?”

“Right now, if you say it. Are you strong enough?”

“Is it far in the cave? I ben on my pins a little, three or four days,
now, but I can't walk more'n a mile, Tom--least I don't think I could.”

“It's about five mile into there the way any-body but me would go, Huck,
but there's a mighty short cut that they don't any-body but me know
about. Huck, I'll take you right to it in a skiff. I'll float the skiff
down there, and I'll pull it back again all by my-self. You needn't ever
turn your hand over.”

“Less start right off, Tom.”

“All right. We want some bread and meat, and our pipes, and a little
bag or two, and two or three kite-strings, and some of these new-fangled
things they call lu-ci-fer matches. I tell you, many's the time I wished I
had some when I was in there be-fore.”

A trifle after noon the boys bor-rowed a small skiff from a cit-izen who
was ab-sent, and got un-der way at once. When they were sev-eral miles
be-low “Cave Hol-low,” Tom said:

“Now you see this bluff here looks all alike all the way down from the
cave hol-low--no houses, no wood-yards, bushes all alike. But do you see
that white place up yon-der where there's been a land-slide? Well, that's
one of my marks. We'll get ashore, now.”

They landed.

“Now, Huck, where we're a-stand-ing you could touch that hole I got out
of with a fish-ing-pole. See if you can find it.”

Huck searched all the place about, and found noth-ing. Tom proudly
marched into a thick clump of sumach bushes and said:

“Here you are! Look at it, Huck; it's the snuggest hole in this coun-try.
You just keep mum about it. All along I've been want-ing to be a rob-ber,
but I knew I'd got to have a thing like this, and where to run across
it was the bother. We've got it now, and we'll keep it quiet, only we'll
let Joe Harper and Ben Ro-gers in--be-cause of course there's got to be a
Gang, or else there wouldn't be any style about it. Tom Saw-yer's Gang--it
sounds splen-did, don't it, Huck?”

“Well, it just does, Tom. And who'll we rob?”

“Oh, most any-body. Way-lay people--that's mostly the way.”

“And kill them?”

“No, not al-ways. Hive them in the cave till they raise a ransom.”

“What's a ransom?”

“Money. You make them raise all they can, off'n their friends; and after
you've kept them a year, if it ain't raised then you kill them. That's
the gen-eral way. Only you don't kill the wo-men. You shut up the wo-men,
but you don't kill them. They're al-ways beau-ti-ful and rich, and aw-fully
scared. You take their watches and things, but you al-ways take your hat
off and talk po-lite. They ain't any-body as po-lite as rob-bers--you'll see
that in any book. Well, the wo-men get to lov-ing you, and after they've
been in the cave a week or two weeks they stop cry-ing and after that
you couldn't get them to leave. If you drove them out they'd turn right
around and come back. It's so in all the books.”

“Why, it's real bully, Tom. I be-lieve it's bet-ter'n to be a pir-ate.”

“Yes, it's bet-ter in some ways, be-cause it's close to home and cir-cuses
and all that.”

By this time everything was ready and the boys entered the hole, Tom in
the lead. They toiled their way to the farther end of the tun-nel, then
made their spliced kite-strings fast and moved on. A few steps brought
them to the spring, and Tom felt a shud-der quiver all through him.
He showed Huck the frag-ment of candle-wick perched on a lump of clay
against the wall, and de-scribed how he and Becky had watched the flame
struggle and ex-pire.

The boys began to quiet down to whis-pers, now, for the still-ness and
gloom of the place op-pressed their spir-its. They went on, and presently
entered and fol-lowed Tom's other cor-ridor un-til they reached the
“jump-ing-off place.” The candles re-vealed the fact that it was not
really a pre-cip-ice, but only a steep clay hill twenty or thirty feet
high. Tom whispered:

“Now I'll show you some-thing, Huck.”

He held his candle aloft and said:

“Look as far around the corner as you can. Do you see that? There--on the
big rock over yon-der--done with candle-smoke.”

“Tom, it's a _cross_!”

“_Now_ where's your Num-ber Two? '_un-der the cross_,' hey? Right yon-der's
where I saw In-jun Joe poke up his candle, Huck!”

Huck stared at the mys-tic sign awhile, and then said with a shaky voice:

“Tom, less git out of here!”

“What! and leave the treas-ure?”

“Yes--leave it. In-jun Joe's ghost is round about there, cer-tain.”

“No it ain't, Huck, no it ain't. It would ha'nt the place where he
died--away out at the mouth of the cave--five mile from here.”

“No, Tom, it wouldn't. It would hang round the money. I know the ways of
ghosts, and so do you.”

Tom began to fear that Huck was right. Mis-giv-ings gathered in his mind.
But presently an idea oc-curred to him--

“Looky-here, Huck, what fools we're mak-ing of ourselves! In-jun Joe's
ghost ain't a go-ing to come around where there's a cross!”

The point was well taken. It had its ef-fect.

“Tom, I didn't think of that. But that's so. It's luck for us, that
cross is. I reckon we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box.”

Tom went first, cut-ting rude steps in the clay hill as he des-cen-ded.
Huck fol-lowed. Four av-en-ues opened out of the small cav-ern which the
great rock stood in. The boys ex-amined three of them with no res-ult.
They found a small re-cess in the one nearest the base of the rock, with
a pal-let of blankets spread down in it; also an old sus-pender, some
ba-con rind, and the well-gnawed bones of two or three fowls. But there
was no money-box. The lads searched and re-searched this place, but in
vain. Tom said:

“He said _un-der_ the cross. Well, this comes nearest to be-ing un-der the
cross. It can't be un-der the rock it-self, be-cause that sets solid on the
ground.”

They searched every-where once more, and then sat down dis-cour-aged. Huck
could sug-gest noth-ing. By-and-by Tom said:

“Looky-here, Huck, there's foot-prints and some candle-grease on the clay
about one side of this rock, but not on the other sides. Now, what's
that for? I bet you the money _is_ un-der the rock. I'm go-ing to dig in
the clay.”

“That ain't no bad no-tion, Tom!” said Huck with an-im-a-tion.

Tom's “real Bar-low” was out at once, and he had not dug four inches
be-fore he struck wood.

“Hey, Huck!--you hear that?”

Huck began to dig and scratch now. Some boards were soon un-covered and
re-moved. They had con-cealed a nat-ural chasm which led un-der the rock.
Tom got into this and held his candle as far un-der the rock as he
could, but said he could not see to the end of the rift. He pro-posed
to ex-plore. He stooped and passed un-der; the nar-row way des-cen-ded
gradu-ally. He fol-lowed its wind-ing course, first to the right, then to
the left, Huck at his heels. Tom turned a short curve, by-and-by, and
ex-claimed:

“My good-ness, Huck, looky-here!”

It was the treas-ure-box, sure enough, oc-cupy-ing a snug little cav-ern,
along with an empty powder-keg, a couple of guns in leather cases, two
or three pairs of old moc-cas-ins, a leather belt, and some other rub-bish
well soaked with the wa-ter-drip.

“Got it at last!” said Huck, plough-ing among the tar-nished coins with
his hand. “My, but we're rich, Tom!”

“Huck, I al-ways reckoned we'd get it. It's just too good to be-lieve, but
we _have_ got it, sure! Say--let's not fool around here. Let's snake it
out. Lemme see if I can lift the box.”

It weighed about fifty pounds. Tom could lift it, after an awk-ward
fash-ion, but could not carry it con-veni-ently.

“I thought so,” he said; “_They_ car-ried it like it was heavy, that day
at the ha'nted house. I no-ticed that. I reckon I was right to think of
fetch-ing the little bags along.”

The money was soon in the bags and the boys took it up to the cross
rock.

“Now less fetch the guns and things,” said Huck.

“No, Huck--leave them there. They're just the tricks to have when we
go to rob-bing. We'll keep them there all the time, and we'll hold our
or-gies there, too. It's an aw-ful snug place for or-gies.”

“What or-gies?”

“I dono. But rob-bers al-ways have or-gies, and of course we've got to
have them, too. Come along, Huck, we've been in here a long time. It's
get-ting late, I reckon. I'm hungry, too. We'll eat and smoke when we get
to the skiff.”

They presently emerged into the clump of sumach bushes, looked war-ily
out, found the coast clear, and were soon lunch-ing and smoking in the
skiff. As the sun dipped to-ward the ho-ri-zon they pushed out and got
un-der way. Tom skimmed up the shore through the long twi-light, chat-ting
cheer-ily with Huck, and landed shortly after dark.

“Now, Huck,” said Tom, “we'll hide the money in the loft of the widow's
wood-shed, and I'll come up in the morn-ing and we'll count it and di-vide,
and then we'll hunt up a place out in the woods for it where it will be
safe. Just you lay quiet here and watch the stuff till I run and hook
Benny Taylor's little wagon; I won't be gone a minute.”

He dis-ap-peared, and presently re-turned with the wagon, put the two small
sacks into it, threw some old rags on top of them, and star-ted off,
drag-ging his cargo be-hind him. When the boys reached the Welsh-man's
house, they stopped to rest. Just as they were about to move on, the
Welsh-man stepped out and said:

“Hallo, who's that?”

“Huck and Tom Saw-yer.”

“Good! Come along with me, boys, you are keep-ing every-body wait-ing.
Here--hurry up, trot ahead--I'll haul the wagon for you. Why, it's not as
light as it might be. Got bricks in it?--or old metal?”

“Old metal,” said Tom.

“I judged so; the boys in this town will take more trouble and fool away
more time hunt-ing up six bits' worth of old iron to sell to the foundry
than they would to make twice the money at reg-u-lar work. But that's
hu-man nature--hurry along, hurry along!”

The boys wanted to know what the hurry was about.

“Never mind; you'll see, when we get to the Widow Douglas'.”

Huck said with some ap-pre-hen-sion--for he was long used to be-ing falsely
ac-cused:

“Mr. Jones, we haven't been do-ing noth-ing.”

The Welsh-man laughed.

“Well, I don't know, Huck, my boy. I don't know about that. Ain't you
and the widow good friends?”

“Yes. Well, she's ben good friends to me, any-way.”

“All right, then. What do you want to be afraid for?”

This ques-tion was not en-tirely answered in Huck's slow mind be-fore he
found him-self pushed, along with Tom, into Mrs. Douglas' draw-ing-room.
Mr. Jones left the wagon near the door and fol-lowed.

The place was grandly lighted, and every-body that was of any con-sequence
in the vil-lage was there. The Thatch-ers were there, the Harp-ers, the
Ro-gerses, Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, the min-is-ter, the ed-itor, and a great
many more, and all dressed in their best. The widow re-ceived the boys
as heart-ily as any one could well re-ceive two such look-ing be-ings. They
were covered with clay and candle-grease. Aunt Polly blushed crim-son
with hu-mi-li-ation, and frowned and shook her head at Tom. Nobody suffered
half as much as the two boys did, how-ever. Mr. Jones said:

“Tom wasn't at home, yet, so I gave him up; but I stumbled on him and
Huck right at my door, and so I just brought them along in a hurry.”

“And you did just right,” said the widow. “Come with me, boys.”

She took them to a bed-cham-ber and said:

“Now wash and dress yourselves. Here are two new suits of
clothes--shirts, socks, everything com-plete. They're Huck's--no, no
thanks, Huck--Mr. Jones bought one and I the other. But they'll fit both
of you. Get into them. We'll wait--come down when you are slicked up
enough.”

Then she left.




CHAPTER XXXIV

HUCK said: “Tom, we can slope, if we can find a rope. The win-dow ain't
high from the ground.”

“Shucks! what do you want to slope for?”

“Well, I ain't used to that kind of a crowd. I can't stand it. I ain't
go-ing down there, Tom.”

“Oh, bother! It ain't any-thing. I don't mind it a bit. I'll take care of
you.”

Sid ap-peared.

“Tom,” said he, “auntie has been wait-ing for you all the af-ter-noon. Mary
got your Sunday clothes ready, and every-body's been fret-ting about you.
Say--ain't this grease and clay, on your clothes?”

“Now, Mr. Siddy, you jist 'tend to your own busi-ness. What's all this
blo-wout about, any-way?”

“It's one of the widow's parties that she's al-ways hav-ing. This time
it's for the Welsh-man and his sons, on ac-count of that scrape they
helped her out of the other night. And say--I can tell you some-thing, if
you want to know.”

“Well, what?”

“Why, old Mr. Jones is go-ing to try to spring some-thing on the people
here to-night, but I over-heard him tell auntie today about it, as a
secret, but I reckon it's not much of a secret now. Every-body knows--the
widow, too, for all she tries to let on she don't. Mr. Jones was bound
Huck should be here--couldn't get along with his grand secret without
Huck, you know!”

“Secret about what, Sid?”

“About Huck track-ing the rob-bers to the widow's. I reckon Mr. Jones was
go-ing to make a grand time over his sur-prise, but I bet you it will drop
pretty flat.”

Sid chuckled in a very con-ten-ted and sat-is-fied way.

“Sid, was it you that told?”

“Oh, never mind who it was. _Some-body_ told--that's enough.”

“Sid, there's only one per-son in this town mean enough to do that, and
that's you. If you had been in Huck's place you'd 'a' sneaked down the
hill and never told any-body on the rob-bers. You can't do any but mean
things, and you can't bear to see any-body praised for do-ing good ones.
There--no thanks, as the widow says”--and Tom cuffed Sid's ears and helped
him to the door with sev-eral kicks. “Now go and tell auntie if you
dare--and to-mor-row you'll catch it!”

Some minutes later the widow's guests were at the sup-per-table, and a
dozen chil-dren were propped up at little side-tables in the same room,
after the fash-ion of that coun-try and that day. At the proper time Mr.
Jones made his little speech, in which he thanked the widow for the
honor she was do-ing him-self and his sons, but said that there was
an-other per-son whose mod-esty--

And so forth and so on. He sprung his secret about Huck's share in
the ad-ven-ture in the finest dra-matic man-ner he was mas-ter of, but the
sur-prise it oc-ca-sioned was largely coun-ter-feit and not as clam-or-ous and
ef-fus-ive as it might have been un-der hap-pier cir-cum-stances. However,
the widow made a pretty fair show of as-ton-ish-ment, and heaped so many
com-pli-ments and so much grat-it-ude upon Huck that he al-most for-got
the nearly in-tol-er-able dis-com-fort of his new clothes in the en-tirely
in-tol-er-able dis-com-fort of be-ing set up as a tar-get for every-body's gaze
and every-body's laud-a-tions.

The widow said she meant to give Huck a home un-der her roof and have him
edu-cated; and that when she could spare the money she would start him in
busi-ness in a mod-est way. Tom's chance was come. He said:

“Huck don't need it. Huck's rich.”

Noth-ing but a heavy strain upon the good man-ners of the com-pany kept
back the due and proper com-pli-ment-ary laugh at this pleas-ant joke. But
the si-lence was a little awk-ward. Tom broke it:

“Huck's got money. Maybe you don't be-lieve it, but he's got lots of it.
Oh, you needn't smile--I reckon I can show you. You just wait a minute.”

Tom ran out of doors. The com-pany looked at each other with a per-plexed
in-terest--and in-quir-ingly at Huck, who was tongue-tied.

“Sid, what ails Tom?” said Aunt Polly. “He--well, there ain't ever any
mak-ing of that boy out. I never--”

Tom entered, strug-gling with the weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly
did not fin-ish her sen-tence. Tom poured the mass of yel-low coin upon the
table and said:

“There--what did I tell you? Half of it's Huck's and half of it's mine!”

The spec-tacle took the gen-eral breath away. All gazed, nobody spoke for
a mo-ment. Then there was a un-an-im-ous call for an ex-plan-a-tion. Tom said
he could fur-nish it, and he did. The tale was long, but brim-ful of
in-terest. There was scarcely an in-ter-rup-tion from any one to break the
charm of its flow. When he had fin-ished, Mr. Jones said:

“I thought I had fixed up a little sur-prise for this oc-ca-sion, but it
don't amount to any-thing now. This one makes it sing mighty small, I'm
will-ing to al-low.”

The money was coun-ted. The sum amoun-ted to a little over twelve thou-sand
dol-lars. It was more than any one present had ever seen at one time
be-fore, though sev-eral per-sons were there who were worth con-sid-er-ably
more than that in prop-erty.




CHAPTER XXXV

THE reader may rest sat-is-fied that Tom's and Huck's wind-fall made a
mighty stir in the poor little vil-lage of St. Peters-burg. So vast a
sum, all in ac-tual cash, seemed next to in-cred-ible. It was talked
about, gloated over, glor-i-fied, un-til the reason of many of the cit-izens
tottered un-der the strain of the un-healthy ex-cite-ment. Every “haunted”
 house in St. Peters-burg and the neigh-bor-ing vil-lages was dis-sec-ted,
plank by plank, and its found-a-tions dug up and ran-sacked for hid-den
treas-ure--and not by boys, but men--pretty grave, un-ro-mantic men, too,
some of them. Wherever Tom and Huck ap-peared they were cour-ted, ad-mired,
stared at. The boys were not able to re-mem-ber that their re-marks had
pos-sessed weight be-fore; but now their say-ings were treas-ured and
re-peated; everything they did seemed some-how to be re-garded as
re-mark-able; they had evid-ently lost the power of do-ing and say-ing
com-mon-place things; moreover, their past his-tory was raked up and
dis-covered to bear marks of con-spicu-ous ori-gin-al-ity. The vil-lage pa-per
pub-lished bio-graph-ical sketches of the boys.

The Widow Douglas put Huck's money out at six per cent., and Judge
Thatcher did the same with Tom's at Aunt Polly's re-quest. Each lad had
an in-come, now, that was simply prodi-gious--a dol-lar for every week-day in
the year and half of the Sundays. It was just what the min-is-ter got--no,
it was what he was prom-ised--he gen-er-ally couldn't col-lect it. A dol-lar
and a quarter a week would board, lodge, and school a boy in those old
simple days--and clothe him and wash him, too, for that mat-ter.

Judge Thatcher had con-ceived a great opin-ion of Tom. He said that no
com-mon-place boy would ever have got his daugh-ter out of the cave. When
Becky told her father, in strict con-fid-ence, how Tom had taken her
whip-ping at school, the Judge was vis-ibly moved; and when she pleaded
grace for the mighty lie which Tom had told in or-der to shift that
whip-ping from her shoulders to his own, the Judge said with a fine
out-burst that it was a noble, a gen-er-ous, a mag-nan-im-ous lie--a lie that
was worthy to hold up its head and march down through his-tory breast to
breast with Ge-orge Wash-ing-ton's lauded Truth about the hatchet! Becky
thought her father had never looked so tall and so su-perb as when he
walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that. She went straight
off and told Tom about it.

Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great law-yer or a great sol-dier some
day. He said he meant to look to it that Tom should be ad-mit-ted to the
Na-tional Mil-it-ary Academy and af-ter-ward trained in the best law school
in the coun-try, in or-der that he might be ready for either ca-reer or
both.

Huck Finn's wealth and the fact that he was now un-der the Widow Douglas'
pro-tec-tion in-tro-duced him into so-ci-ety--no, dragged him into it, hurled
him into it--and his suf-fer-ings were al-most more than he could bear. The
widow's ser-vants kept him clean and neat, combed and brushed, and they
bed-ded him nightly in un-sym-path-etic sheets that had not one little spot
or stain which he could press to his heart and know for a friend. He had
to eat with a knife and fork; he had to use nap-kin, cup, and plate;
he had to learn his book, he had to go to church; he had to talk so
prop-erly that speech was be-come in-sipid in his mouth; whith-er-so-ever he
turned, the bars and shackles of civil-iz-a-tion shut him in and bound him
hand and foot.

He bravely bore his miser-ies three weeks, and then one day turned up
miss-ing. For forty-eight hours the widow hunted for him every-where in
great dis-tress. The pub-lic were pro-foundly con-cerned; they searched high
and low, they dragged the river for his body. Early the third morn-ing
Tom Saw-yer wisely went pok-ing among some old empty hogsheads down be-hind
the aban-doned slaughter-house, and in one of them he found the refugee.
Huck had slept there; he had just break-fas-ted upon some stolen odds and
ends of food, and was ly-ing off, now, in com-fort, with his pipe. He was
un-kempt, un-combed, and clad in the same old ruin of rags that had made
him pic-tur-esque in the days when he was free and happy. Tom routed him
out, told him the trouble he had been caus-ing, and urged him to go home.
Huck's face lost its tran-quil con-tent, and took a mel-an-choly cast. He
said:

“Don't talk about it, Tom. I've tried it, and it don't work; it don't
work, Tom. It ain't for me; I ain't used to it. The wid-der's good to me,
and friendly; but I can't stand them ways. She makes me get up just
at the same time every morn-ing; she makes me wash, they comb me all
to thun-der; she won't let me sleep in the wood-shed; I got to wear them
blamed clothes that just smoth-ers me, Tom; they don't seem to any air
git through 'em, some-how; and they're so rot-ten nice that I can't
set down, nor lay down, nor roll around any-wher's; I hain't slid on a
cel-lar-door for--well, it 'pears to be years; I got to go to church
and sweat and sweat--I hate them ornery ser-mons! I can't ketch a fly in
there, I can't chaw. I got to wear shoes all Sunday. The wid-der eats by
a bell; she goes to bed by a bell; she gits up by a bell--everything's so
aw-ful reg'lar a body can't stand it.”

“Well, every-body does that way, Huck.”

“Tom, it don't make no dif-fer-ence. I ain't every-body, and I can't
_stand_ it. It's aw-ful to be tied up so. And grub comes too easy--I don't
take no in-terest in vittles, that way. I got to ask to go a-fish-ing;
I got to ask to go in a-swim-ming--dern'd if I hain't got to ask to do
everything. Well, I'd got to talk so nice it wasn't no com-fort--I'd got
to go up in the at-tic and rip out awhile, every day, to git a taste
in my mouth, or I'd a died, Tom. The wid-der wouldn't let me smoke;
she wouldn't let me yell, she wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor
scratch, be-fore folks--” [Then with a spasm of spe-cial ir-rit-a-tion and
in-jury]--“And dad fetch it, she prayed all the time! I never see such a
wo-man! I _had_ to shove, Tom--I just had to. And be-sides, that school's
go-ing to open, and I'd a had to go to it--well, I wouldn't stand _that_,
Tom. Looky-here, Tom, be-ing rich ain't what it's cracked up to be. It's
just worry and worry, and sweat and sweat, and a-wish-ing you was dead
all the time. Now these clothes suits me, and this bar'l suits me, and
I ain't ever go-ing to shake 'em any more. Tom, I wouldn't ever got into
all this trouble if it hadn't 'a' ben for that money; now you just take
my sheer of it along with your'n, and gimme a ten-cen-ter some-times--not
many times, becuz I don't give a dern for a thing 'thout it's tollable
hard to git--and you go and beg off for me with the wid-der.”

“Oh, Huck, you know I can't do that. 'Tain't fair; and be-sides if you'll
try this thing just a while longer you'll come to like it.”

“Like it! Yes--the way I'd like a hot stove if I was to set on it long
enough. No, Tom, I won't be rich, and I won't live in them cussed
smoth-ery houses. I like the woods, and the river, and hogsheads, and
I'll stick to 'em, too. Blame it all! just as we'd got guns, and a cave,
and all just fixed to rob, here this dern fool-ish-ness has got to come up
and spile it all!”

Tom saw his op-por-tun-ity--

“Looky-here, Huck, be-ing rich ain't go-ing to keep me back from turn-ing
rob-ber.”

“No! Oh, good-licks; are you in real dead-wood earn-est, Tom?”

“Just as dead earn-est as I'm sit-ting here. But Huck, we can't let you
into the gang if you ain't re-spect-able, you know.”

Huck's joy was quenched.

“Can't let me in, Tom? Didn't you let me go for a pir-ate?”

“Yes, but that's dif-fer-ent. A rob-ber is more high-toned than what a
pir-ate is--as a gen-eral thing. In most coun-tries they're aw-ful high up in
the no-bil-ity--dukes and such.”

“Now, Tom, hain't you al-ways ben friendly to me? You wouldn't shet me
out, would you, Tom? You wouldn't do that, now, _would_ you, Tom?”

“Huck, I wouldn't want to, and I _don't_ want to--but what would people
say? Why, they'd say, 'Mph! Tom Saw-yer's Gang! pretty low char-ac-ters in
it!' They'd mean you, Huck. You wouldn't like that, and I wouldn't.”

Huck was si-lent for some time, en-gaged in a men-tal struggle. Fin-ally he
said:

“Well, I'll go back to the wid-der for a month and tackle it and see if I
can come to stand it, if you'll let me b'long to the gang, Tom.”

“All right, Huck, it's a whiz! Come along, old chap, and I'll ask the
widow to let up on you a little, Huck.”

“Will you, Tom--now will you? That's good. If she'll let up on some of
the roughest things, I'll smoke private and cuss private, and crowd
through or bust. When you go-ing to start the gang and turn rob-bers?”

“Oh, right off. We'll get the boys to-gether and have the ini-ti-ation
to-night, maybe.”

“Have the which?”

“Have the ini-ti-ation.”

“What's that?”

“It's to swear to stand by one an-other, and never tell the gang's
secrets, even if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill any-body and
all his fam-ily that hurts one of the gang.”

“That's gay--that's mighty gay, Tom, I tell you.”

“Well, I bet it is. And all that swear-ing's got to be done at mid-night,
in the lone-somest, aw-fulest place you can find--a ha'nted house is the
best, but they're all ripped up now.”

“Well, mid-night's good, any-way, Tom.”

“Yes, so it is. And you've got to swear on a coffin, and sign it with
blood.”

“Now, that's some-thing _like_! Why, it's a mil-lion times bul-lier than
pir-at-ing. I'll stick to the wid-der till I rot, Tom; and if I git to be
a reg'lar rip-per of a rob-ber, and every-body talk-ing 'bout it, I reckon
she'll be proud she snaked me in out of the wet.”

CONCLUSION

SO en-deth this chron-icle. It be-ing strictly a his-tory of a _boy_, it
must stop here; the story could not go much fur-ther without be-com-ing the
his-tory of a _man_. When one writes a novel about grown people, he knows
ex-actly where to stop--that is, with a mar-riage; but when he writes of
ju-ven-iles, he must stop where he best can.

Most of the char-ac-ters that per-form in this book still live, and are
pros-per-ous and happy. Some day it may seem worth while to take up the
story of the younger ones again and see what sort of men and wo-men they
turned out to be; there-fore it will be wisest not to re-veal any of that
part of their lives at present.
