HUCKLEBERRY FINN

Scene:  The Mis-sis-sippi Val-ley Time:  Forty to fifty years ago




CHAPTER I.

YOU don't know about me without you have read a book by the name of The
Ad-ven-tures of Tom Saw-yer; but that ain't no mat-ter.  That book was made
by Mr. Mark Twain, and he told the truth, mainly.  There was things
which he stretched, but mainly he told the truth.  That is noth-ing.  I
never seen any-body but lied one time or an-other, without it was Aunt
Polly, or the widow, or maybe Mary.  Aunt Polly--Tom's Aunt Polly, she
is--and Mary, and the Widow Douglas is all told about in that book, which
is mostly a true book, with some stretch-ers, as I said be-fore.

Now the way that the book winds up is this:  Tom and me found the money
that the rob-bers hid in the cave, and it made us rich.  We got six
thou-sand dol-lars apiece--all gold.  It was an aw-ful sight of money when
it was piled up.  Well, Judge Thatcher he took it and put it out
at in-terest, and it fetched us a dol-lar a day apiece all the year
round--more than a body could tell what to do with.  The Widow Douglas
she took me for her son, and al-lowed she would siv-il-ize me; but it was
rough liv-ing in the house all the time, con-sid-er-ing how dis-mal reg-u-lar
and de-cent the widow was in all her ways; and so when I couldn't stand
it no longer I lit out.  I got into my old rags and my sugar-hogshead
again, and was free and sat-is-fied.  But Tom Saw-yer he hunted me up and
said he was go-ing to start a band of rob-bers, and I might join if I
would go back to the widow and be re-spect-able.  So I went back.

The widow she cried over me, and called me a poor lost lamb, and she
called me a lot of other names, too, but she never meant no harm by
it. She put me in them new clothes again, and I couldn't do noth-ing but
sweat and sweat, and feel all cramped up.  Well, then, the old thing
com-menced again.  The widow rung a bell for sup-per, and you had to come
to time. When you got to the table you couldn't go right to eat-ing, but
you had to wait for the widow to tuck down her head and grumble a little
over the victu-als, though there warn't really any-thing the mat-ter with
them,--that is, noth-ing only everything was cooked by it-self.  In a
bar-rel of odds and ends it is dif-fer-ent; things get mixed up, and the
juice kind of swaps around, and the things go bet-ter.

After sup-per she got out her book and learned me about Moses and the
Bul-rush-ers, and I was in a sweat to find out all about him; but by and
by she let it out that Moses had been dead a con-sid-er-able long time; so
then I didn't care no more about him, be-cause I don't take no stock in
dead people.

Pretty soon I wanted to smoke, and asked the widow to let me.  But she
wouldn't.  She said it was a mean prac-tice and wasn't clean, and I must
try to not do it any more.  That is just the way with some people.  They
get down on a thing when they don't know noth-ing about it.  Here she was
a-both-er-ing about Moses, which was no kin to her, and no use to any-body,
be-ing gone, you see, yet find-ing a power of fault with me for do-ing a
thing that had some good in it.  And she took snuff, too; of course that
was all right, be-cause she done it her-self.

Her sis-ter, Miss Wat-son, a tol-er-able slim old maid, with goggles on,
had just come to live with her, and took a set at me now with a
spelling-book. She worked me mid-dling hard for about an hour, and then
the widow made her ease up.  I couldn't stood it much longer.  Then for
an hour it was deadly dull, and I was fid-gety.  Miss Wat-son would say,
“Don't put your feet up there, Huckle-berry;” and “Don't scrunch up
like that, Huckle-berry--set up straight;” and pretty soon she would
say, “Don't gap and stretch like that, Huckle-berry--why don't you try to
be-have?”  Then she told me all about the bad place, and I said I wished
I was there. She got mad then, but I didn't mean no harm.  All I wanted
was to go some-wheres; all I wanted was a change, I warn't par-tic-u-lar.
 She said it was wicked to say what I said; said she wouldn't say it for
the whole world; she was go-ing to live so as to go to the good place.
 Well, I couldn't see no ad-vant-age in go-ing where she was go-ing, so I
made up my mind I wouldn't try for it.  But I never said so, be-cause it
would only make trouble, and wouldn't do no good.

Now she had got a start, and she went on and told me all about the good
place.  She said all a body would have to do there was to go around all
day long with a harp and sing, forever and ever.  So I didn't think
much of it. But I never said so.  I asked her if she reckoned Tom Saw-yer
would go there, and she said not by a con-sid-er-able sight.  I was glad
about that, be-cause I wanted him and me to be to-gether.

Miss Wat-son she kept peck-ing at me, and it got tire-some and lone-some.
 By and by they fetched the nig-gers in and had pray-ers, and then
every-body was off to bed.  I went up to my room with a piece of candle,
and put it on the table.  Then I set down in a chair by the win-dow and
tried to think of some-thing cheer-ful, but it warn't no use.  I felt
so lone-some I most wished I was dead.  The stars were shin-ing, and the
leaves rustled in the woods ever so mourn-ful; and I heard an owl, away
off, who-whoo-ing about some-body that was dead, and a whip-pow-ill and a
dog cry-ing about some-body that was go-ing to die; and the wind was try-ing
to whis-per some-thing to me, and I couldn't make out what it was, and so
it made the cold shivers run over me. Then away out in the woods I heard
that kind of a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about
some-thing that's on its mind and can't make it-self un-der-stood, and so
can't rest easy in its grave, and has to go about that way every night
griev-ing.  I got so down-hearted and scared I did wish I had some
com-pany.  Pretty soon a spider went crawl-ing up my shoulder, and I
flipped it off and it lit in the candle; and be-fore I could budge it
was all shriveled up.  I didn't need any-body to tell me that that was
an aw-ful bad sign and would fetch me some bad luck, so I was scared
and most shook the clothes off of me. I got up and turned around in my
tracks three times and crossed my breast every time; and then I tied
up a little lock of my hair with a thread to keep witches away.  But
I hadn't no con-fid-ence.  You do that when you've lost a horse-shoe that
you've found, in-stead of nail-ing it up over the door, but I hadn't ever
heard any-body say it was any way to keep off bad luck when you'd killed
a spider.

I set down again, a-shak-ing all over, and got out my pipe for a smoke;
for the house was all as still as death now, and so the widow wouldn't
know. Well, after a long time I heard the clock away off in the town
go boom--boom--boom--twelve licks; and all still again--stil-ler than
ever. Pretty soon I heard a twig snap down in the dark amongst the
trees--some-thing was a stir-ring.  I set still and listened.  Dir-ectly I
could just barely hear a “me-yow! me-yow!” down there.  That was good!
 Says I, “me-yow! me-yow!” as soft as I could, and then I put out the
light and scrambled out of the win-dow on to the shed.  Then I slipped
down to the ground and crawled in among the trees, and, sure enough,
there was Tom Saw-yer wait-ing for me.




CHAPTER II.

WE went tip-toe-ing along a path amongst the trees back to-wards the end of
the widow's garden, stoop-ing down so as the branches wouldn't scrape our
heads. When we was passing by the kit-chen I fell over a root and made
a noise.  We scrouched down and laid still.  Miss Wat-son's big nig-ger,
named Jim, was set-ting in the kit-chen door; we could see him pretty
clear, be-cause there was a light be-hind him.  He got up and stretched
his neck out about a minute, listen-ing.  Then he says:

“Who dah?”

He listened some more; then he come tip-toe-ing down and stood right
between us; we could a touched him, nearly.  Well, likely it was
minutes and minutes that there warn't a sound, and we all there so close
to-gether.  There was a place on my ankle that got to itch-ing, but I
dasn't scratch it; and then my ear be-gun to itch; and next my back,
right between my shoulders.  Seemed like I'd die if I couldn't scratch.
 Well, I've no-ticed that thing plenty times since.  If you are with
the qual-ity, or at a fu-neral, or try-ing to go to sleep when you ain't
sleepy--if you are any-wheres where it won't do for you to scratch, why
you will itch all over in up-wards of a thou-sand places. Pretty soon Jim
says:

“Say, who is you?  Whar is you?  Dog my cats ef I didn' hear sumf'n.
Well, I know what I's gwyne to do:  I's gwyne to set down here and
listen tell I hears it agin.”

So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom.  He leaned his back up
against a tree, and stretched his legs out till one of them most touched
one of mine.  My nose be-gun to itch.  It itched till the tears come into
my eyes.  But I dasn't scratch.  Then it be-gun to itch on the in-side.
Next I got to itch-ing un-der-neath.  I didn't know how I was go-ing to set
still. This miser-able-ness went on as much as six or seven minutes; but
it seemed a sight longer than that.  I was itch-ing in el-even dif-fer-ent
places now.  I reckoned I couldn't stand it more'n a minute longer,
but I set my teeth hard and got ready to try.  Just then Jim be-gun
to breathe heavy; next he be-gun to snore--and then I was pretty soon
com-fort-able again.

Tom he made a sign to me--kind of a little noise with his mouth--and we
went creep-ing away on our hands and knees.  When we was ten foot off Tom
whispered to me, and wanted to tie Jim to the tree for fun.  But I said
no; he might wake and make a dis-turb-ance, and then they'd find out I
warn't in. Then Tom said he hadn't got candles enough, and he would slip
in the kit-chen and get some more.  I didn't want him to try.  I said Jim
might wake up and come.  But Tom wanted to resk it; so we slid in there
and got three candles, and Tom laid five cents on the table for pay.
Then we got out, and I was in a sweat to get away; but noth-ing would do
Tom but he must crawl to where Jim was, on his hands and knees, and play
some-thing on him.  I waited, and it seemed a good while, everything was
so still and lone-some.

As soon as Tom was back we cut along the path, around the garden fence,
and by and by fetched up on the steep top of the hill the other side of
the house.  Tom said he slipped Jim's hat off of his head and hung it
on a limb right over him, and Jim stirred a little, but he didn't wake.
After-wards Jim said the witches be witched him and put him in a trance,
and rode him all over the State, and then set him un-der the trees again,
and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it.  And next time Jim told
it he said they rode him down to New Or-leans; and, after that, every
time he told it he spread it more and more, till by and by he said they
rode him all over the world, and tired him most to death, and his back
was all over saddle-boils.  Jim was mon-strous proud about it, and he
got so he wouldn't hardly no-tice the other nig-gers.  Nig-gers would come
miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more looked up to than any
nig-ger in that coun-try.  Strange nig-gers would stand with their mouths
open and look him all over, same as if he was a won-der.  Nig-gers is
al-ways talk-ing about witches in the dark by the kit-chen fire; but
whenever one was talk-ing and let-ting on to know all about such things,
Jim would hap-pen in and say, “Hm!  What you know 'bout witches?” and
that nig-ger was corked up and had to take a back seat.  Jim al-ways kept
that five-cen-ter piece round his neck with a string, and said it was a
charm the devil give to him with his own hands, and told him he could
cure any-body with it and fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by
say-ing some-thing to it; but he never told what it was he said to it.
 Nig-gers would come from all around there and give Jim any-thing they
had, just for a sight of that five-cen-ter piece; but they wouldn't touch
it, be-cause the devil had had his hands on it.  Jim was most ruined for
a ser-vant, be-cause he got stuck up on ac-count of hav-ing seen the devil
and been rode by witches.

Well, when Tom and me got to the edge of the hill-top we looked away down
into the vil-lage and could see three or four lights twink-ling, where
there was sick folks, maybe; and the stars over us was spark-ling ever
so fine; and down by the vil-lage was the river, a whole mile broad, and
aw-ful still and grand.  We went down the hill and found Jo Harper and
Ben Ro-gers, and two or three more of the boys, hid in the old tan-yard.
 So we un-hitched a skiff and pulled down the river two mile and a half,
to the big scar on the hill-side, and went ashore.

We went to a clump of bushes, and Tom made every-body swear to keep the
secret, and then showed them a hole in the hill, right in the thick-est
part of the bushes.  Then we lit the candles, and crawled in on our
hands and knees.  We went about two hun-dred yards, and then the cave
opened up. Tom poked about amongst the pas-sages, and pretty soon ducked
un-der a wall where you wouldn't a no-ticed that there was a hole.  We
went along a nar-row place and got into a kind of room, all damp and
sweaty and cold, and there we stopped.  Tom says:

“Now, we'll start this band of rob-bers and call it Tom Saw-yer's Gang.
Every-body that wants to join has got to take an oath, and write his name
in blood.”

Every-body was will-ing.  So Tom got out a sheet of pa-per that he had
wrote the oath on, and read it.  It swore every boy to stick to the
band, and never tell any of the secrets; and if any-body done any-thing to
any boy in the band, whichever boy was ordered to kill that per-son and
his fam-ily must do it, and he mustn't eat and he mustn't sleep till he
had killed them and hacked a cross in their breasts, which was the sign
of the band. And nobody that didn't be-long to the band could use that
mark, and if he did he must be sued; and if he done it again he must be
killed.  And if any-body that be-longed to the band told the secrets, he
must have his throat cut, and then have his car-cass burnt up and the
ashes scattered all around, and his name blot-ted off of the list with
blood and never men-tioned again by the gang, but have a curse put on it
and be for-got forever.

Every-body said it was a real beau-ti-ful oath, and asked Tom if he got
it out of his own head.  He said, some of it, but the rest was out of
pir-ate-books and rob-ber-books, and every gang that was high-toned had
it.

Some thought it would be good to kill the _fam-il-ies_ of boys that told
the secrets.  Tom said it was a good idea, so he took a pen-cil and wrote
it in. Then Ben Ro-gers says:

“Here's Huck Finn, he hain't got no fam-ily; what you go-ing to do 'bout
him?”

“Well, hain't he got a father?” says Tom Saw-yer.

“Yes, he's got a father, but you can't never find him these days.  He
used to lay drunk with the hogs in the tan-yard, but he hain't been seen
in these parts for a year or more.”

They talked it over, and they was go-ing to rule me out, be-cause they
said every boy must have a fam-ily or some-body to kill, or else it
wouldn't be fair and square for the oth-ers.  Well, nobody could think of
any-thing to do--every-body was stumped, and set still.  I was most ready
to cry; but all at once I thought of a way, and so I offered them Miss
Wat-son--they could kill her.  Every-body said:

“Oh, she'll do.  That's all right.  Huck can come in.”

Then they all stuck a pin in their fin-gers to get blood to sign with,
and I made my mark on the pa-per.

“Now,” says Ben Ro-gers, “what's the line of busi-ness of this Gang?”

“Noth-ing only rob-bery and murder,” Tom said.

“But who are we go-ing to rob?--houses, or cattle, or--”

“Stuff! steal-ing cattle and such things ain't rob-bery; it's burg-lary,”
 says Tom Saw-yer.  “We ain't burg-lars.  That ain't no sort of style.  We
are high-way-men.  We stop stages and car-riages on the road, with masks
on, and kill the people and take their watches and money.”

“Must we al-ways kill the people?”

“Oh, cer-tainly.  It's best.  Some au-thor-it-ies think dif-fer-ent, but
mostly it's con-sidered best to kill them--ex-cept some that you bring to
the cave here, and keep them till they're ransomed.”

“Ransomed?  What's that?”

“I don't know.  But that's what they do.  I've seen it in books; and so
of course that's what we've got to do.”

“But how can we do it if we don't know what it is?”

“Why, blame it all, we've _got_ to do it.  Don't I tell you it's in the
books?  Do you want to go to do-ing dif-fer-ent from what's in the books,
and get things all muddled up?”

“Oh, that's all very fine to _say_, Tom Saw-yer, but how in the na-tion
are these fel-lows go-ing to be ransomed if we don't know how to do it
to them?--that's the thing I want to get at.  Now, what do you reckon it
is?”

“Well, I don't know.  But per'aps if we keep them till they're ransomed,
it means that we keep them till they're dead.”

“Now, that's some-thing _like_.  That'll an-swer.  Why couldn't you said
that be-fore?  We'll keep them till they're ransomed to death; and a
both-er-some lot they'll be, too--eat-ing up everything, and al-ways try-ing
to get loose.”

“How you talk, Ben Ro-gers.  How can they get loose when there's a guard
over them, ready to shoot them down if they move a peg?”

“A guard!  Well, that _is_ good.  So some-body's got to set up all night
and never get any sleep, just so as to watch them.  I think that's
fool-ish-ness. Why can't a body take a club and ransom them as soon as
they get here?”

“Be-cause it ain't in the books so--that's why.  Now, Ben Ro-gers, do you
want to do things reg-u-lar, or don't you?--that's the idea.  Don't you
reckon that the people that made the books knows what's the cor-rect
thing to do?  Do you reckon _y-ou_ can learn 'em any-thing?  Not by a good
deal. No, sir, we'll just go on and ransom them in the reg-u-lar way.”

“All right.  I don't mind; but I say it's a fool way, any-how.  Say, do
we kill the wo-men, too?”

“Well, Ben Ro-gers, if I was as ig-nor-ant as you I wouldn't let on.  Kill
the wo-men?  No; nobody ever saw any-thing in the books like that.  You
fetch them to the cave, and you're al-ways as po-lite as pie to them;
and by and by they fall in love with you, and never want to go home any
more.”

“Well, if that's the way I'm agreed, but I don't take no stock in it.
Mighty soon we'll have the cave so cluttered up with wo-men, and fel-lows
wait-ing to be ransomed, that there won't be no place for the rob-bers.
But go ahead, I ain't got noth-ing to say.”

Little Tommy Barnes was asleep now, and when they waked him up he was
scared, and cried, and said he wanted to go home to his ma, and didn't
want to be a rob-ber any more.

So they all made fun of him, and called him cry-baby, and that made him
mad, and he said he would go straight and tell all the secrets.  But
Tom give him five cents to keep quiet, and said we would all go home and
meet next week, and rob some-body and kill some people.

Ben Ro-gers said he couldn't get out much, only Sundays, and so he wanted
to be-gin next Sunday; but all the boys said it would be wicked to do it
on Sunday, and that settled the thing.  They agreed to get to-gether and
fix a day as soon as they could, and then we elec-ted Tom Saw-yer first
cap-tain and Jo Harper second cap-tain of the Gang, and so star-ted home.

I clumb up the shed and crept into my win-dow just be-fore day was
break-ing. My new clothes was all greased up and clayey, and I was
dog-tired.




CHAPTER III.

WELL, I got a good go-ing-over in the morn-ing from old Miss Wat-son on
ac-count of my clothes; but the widow she didn't scold, but only cleaned
off the grease and clay, and looked so sorry that I thought I would
be-have awhile if I could.  Then Miss Wat-son she took me in the closet
and prayed, but noth-ing come of it.  She told me to pray every day, and
whatever I asked for I would get it.  But it warn't so.  I tried it.
Once I got a fish-line, but no hooks.  It warn't any good to me without
hooks.  I tried for the hooks three or four times, but some-how I
couldn't make it work.  By and by, one day, I asked Miss Wat-son to
try for me, but she said I was a fool.  She never told me why, and I
couldn't make it out no way.

I set down one time back in the woods, and had a long think about it.
 I says to my-self, if a body can get any-thing they pray for, why don't
Deacon Winn get back the money he lost on pork?  Why can't the widow get
back her sil-ver snuff-box that was stole?  Why can't Miss Wat-son fat up?
No, says I to my self, there ain't noth-ing in it.  I went and told the
widow about it, and she said the thing a body could get by pray-ing for
it was “spir-itual gifts.”  This was too many for me, but she told me
what she meant--I must help other people, and do everything I could for
other people, and look out for them all the time, and never think about
my-self. This was in-clud-ing Miss Wat-son, as I took it.  I went out in the
woods and turned it over in my mind a long time, but I couldn't see no
ad-vant-age about it--ex-cept for the other people; so at last I reckoned
I wouldn't worry about it any more, but just let it go.  So-me-times the
widow would take me one side and talk about Provid-ence in a way to make
a body's mouth wa-ter; but maybe next day Miss Wat-son would take hold
and knock it all down again.  I judged I could see that there was two
Provid-ences, and a poor chap would stand con-sid-er-able show with the
widow's Provid-ence, but if Miss Wat-son's got him there warn't no help
for him any more.  I thought it all out, and reckoned I would be-long
to the widow's if he wanted me, though I couldn't make out how he was
a-go-ing to be any bet-ter off then than what he was be-fore, see-ing I was
so ig-nor-ant, and so kind of low-down and ornery.

Pap he hadn't been seen for more than a year, and that was com-fort-able
for me; I didn't want to see him no more.  He used to al-ways whale me
when he was sober and could get his hands on me; though I used to take
to the woods most of the time when he was around.  Well, about this time
he was found in the river drown-ded, about twelve mile above town, so
people said.  They judged it was him, any-way; said this drown-ded man was
just his size, and was ragged, and had un-com-mon long hair, which was all
like pap; but they couldn't make noth-ing out of the face, be-cause it had
been in the wa-ter so long it warn't much like a face at all.  They said
he was float-ing on his back in the wa-ter.  They took him and bur-ied him
on the bank.  But I warn't com-fort-able long, be-cause I happened to think
of some-thing.  I knowed mighty well that a drown-ded man don't float on
his back, but on his face.  So I knowed, then, that this warn't pap, but
a wo-man dressed up in a man's clothes.  So I was un-com-fort-able again.
 I judged the old man would turn up again by and by, though I wished he
wouldn't.

We played rob-ber now and then about a month, and then I resigned.  All
the boys did.  We hadn't robbed nobody, hadn't killed any people, but
only just pre-ten-ded.  We used to hop out of the woods and go char-ging
down on hog-drivers and wo-men in carts tak-ing garden stuff to mar-ket,
but we never hived any of them.  Tom Saw-yer called the hogs “in-gots,”
 and he called the turnips and stuff “ju-lery,” and we would go to the
cave and pow-wow over what we had done, and how many people we had killed
and marked.  But I couldn't see no profit in it.  One time Tom sent a
boy to run about town with a blaz-ing stick, which he called a slo-gan
(which was the sign for the Gang to get to-gether), and then he said he
had got secret news by his spies that next day a whole par-cel of Span-ish
mer-chants and rich A-rabs was go-ing to camp in Cave Hol-low with two
hun-dred ele-phants, and six hun-dred camels, and over a thou-sand “sumter”
 mules, all loaded down with di'monds, and they didn't have only a guard
of four hun-dred sol-diers, and so we would lay in am-bus-cade, as he called
it, and kill the lot and scoop the things.  He said we must slick up
our swords and guns, and get ready.  He never could go after even a
turnip-cart but he must have the swords and guns all scoured up for it,
though they was only lath and broom-sticks, and you might scour at them
till you rot-ted, and then they warn't worth a mouth-ful of ashes more
than what they was be-fore.  I didn't be-lieve we could lick such a crowd
of Span-iards and A-rabs, but I wanted to see the camels and ele-phants,
so I was on hand next day, Saturday, in the am-bus-cade; and when we got
the word we rushed out of the woods and down the hill.  But there warn't
no Span-iards and A-rabs, and there warn't no camels nor no ele-phants.
 It warn't any-thing but a Sunday-school pic-nic, and only a primer-class
at that.  We bus-ted it up, and chased the chil-dren up the hol-low; but we
never got any-thing but some dough-nuts and jam, though Ben Ro-gers got
a rag doll, and Jo Harper got a hymn-book and a tract; and then the
teacher charged in, and made us drop everything and cut.

 I didn't see no di'monds, and I told Tom Saw-yer so.  He said there was
loads of them there, any-way; and he said there was A-rabs there, too,
and ele-phants and things.  I said, why couldn't we see them, then?  He
said if I warn't so ig-nor-ant, but had read a book called Don Quix-ote, I
would know without ask-ing.  He said it was all done by en-chant-ment.  He
said there was hun-dreds of sol-diers there, and ele-phants and treas-ure,
and so on, but we had en-emies which he called ma-gi-cians; and they had
turned the whole thing into an in-fant Sunday-school, just out of spite.
 I said, all right; then the thing for us to do was to go for the
ma-gi-cians.  Tom Saw-yer said I was a num-skull.

“Why,” said he, “a ma-gi-cian could call up a lot of genies, and they
would hash you up like noth-ing be-fore you could say Jack Robin-son.  They
are as tall as a tree and as big around as a church.”

“Well,” I says, “s'pose we got some genies to help _us_--can't we lick
the other crowd then?”

“How you go-ing to get them?”

“I don't know.  How do _they_ get them?”

“Why, they rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring, and then the genies
come tear-ing in, with the thun-der and light-ning a-rip-ping around and the
smoke a-rolling, and everything they're told to do they up and do it.
 They don't think noth-ing of pulling a shot-tower up by the roots, and
belt-ing a Sunday-school su-per-in-tend-ent over the head with it--or any
other man.”

“Who makes them tear around so?”

“Why, who-ever rubs the lamp or the ring.  They be-long to who-ever rubs
the lamp or the ring, and they've got to do whatever he says.  If he
tells them to build a palace forty miles long out of di'monds, and fill
it full of chew-ing-gum, or whatever you want, and fetch an em-peror's
daugh-ter from Ch-ina for you to marry, they've got to do it--and they've
got to do it be-fore sun-up next morn-ing, too.  And more:  they've got
to waltz that palace around over the coun-try wherever you want it, you
un-der-stand.”

“Well,” says I, “I think they are a pack of flat-heads for not keep-ing
the palace them-selves 'stead of fool-ing them away like that.  And what's
more--if I was one of them I would see a man in Jericho be-fore I would
drop my busi-ness and come to him for the rub-bing of an old tin lamp.”

“How you talk, Huck Finn.  Why, you'd _have_ to come when he rubbed it,
whether you wanted to or not.”

“What! and I as high as a tree and as big as a church?  All right, then;
I _would_ come; but I lay I'd make that man climb the highest tree there
was in the coun-try.”

“Shucks, it ain't no use to talk to you, Huck Finn.  You don't seem to
know any-thing, some-how--per-fect sap-head.”

I thought all this over for two or three days, and then I reckoned I
would see if there was any-thing in it.  I got an old tin lamp and an
iron ring, and went out in the woods and rubbed and rubbed till I sweat
like an In-jun, cal-cu-lat-ing to build a palace and sell it; but it warn't
no use, none of the genies come.  So then I judged that all that stuff
was only just one of Tom Saw-yer's lies.  I reckoned he be-lieved in the
A-rabs and the ele-phants, but as for me I think dif-fer-ent.  It had all
the marks of a Sunday-school.




CHAPTER IV.

WELL, three or four months run along, and it was well into the winter
now. I had been to school most all the time and could spell and read and
write just a little, and could say the mul-ti-plic-a-tion table up to six
times seven is thirty-five, and I don't reckon I could ever get any
fur-ther than that if I was to live forever.  I don't take no stock in
math-em-at-ics, any-way.

At first I hated the school, but by and by I got so I could stand it.
Whenever I got un-com-mon tired I played hookey, and the hid-ing I got next
day done me good and cheered me up.  So the longer I went to school the
easier it got to be.  I was get-ting sort of used to the widow's ways,
too, and they warn't so raspy on me.  Liv-ing in a house and sleep-ing in
a bed pulled on me pretty tight mostly, but be-fore the cold weather I
used to slide out and sleep in the woods some-times, and so that was a
rest to me.  I liked the old ways best, but I was get-ting so I liked the
new ones, too, a little bit. The widow said I was com-ing along slow but
sure, and do-ing very sat-is-fact-ory.  She said she warn't ashamed of me.

One morn-ing I happened to turn over the salt-cel-lar at break-fast.
 I reached for some of it as quick as I could to throw over my left
shoulder and keep off the bad luck, but Miss Wat-son was in ahead of me,
and crossed me off. She says, “Take your hands away, Huckle-berry; what
a mess you are al-ways mak-ing!”  The widow put in a good word for me, but
that warn't go-ing to keep off the bad luck, I knowed that well enough.
 I star-ted out, after break-fast, feel-ing wor-ried and shaky, and
won-der-ing where it was go-ing to fall on me, and what it was go-ing to be.
 There is ways to keep off some kinds of bad luck, but this wasn't one
of them kind; so I never tried to do any-thing, but just poked along
low-spir-ited and on the watch-out.

I went down to the front garden and clumb over the stile where you go
through the high board fence.  There was an inch of new snow on the
ground, and I seen some-body's tracks.  They had come up from the quarry
and stood around the stile a while, and then went on around the garden
fence.  It was funny they hadn't come in, after stand-ing around so.  I
couldn't make it out.  It was very curi-ous, some-how.  I was go-ing to
fol-low around, but I stooped down to look at the tracks first.  I didn't
no-tice any-thing at first, but next I did.  There was a cross in the left
boot-heel made with big nails, to keep off the devil.

I was up in a second and shin-ning down the hill.  I looked over my
shoulder every now and then, but I didn't see nobody.  I was at Judge
Thatcher's as quick as I could get there.  He said:

“Why, my boy, you are all out of breath.  Did you come for your
in-terest?”

“No, sir,” I says; “is there some for me?”

“Oh, yes, a half-yearly is in last night--over a hun-dred and fifty
dol-lars.  Quite a for-tune for you.  You had bet-ter let me in-vest it
along with your six thou-sand, be-cause if you take it you'll spend it.”

“No, sir,” I says, “I don't want to spend it.  I don't want it at
all--nor the six thou-sand, nuther.  I want you to take it; I want to give
it to you--the six thou-sand and all.”

He looked sur-prised.  He couldn't seem to make it out.  He says:

“Why, what can you mean, my boy?”

I says, “Don't you ask me no ques-tions about it, please.  You'll take
it--won't you?”

He says:

“Well, I'm puzzled.  Is some-thing the mat-ter?”

“Please take it,” says I, “and don't ask me noth-ing--then I won't have to
tell no lies.”

He stud-ied a while, and then he says:

“Oho-o!  I think I see.  You want to _sell_ all your prop-erty to me--not
give it.  That's the cor-rect idea.”

Then he wrote some-thing on a pa-per and read it over, and says:

“There; you see it says 'for a con-sid-er-a-tion.'  That means I have bought
it of you and paid you for it.  Here's a dol-lar for you.  Now you sign
it.”

So I signed it, and left.

Miss Wat-son's nig-ger, Jim, had a hair-ball as big as your fist, which
had been took out of the fourth stom-ach of an ox, and he used to do
ma-gic with it.  He said there was a spirit in-side of it, and it knowed
everything.  So I went to him that night and told him pap was here
again, for I found his tracks in the snow.  What I wanted to know was,
what he was go-ing to do, and was he go-ing to stay?  Jim got out his
hair-ball and said some-thing over it, and then he held it up and dropped
it on the floor.  It fell pretty solid, and only rolled about an inch.
 Jim tried it again, and then an-other time, and it ac-ted just the same.
 Jim got down on his knees, and put his ear against it and listened.
 But it warn't no use; he said it wouldn't talk. He said some-times it
wouldn't talk without money.  I told him I had an old slick coun-ter-feit
quarter that warn't no good be-cause the brass showed through the sil-ver
a little, and it wouldn't pass no-how, even if the brass didn't show,
be-cause it was so slick it felt greasy, and so that would tell on it
every time.  (I reckoned I wouldn't say noth-ing about the dol-lar I got
from the judge.) I said it was pretty bad money, but maybe the hair-ball
would take it, be-cause maybe it wouldn't know the dif-fer-ence.  Jim smelt
it and bit it and rubbed it, and said he would man-age so the hair-ball
would think it was good.  He said he would split open a raw Irish potato
and stick the quarter in between and keep it there all night, and next
morn-ing you couldn't see no brass, and it wouldn't feel greasy no more,
and so any-body in town would take it in a minute, let alone a hair-ball.
 Well, I knowed a potato would do that be-fore, but I had for-got it.

Jim put the quarter un-der the hair-ball, and got down and listened
again. This time he said the hair-ball was all right.  He said it
would tell my whole for-tune if I wanted it to.  I says, go on.  So the
hair-ball talked to Jim, and Jim told it to me.  He says:

“Yo' ole father doan' know yit what he's a-gwyne to do.  So-me-times he
spec he'll go 'way, en den agin he spec he'll stay.  De bes' way is to
res' easy en let de ole man take his own way.  Dey's two an-gels hov-erin'
roun' 'bout him.  One uv 'em is white en shiny, en t'other one is black.
De white one gits him to go right a little while, den de black one sail
in en bust it all up.  A body can't tell yit which one gwyne to fetch
him at de las'.  But you is all right.  You gwyne to have con-sid-able
trouble in yo' life, en con-sid-able joy.  So-me-times you gwyne to git
hurt, en some-times you gwyne to git sick; but every time you's gwyne
to git well agin.  Dey's two gals flyin' 'bout you in yo' life.  One
uv 'em's light en t'other one is dark. One is rich en t'other is po'.
 You's gwyne to marry de po' one fust en de rich one by en by.  You
wants to keep 'way fum de wa-ter as much as you kin, en don't run no
resk, 'kase it's down in de bills dat you's gwyne to git hung.”

When I lit my candle and went up to my room that night there sat pap his
own self!




CHAPTER V.

I had shut the door to.  Then I turned around and there he was.  I used
to be scared of him all the time, he tanned me so much.  I reckoned I
was scared now, too; but in a minute I see I was mis-taken--that is, after
the first jolt, as you may say, when my breath sort of hitched, he be-ing
so un-ex-pec-ted; but right away after I see I warn't scared of him worth
bothring about.

He was most fifty, and he looked it.  His hair was long and tangled and
greasy, and hung down, and you could see his eyes shin-ing through
like he was be-hind vines.  It was all black, no gray; so was his long,
mixed-up whiskers.  There warn't no color in his face, where his face
showed; it was white; not like an-other man's white, but a white to make
a body sick, a white to make a body's flesh crawl--a tree-toad white, a
fish-belly white.  As for his clothes--just rags, that was all.  He had
one ankle rest-ing on t'other knee; the boot on that foot was bus-ted, and
two of his toes stuck through, and he worked them now and then.  His hat
was lay-ing on the floor--an old black slouch with the top caved in, like
a lid.

I stood a-look-ing at him; he set there a-look-ing at me, with his chair
tilted back a little.  I set the candle down.  I no-ticed the win-dow was
up; so he had clumb in by the shed.  He kept a-look-ing me all over.  By
and by he says:

“Starchy clothes--very.  You think you're a good deal of a big-bug,
_don't_ you?”

“Maybe I am, maybe I ain't,” I says.

“Don't you give me none o' your lip,” says he.  “You've put on
con-sid-er-able many frills since I been away.  I'll take you down a peg
be-fore I get done with you.  You're edu-cated, too, they say--can read and
write.  You think you're bet-ter'n your father, now, don't you, be-cause
he can't?  _I'll_ take it out of you.  Who told you you might meddle
with such hifalut'n fool-ish-ness, hey?--who told you you could?”

“The widow.  She told me.”

“The widow, hey?--and who told the widow she could put in her shovel
about a thing that ain't none of her busi-ness?”

“Nobody never told her.”

“Well, I'll learn her how to meddle.  And looky here--you drop that
school, you hear?  I'll learn people to bring up a boy to put on airs
over his own father and let on to be bet-ter'n what _he_ is.  You lemme
catch you fool-ing around that school again, you hear?  Your mother
couldn't read, and she couldn't write, nuther, be-fore she died.  None
of the fam-ily couldn't be-fore _they_ died.  I can't; and here you're
a-swell-ing your-self up like this.  I ain't the man to stand it--you hear?
Say, lemme hear you read.”

I took up a book and be-gun some-thing about Gen-eral Wash-ing-ton and the
wars. When I'd read about a half a minute, he fetched the book a whack
with his hand and knocked it across the house.  He says:

“It's so.  You can do it.  I had my doubts when you told me.  Now looky
here; you stop that put-ting on frills.  I won't have it.  I'll lay for
you, my smarty; and if I catch you about that school I'll tan you good.
First you know you'll get re-li-gion, too.  I never see such a son.”

He took up a little blue and yaller pic-ture of some cows and a boy, and
says:

“What's this?”

“It's some-thing they give me for learn-ing my les-sons good.”

He tore it up, and says:

“I'll give you some-thing bet-ter--I'll give you a cow-hide.”

He set there a-mum-bling and a-growl-ing a minute, and then he says:

“_Ain't_ you a sweet-scen-ted dandy, though?  A bed; and bed-clothes; and
a look'n'-glass; and a piece of car-pet on the floor--and your own father
got to sleep with the hogs in the tan-yard.  I never see such a son.  I
bet I'll take some o' these frills out o' you be-fore I'm done with you.
Why, there ain't no end to your airs--they say you're rich.  Hey?--how's
that?”

“They lie--that's how.”

“Looky here--mind how you talk to me; I'm a-stand-ing about all I can
stand now--so don't gimme no sass.  I've been in town two days, and I
hain't heard noth-ing but about you bein' rich.  I heard about it
away down the river, too.  That's why I come.  You git me that money
to-mor-row--I want it.”

“I hain't got no money.”

“It's a lie.  Judge Thatcher's got it.  You git it.  I want it.”

“I hain't got no money, I tell you.  You ask Judge Thatcher; he'll tell
you the same.”

“All right.  I'll ask him; and I'll make him pungle, too, or I'll know
the reason why.  Say, how much you got in your pocket?  I want it.”

“I hain't got only a dol-lar, and I want that to--”

“It don't make no dif-fer-ence what you want it for--you just shell it
out.”

He took it and bit it to see if it was good, and then he said he was
go-ing down town to get some whisky; said he hadn't had a drink all day.
When he had got out on the shed he put his head in again, and cussed
me for put-ting on frills and try-ing to be bet-ter than him; and when I
reckoned he was gone he come back and put his head in again, and told me
to mind about that school, be-cause he was go-ing to lay for me and lick
me if I didn't drop that.

Next day he was drunk, and he went to Judge Thatcher's and bul-ly-ragged
him, and tried to make him give up the money; but he couldn't, and then
he swore he'd make the law force him.

The judge and the widow went to law to get the court to take me away
from him and let one of them be my guard-ian; but it was a new judge that
had just come, and he didn't know the old man; so he said courts mustn't
in-ter-fere and sep-ar-ate fam-il-ies if they could help it; said he'd druther
not take a child away from its father.  So Judge Thatcher and the widow
had to quit on the busi-ness.

That pleased the old man till he couldn't rest.  He said he'd cow-hide
me till I was black and blue if I didn't raise some money for him.  I
bor-rowed three dol-lars from Judge Thatcher, and pap took it and got
drunk, and went a-blow-ing around and cuss-ing and whoop-ing and car-ry-ing
on; and he kept it up all over town, with a tin pan, till most mid-night;
then they jailed him, and next day they had him be-fore court, and jailed
him again for a week.  But he said _he_ was sat-is-fied; said he was boss
of his son, and he'd make it warm for _him_.

When he got out the new judge said he was a-go-ing to make a man of him.
So he took him to his own house, and dressed him up clean and nice, and
had him to break-fast and din-ner and sup-per with the fam-ily, and was just
old pie to him, so to speak.  And after sup-per he talked to him about
tem-per-ance and such things till the old man cried, and said he'd been
a fool, and fooled away his life; but now he was a-go-ing to turn over
a new leaf and be a man nobody wouldn't be ashamed of, and he hoped the
judge would help him and not look down on him.  The judge said he could
hug him for them words; so he cried, and his wife she cried again; pap
said he'd been a man that had al-ways been mis-un-der-stood be-fore, and the
judge said he be-lieved it.  The old man said that what a man wanted
that was down was sym-pathy, and the judge said it was so; so they cried
again.  And when it was bed-time the old man rose up and held out his
hand, and says:

“Look at it, gen-tle-men and ladies all; take a-hold of it; shake it.
There's a hand that was the hand of a hog; but it ain't so no more; it's
the hand of a man that's star-ted in on a new life, and'll die be-fore
he'll go back.  You mark them words--don't for-get I said them.  It's a
clean hand now; shake it--don't be afeard.”

So they shook it, one after the other, all around, and cried.  The
judge's wife she kissed it.  Then the old man he signed a pledge--made
his mark. The judge said it was the holi-est time on re-cord, or some-thing
like that. Then they tucked the old man into a beau-ti-ful room, which was
the spare room, and in the night some time he got power-ful thirsty and
clumb out on to the porch-roof and slid down a stan-chion and traded his
new coat for a jug of forty-rod, and clumb back again and had a good old
time; and to-wards day-light he crawled out again, drunk as a fid-dler, and
rolled off the porch and broke his left arm in two places, and was most
froze to death when some-body found him after sun-up.  And when they come
to look at that spare room they had to take sound-ings be-fore they could
nav-ig-ate it.

The judge he felt kind of sore.  He said he reckoned a body could re-form
the old man with a shot-gun, maybe, but he didn't know no other way.




CHAPTER VI.

WELL, pretty soon the old man was up and around again, and then he went
for Judge Thatcher in the courts to make him give up that money, and he
went for me, too, for not stop-ping school.  He catched me a couple of
times and thrashed me, but I went to school just the same, and dodged
him or out-run him most of the time.  I didn't want to go to school much
be-fore, but I reckoned I'd go now to spite pap.  That law trial was a
slow busi-ness--ap-peared like they warn't ever go-ing to get star-ted on it;
so every now and then I'd bor-row two or three dol-lars off of the judge
for him, to keep from get-ting a cow-hid-ing.  Every time he got money he
got drunk; and every time he got drunk he raised Cain around town; and
every time he raised Cain he got jailed.  He was just suited--this kind
of thing was right in his line.

He got to hanging around the widow's too much and so she told him at
last that if he didn't quit us-ing around there she would make trouble
for him. Well, _wasn't_ he mad?  He said he would show who was Huck
Finn's boss.  So he watched out for me one day in the spring, and
catched me, and took me up the river about three mile in a skiff, and
crossed over to the Illinois shore where it was woody and there warn't
no houses but an old log hut in a place where the tim-ber was so thick
you couldn't find it if you didn't know where it was.

He kept me with him all the time, and I never got a chance to run off.
We lived in that old cabin, and he al-ways locked the door and put the
key un-der his head nights.  He had a gun which he had stole, I reckon,
and we fished and hunted, and that was what we lived on.  Every little
while he locked me in and went down to the store, three miles, to the
ferry, and traded fish and game for whisky, and fetched it home and got
drunk and had a good time, and licked me.  The widow she found out where
I was by and by, and she sent a man over to try to get hold of me; but
pap drove him off with the gun, and it warn't long after that till I was
used to be-ing where I was, and liked it--all but the cow-hide part.

It was kind of lazy and jolly, lay-ing off com-fort-able all day, smoking
and fish-ing, and no books nor study.  Two months or more run along, and
my clothes got to be all rags and dirt, and I didn't see how I'd ever
got to like it so well at the widow's, where you had to wash, and eat on
a plate, and comb up, and go to bed and get up reg-u-lar, and be forever
both-er-ing over a book, and have old Miss Wat-son peck-ing at you all the
time.  I didn't want to go back no more.  I had stopped cuss-ing, be-cause
the widow didn't like it; but now I took to it again be-cause pap hadn't
no ob-jec-tions.  It was pretty good times up in the woods there, take it
all around.

But by and by pap got too handy with his hick'ry, and I couldn't stand
it. I was all over welts.  He got to go-ing away so much, too, and
lock-ing me in.  Once he locked me in and was gone three days.  It was
dread-ful lone-some.  I judged he had got drown-ded, and I wasn't ever
go-ing to get out any more.  I was scared.  I made up my mind I would fix
up some way to leave there.  I had tried to get out of that cabin many
a time, but I couldn't find no way.  There warn't a win-dow to it big
enough for a dog to get through.  I couldn't get up the chimbly; it
was too nar-row.  The door was thick, solid oak slabs.  Pap was pretty
care-ful not to leave a knife or any-thing in the cabin when he was away;
I reckon I had hunted the place over as much as a hun-dred times; well, I
was most all the time at it, be-cause it was about the only way to put in
the time.  But this time I found some-thing at last; I found an old rusty
wood-saw without any handle; it was laid in between a rafter and the
clap-boards of the roof. I greased it up and went to work.  There was an
old horse-blanket nailed against the logs at the far end of the cabin
be-hind the table, to keep the wind from blow-ing through the chinks and
put-ting the candle out.  I got un-der the table and raised the blanket,
and went to work to saw a sec-tion of the big bot-tom log out--big enough
to let me through.  Well, it was a good long job, but I was get-ting
to-wards the end of it when I heard pap's gun in the woods.  I got rid of
the signs of my work, and dropped the blanket and hid my saw, and pretty
soon pap come in.

Pap warn't in a good hu-mor--so he was his nat-ural self.  He said he was
down town, and everything was go-ing wrong.  His law-yer said he reckoned
he would win his law-suit and get the money if they ever got star-ted on
the trial; but then there was ways to put it off a long time, and Judge
Thatcher knowed how to do it. And he said people al-lowed there'd be
an-other trial to get me away from him and give me to the widow for my
guard-ian, and they guessed it would win this time.  This shook me up
con-sid-er-able, be-cause I didn't want to go back to the widow's any more
and be so cramped up and siv-il-ized, as they called it.  Then the old man
got to cuss-ing, and cussed everything and every-body he could think of,
and then cussed them all over again to make sure he hadn't skipped any,
and after that he pol-ished off with a kind of a gen-eral cuss all round,
in-clud-ing a con-sid-er-able par-cel of people which he didn't know the names
of, and so called them what's-his-name when he got to them, and went
right along with his cuss-ing.

He said he would like to see the widow get me.  He said he would watch
out, and if they tried to come any such game on him he knowed of a place
six or seven mile off to stow me in, where they might hunt till they
dropped and they couldn't find me.  That made me pretty un-easy again,
but only for a minute; I reckoned I wouldn't stay on hand till he got
that chance.

The old man made me go to the skiff and fetch the things he had
got. There was a fifty-pound sack of corn meal, and a side of ba-con,
am-muni-tion, and a four-gal-lon jug of whisky, and an old book and two
news-pa-pers for wad-ding, be-sides some tow.  I toted up a load, and went
back and set down on the bow of the skiff to rest.  I thought it all
over, and I reckoned I would walk off with the gun and some lines, and
take to the woods when I run away.  I guessed I wouldn't stay in one
place, but just tramp right across the coun-try, mostly night times, and
hunt and fish to keep alive, and so get so far away that the old man nor
the widow couldn't ever find me any more.  I judged I would saw out and
leave that night if pap got drunk enough, and I reckoned he would.  I
got so full of it I didn't no-tice how long I was stay-ing till the old
man hollered and asked me whether I was asleep or drown-ded.

I got the things all up to the cabin, and then it was about dark.  While
I was cook-ing sup-per the old man took a swig or two and got sort of
warmed up, and went to rip-ping again.  He had been drunk over in town,
and laid in the gut-ter all night, and he was a sight to look at.  A body
would a thought he was Adam--he was just all mud.  Whenever his li-quor
be-gun to work he most al-ways went for the gov-ment, this time he says:

“Call this a gov-ment! why, just look at it and see what it's like.
Here's the law a-stand-ing ready to take a man's son away from him--a
man's own son, which he has had all the trouble and all the anxi-ety
and all the ex-pense of rais-ing.  Yes, just as that man has got that
son raised at last, and ready to go to work and be-gin to do suthin' for
_him_ and give him a rest, the law up and goes for him.  And they call
_that_ gov-ment!  That ain't all, nuther.  The law backs that old Judge
Thatcher up and helps him to keep me out o' my prop-erty.  Here's what
the law does:  The law takes a man worth six thou-sand dol-lars and
up'ards, and jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this, and lets
him go round in clothes that ain't fit-ten for a hog. They call that
gov-ment!  A man can't get his rights in a gov-ment like this. So-me-times
I've a mighty no-tion to just leave the coun-try for good and all. Yes,
and I _told_ 'em so; I told old Thatcher so to his face.  Lots of 'em
heard me, and can tell what I said.  Says I, for two cents I'd leave the
blamed coun-try and never come a-near it agin.  Them's the very words.  I
says look at my hat--if you call it a hat--but the lid raises up and the
rest of it goes down till it's be-low my chin, and then it ain't rightly
a hat at all, but more like my head was shoved up through a jint o'
stove-pipe.  Look at it, says I--such a hat for me to wear--one of the
wealth-i-est men in this town if I could git my rights.

“Oh, yes, this is a won-der-ful gov-ment, won-der-ful.  Why, looky here.
There was a free nig-ger there from Ohio--a mu-lat-ter, most as white as
a white man.  He had the whitest shirt on you ever see, too, and the
shi-ni-est hat; and there ain't a man in that town that's got as fine
clothes as what he had; and he had a gold watch and chain, and a
sil-ver-headed cane--the aw-fulest old gray-headed na-bob in the State.  And
what do you think?  They said he was a p'fessor in a col-lege, and could
talk all kinds of lan-guages, and knowed everything.  And that ain't the
wust. They said he could _vote_ when he was at home.  Well, that let me
out. Thinks I, what is the coun-try a-com-ing to?  It was 'lec-tion day,
and I was just about to go and vote my-self if I warn't too drunk to get
there; but when they told me there was a State in this coun-try where
they'd let that nig-ger vote, I drawed out.  I says I'll never vote agin.
 Them's the very words I said; they all heard me; and the coun-try may
rot for all me--I'll never vote agin as long as I live.  And to see the
cool way of that nig-ger--why, he wouldn't a give me the road if I hadn't
shoved him out o' the way.  I says to the people, why ain't this nig-ger
put up at auc-tion and sold?--that's what I want to know.  And what do you
reckon they said? Why, they said he couldn't be sold till he'd been in
the State six months, and he hadn't been there that long yet.  There,
now--that's a spe-ci-men.  They call that a gov-ment that can't sell a free
nig-ger till he's been in the State six months.  Here's a gov-ment that
calls it-self a gov-ment, and lets on to be a gov-ment, and thinks it is a
gov-ment, and yet's got to set stock-still for six whole months be-fore
it can take a hold of a prowl-ing, thiev-ing, in-fernal, white-shir-ted free
nig-ger, and--”

Pap was ago-ing on so he never no-ticed where his old limber legs was
tak-ing him to, so he went head over heels over the tub of salt pork and
barked both shins, and the rest of his speech was all the hot-test kind
of lan-guage--mostly hove at the nig-ger and the gov-ment, though he give
the tub some, too, all along, here and there.  He hopped around the
cabin con-sid-er-able, first on one leg and then on the other, hold-ing
first one shin and then the other one, and at last he let out with his
left foot all of a sud-den and fetched the tub a rat-tling kick.  But it
warn't good judg-ment, be-cause that was the boot that had a couple of his
toes leak-ing out of the front end of it; so now he raised a howl that
fairly made a body's hair raise, and down he went in the dirt, and
rolled there, and held his toes; and the cuss-ing he done then laid over
any-thing he had ever done pre-vi-ous.  He said so his own self af-ter-wards.
 He had heard old Sow-berry Hagan in his best days, and he said it laid
over him, too; but I reckon that was sort of pil-ing it on, maybe.

After sup-per pap took the jug, and said he had enough whisky there
for two drunks and one de-li-rium tre-mens.  That was al-ways his word.  I
judged he would be blind drunk in about an hour, and then I would steal
the key, or saw my-self out, one or t'other.  He drank and drank, and
tumbled down on his blankets by and by; but luck didn't run my way.
 He didn't go sound asleep, but was un-easy.  He groaned and moaned and
thrashed around this way and that for a long time.  At last I got so
sleepy I couldn't keep my eyes open all I could do, and so be-fore I
knowed what I was about I was sound asleep, and the candle burn-ing.

I don't know how long I was asleep, but all of a sud-den there was an
aw-ful scream and I was up.  There was pap look-ing wild, and skip-ping
around every which way and yelling about snakes.  He said they was
crawl-ing up his legs; and then he would give a jump and scream, and say
one had bit him on the cheek--but I couldn't see no snakes.  He star-ted
and run round and round the cabin, holler-ing “Take him off! take him
off! he's bit-ing me on the neck!”  I never see a man look so wild in the
eyes. Pretty soon he was all fagged out, and fell down pant-ing; then he
rolled over and over won-der-ful fast, kick-ing things every which way,
and strik-ing and grabbing at the air with his hands, and scream-ing and
say-ing there was dev-ils a-hold of him.  He wore out by and by, and laid
still a while, moan-ing.  Then he laid stil-ler, and didn't make a sound.
 I could hear the owls and the wolves away off in the woods, and it
seemed ter-rible still.  He was lay-ing over by the corner. By and by he
raised up part way and listened, with his head to one side.  He says,
very low:

“Tramp--tramp--tramp; that's the dead; tramp--tramp--tramp; they're com-ing
after me; but I won't go.  Oh, they're here! don't touch me--don't! hands
off--they're cold; let go.  Oh, let a poor devil alone!”

Then he went down on all fours and crawled off, beg-ging them to let him
alone, and he rolled him-self up in his blanket and wal-lowed in un-der the
old pine table, still a-beg-ging; and then he went to cry-ing.  I could
hear him through the blanket.

By and by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet look-ing wild, and he
see me and went for me.  He chased me round and round the place with a
clasp-knife, call-ing me the An-gel of Death, and say-ing he would kill me,
and then I couldn't come for him no more.  I begged, and told him I
was only Huck; but he laughed _such_ a screechy laugh, and roared and
cussed, and kept on chas-ing me up.  Once when I turned short and
dodged un-der his arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my
shoulders, and I thought I was gone; but I slid out of the jacket quick
as light-ning, and saved my-self. Pretty soon he was all tired out, and
dropped down with his back against the door, and said he would rest a
minute and then kill me. He put his knife un-der him, and said he would
sleep and get strong, and then he would see who was who.

So he dozed off pretty soon.  By and by I got the old split-bot-tom chair
and clumb up as easy as I could, not to make any noise, and got down the
gun.  I slipped the ram-rod down it to make sure it was loaded, then I
laid it across the turnip bar-rel, point-ing to-wards pap, and set down
be-hind it to wait for him to stir.  And how slow and still the time did
drag along.




CHAPTER VII.

“GIT up!  What you 'bout?”

I opened my eyes and looked around, try-ing to make out where I was.  It
was after sun-up, and I had been sound asleep.  Pap was stand-ing over me
look-ing sour and sick, too.  He says:

“What you doin' with this gun?”

I judged he didn't know noth-ing about what he had been do-ing, so I says:

“Some-body tried to get in, so I was lay-ing for him.”

“Why didn't you roust me out?”

“Well, I tried to, but I couldn't; I couldn't budge you.”

“Well, all right.  Don't stand there pa-laver-ing all day, but out with
you and see if there's a fish on the lines for break-fast.  I'll be along
in a minute.”

He un-locked the door, and I cleared out up the river-bank.  I no-ticed
some pieces of limbs and such things float-ing down, and a sprink-ling of
bark; so I knowed the river had be-gun to rise.  I reckoned I would have
great times now if I was over at the town.  The June rise used to be
al-ways luck for me; be-cause as soon as that rise be-gins here comes
cord-wood float-ing down, and pieces of log rafts--some-times a dozen logs
to-gether; so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them to the
wood-yards and the saw-mill.

I went along up the bank with one eye out for pap and t'other one out
for what the rise might fetch along.  Well, all at once here comes a
ca-noe; just a beauty, too, about thir-teen or four-teen foot long, rid-ing
high like a duck.  I shot head-first off of the bank like a frog,
clothes and all on, and struck out for the ca-noe.  I just ex-pec-ted
there'd be some-body lay-ing down in it, be-cause people of-ten done that
to fool folks, and when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they'd
raise up and laugh at him.  But it warn't so this time.  It was a
drift-ca-noe sure enough, and I clumb in and paddled her ashore.  Thinks
I, the old man will be glad when he sees this--she's worth ten dol-lars.
 But when I got to shore pap wasn't in sight yet, and as I was run-ning
her into a little creek like a gully, all hung over with vines and
wil-lows, I struck an-other idea:  I judged I'd hide her good, and then,
'stead of tak-ing to the woods when I run off, I'd go down the river
about fifty mile and camp in one place for good, and not have such a
rough time tramp-ing on foot.

It was pretty close to the shanty, and I thought I heard the old man
com-ing all the time; but I got her hid; and then I out and looked around
a bunch of wil-lows, and there was the old man down the path a piece just
draw-ing a bead on a bird with his gun.  So he hadn't seen any-thing.

When he got along I was hard at it tak-ing up a “trot” line.  He ab-used
me a little for be-ing so slow; but I told him I fell in the river, and
that was what made me so long.  I knowed he would see I was wet, and
then he would be ask-ing ques-tions.  We got five cat-fish off the lines
and went home.

While we laid off after break-fast to sleep up, both of us be-ing about
wore out, I got to think-ing that if I could fix up some way to keep pap
and the widow from try-ing to fol-low me, it would be a cer-tainer thing
than trust-ing to luck to get far enough off be-fore they missed me; you
see, all kinds of things might hap-pen.  Well, I didn't see no way for a
while, but by and by pap raised up a minute to drink an-other bar-rel of
wa-ter, and he says:

“Another time a man comes a-prowl-ing round here you roust me out, you
hear? That man warn't here for no good.  I'd a shot him.  Next time you
roust me out, you hear?”

Then he dropped down and went to sleep again; but what he had been
say-ing give me the very idea I wanted.  I says to my-self, I can fix it
now so nobody won't think of fol-low-ing me.

About twelve o'clock we turned out and went along up the bank.  The
river was com-ing up pretty fast, and lots of drift-wood go-ing by on the
rise. By and by along comes part of a log raft--nine logs fast to-gether.
 We went out with the skiff and towed it ashore.  Then we had din-ner.
Anybody but pap would a waited and seen the day through, so as to catch
more stuff; but that warn't pap's style.  Nine logs was enough for one
time; he must shove right over to town and sell.  So he locked me in and
took the skiff, and star-ted off tow-ing the raft about half-past three.
 I judged he wouldn't come back that night.  I waited till I reckoned he
had got a good start; then I out with my saw, and went to work on that
log again.  Be-fore he was t'other side of the river I was out of the
hole; him and his raft was just a speck on the wa-ter away off yon-der.

I took the sack of corn meal and took it to where the ca-noe was hid, and
shoved the vines and branches apart and put it in; then I done the same
with the side of ba-con; then the whisky-jug.  I took all the cof-fee and
sugar there was, and all the am-muni-tion; I took the wad-ding; I took the
bucket and gourd; I took a dip-per and a tin cup, and my old saw and two
blankets, and the skil-let and the cof-fee-pot.  I took fish-lines and
matches and other things--everything that was worth a cent.  I cleaned
out the place.  I wanted an axe, but there wasn't any, only the one out
at the wood-pile, and I knowed why I was go-ing to leave that.  I fetched
out the gun, and now I was done.

I had wore the ground a good deal crawl-ing out of the hole and drag-ging
out so many things.  So I fixed that as good as I could from the out-side
by scat-ter-ing dust on the place, which covered up the smooth-ness and the
saw-dust.  Then I fixed the piece of log back into its place, and put two
rocks un-der it and one against it to hold it there, for it was bent up
at that place and didn't quite touch ground.  If you stood four or five
foot away and didn't know it was sawed, you wouldn't never no-tice
it; and be-sides, this was the back of the cabin, and it warn't likely
any-body would go fool-ing around there.

It was all grass clear to the ca-noe, so I hadn't left a track.  I
fol-lowed around to see.  I stood on the bank and looked out over the
river.  All safe.  So I took the gun and went up a piece into the woods,
and was hunt-ing around for some birds when I see a wild pig; hogs soon
went wild in them bot-toms after they had got away from the prairie
farms. I shot this fel-low and took him into camp.

I took the axe and smashed in the door.  I beat it and hacked it
con-sid-er-able a-do-ing it.  I fetched the pig in, and took him back nearly
to the table and hacked into his throat with the axe, and laid him down
on the ground to bleed; I say ground be-cause it was ground--hard packed,
and no boards.  Well, next I took an old sack and put a lot of big rocks
in it--all I could drag--and I star-ted it from the pig, and dragged it to
the door and through the woods down to the river and dumped it in, and
down it sunk, out of sight.  You could easy see that some-thing had been
dragged over the ground.  I did wish Tom Saw-yer was there; I knowed he
would take an in-terest in this kind of busi-ness, and throw in the fancy
touches.  Nobody could spread him-self like Tom Saw-yer in such a thing as
that.

Well, last I pulled out some of my hair, and blooded the axe good, and
stuck it on the back side, and slung the axe in the corner.  Then I
took up the pig and held him to my breast with my jacket (so he couldn't
drip) till I got a good piece be-low the house and then dumped him into
the river.  Now I thought of some-thing else.  So I went and got the bag
of meal and my old saw out of the ca-noe, and fetched them to the house.
 I took the bag to where it used to stand, and ripped a hole in the
bot-tom of it with the saw, for there warn't no knives and forks on the
place--pap done everything with his clasp-knife about the cook-ing.  Then
I car-ried the sack about a hun-dred yards across the grass and through
the wil-lows east of the house, to a shal-low lake that was five mile wide
and full of rushes--and ducks too, you might say, in the sea-son.  There
was a slough or a creek lead-ing out of it on the other side that went
miles away, I don't know where, but it didn't go to the river.  The meal
sifted out and made a little track all the way to the lake.  I dropped
pap's whet-stone there too, so as to look like it had been done by
ac-ci-dent. Then I tied up the rip in the meal sack with a string, so it
wouldn't leak no more, and took it and my saw to the ca-noe again.

It was about dark now; so I dropped the ca-noe down the river un-der some
wil-lows that hung over the bank, and waited for the moon to rise.  I
made fast to a wil-low; then I took a bite to eat, and by and by laid
down in the ca-noe to smoke a pipe and lay out a plan.  I says to my-self,
they'll fol-low the track of that sack-ful of rocks to the shore and then
drag the river for me.  And they'll fol-low that meal track to the lake
and go brows-ing down the creek that leads out of it to find the rob-bers
that killed me and took the things.  They won't ever hunt the river for
any-thing but my dead car-cass. They'll soon get tired of that, and won't
bother no more about me.  All right; I can stop any-where I want to.
Jack-son's Is-land is good enough for me; I know that is-land pretty well,
and nobody ever comes there.  And then I can paddle over to town nights,
and slink around and pick up things I want. Jack-son's Is-land's the
place.

I was pretty tired, and the first thing I knowed I was asleep.  When
I woke up I didn't know where I was for a minute.  I set up and looked
around, a little scared.  Then I re-membered.  The river looked miles and
miles across.  The moon was so bright I could a coun-ted the drift logs
that went a-slip-ping along, black and still, hun-dreds of yards out from
shore. Everything was dead quiet, and it looked late, and _s-melt_ late.
You know what I mean--I don't know the words to put it in.

I took a good gap and a stretch, and was just go-ing to un-hitch and start
when I heard a sound away over the wa-ter.  I listened.  Pretty soon I
made it out.  It was that dull kind of a reg-u-lar sound that comes from
oars work-ing in row-locks when it's a still night.  I peeped out through
the wil-low branches, and there it was--a skiff, away across the wa-ter.
 I couldn't tell how many was in it.  It kept a-com-ing, and when it was
abreast of me I see there warn't but one man in it.  Think's I, maybe
it's pap, though I warn't ex-pect-ing him.  He dropped be-low me with the
cur-rent, and by and by he came a-swinging up shore in the easy wa-ter,
and he went by so close I could a reached out the gun and touched him.
 Well, it _was_ pap, sure enough--and sober, too, by the way he laid his
oars.

I didn't lose no time.  The next minute I was a-spin-ning down stream
soft but quick in the shade of the bank.  I made two mile and a half,
and then struck out a quarter of a mile or more to-wards the middle of
the river, be-cause pretty soon I would be passing the ferry land-ing, and
people might see me and hail me.  I got out amongst the drift-wood, and
then laid down in the bot-tom of the ca-noe and let her float.

 I laid there, and had a good rest and a smoke out of my pipe, look-ing
away into the sky; not a cloud in it.  The sky looks ever so deep when
you lay down on your back in the moon-shine; I never knowed it be-fore.
 And how far a body can hear on the wa-ter such nights!  I heard people
talk-ing at the ferry land-ing. I heard what they said, too--every word
of it.  One man said it was get-ting to-wards the long days and the short
nights now.  T'other one said _this_ warn't one of the short ones, he
reckoned--and then they laughed, and he said it over again, and they
laughed again; then they waked up an-other fel-low and told him, and
laughed, but he didn't laugh; he ripped out some-thing brisk, and said
let him alone.  The first fel-low said he 'lowed to tell it to his
old wo-man--she would think it was pretty good; but he said that warn't
noth-ing to some things he had said in his time. I heard one man say it
was nearly three o'clock, and he hoped day-light wouldn't wait more than
about a week longer.  After that the talk got fur-ther and fur-ther away,
and I couldn't make out the words any more; but I could hear the mumble,
and now and then a laugh, too, but it seemed a long ways off.

I was away be-low the ferry now.  I rose up, and there was Jack-son's
Is-land, about two mile and a half down stream, heavy timbered and
stand-ing up out of the middle of the river, big and dark and solid, like
a steam-boat without any lights.  There warn't any signs of the bar at
the head--it was all un-der wa-ter now.

It didn't take me long to get there.  I shot past the head at a rip-ping
rate, the cur-rent was so swift, and then I got into the dead wa-ter and
landed on the side to-wards the Illinois shore.  I run the ca-noe into
a deep dent in the bank that I knowed about; I had to part the wil-low
branches to get in; and when I made fast nobody could a seen the ca-noe
from the out-side.

I went up and set down on a log at the head of the is-land, and looked
out on the big river and the black drift-wood and away over to the town,
three mile away, where there was three or four lights twink-ling.  A
mon-strous big lum-ber-raft was about a mile up stream, com-ing along down,
with a lan-tern in the middle of it.  I watched it come creep-ing down,
and when it was most abreast of where I stood I heard a man say, “Stern
oars, there! heave her head to stab-board!”  I heard that just as plain
as if the man was by my side.

There was a little gray in the sky now; so I stepped into the woods, and
laid down for a nap be-fore break-fast.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE sun was up so high when I waked that I judged it was after eight
o'clock.  I laid there in the grass and the cool shade think-ing about
things, and feel-ing res-ted and ruther com-fort-able and sat-is-fied.  I
could see the sun out at one or two holes, but mostly it was big trees
all about, and gloomy in there amongst them.  There was freckled places
on the ground where the light sifted down through the leaves, and the
freckled places swapped about a little, show-ing there was a little
breeze up there.  A couple of squir-rels set on a limb and jab-bered at me
very friendly.

I was power-ful lazy and com-fort-able--didn't want to get up and cook
break-fast.  Well, I was doz-ing off again when I thinks I hears a deep
sound of “boom!” away up the river.  I rouses up, and rests on my el-bow
and listens; pretty soon I hears it again.  I hopped up, and went and
looked out at a hole in the leaves, and I see a bunch of smoke lay-ing
on the wa-ter a long ways up--about abreast the ferry.  And there was the
ferry-boat full of people float-ing along down.  I knowed what was the
mat-ter now.  “Boom!” I see the white smoke squirt out of the ferry-boat's
side.  You see, they was fir-ing can-non over the wa-ter, try-ing to make my
car-cass come to the top.

I was pretty hungry, but it warn't go-ing to do for me to start a fire,
be-cause they might see the smoke.  So I set there and watched the
can-non-smoke and listened to the boom.  The river was a mile wide there,
and it al-ways looks pretty on a sum-mer morn-ing--so I was hav-ing a good
enough time see-ing them hunt for my re-main-ders if I only had a bite to
eat. Well, then I happened to think how they al-ways put quick-sil-ver in
loaves of bread and float them off, be-cause they al-ways go right to the
drown-ded car-cass and stop there.  So, says I, I'll keep a lookout, and
if any of them's float-ing around after me I'll give them a show.  I
changed to the Illinois edge of the is-land to see what luck I could
have, and I warn't dis-ap-poin-ted.  A big double loaf come along, and I
most got it with a long stick, but my foot slipped and she floated out
fur-ther.  Of course I was where the cur-rent set in the closest to the
shore--I knowed enough for that.  But by and by along comes an-other one,
and this time I won.  I took out the plug and shook out the little dab
of quick-sil-ver, and set my teeth in.  It was “baker's bread”--what the
qual-ity eat; none of your low-down corn-pone.

I got a good place amongst the leaves, and set there on a log, munch-ing
the bread and watch-ing the ferry-boat, and very well sat-is-fied.  And
then some-thing struck me.  I says, now I reckon the widow or the par-son
or some-body prayed that this bread would find me, and here it has gone
and done it.  So there ain't no doubt but there is some-thing in that
thing--that is, there's some-thing in it when a body like the widow or the
par-son prays, but it don't work for me, and I reckon it don't work for
only just the right kind.

I lit a pipe and had a good long smoke, and went on watch-ing.  The
ferry-boat was float-ing with the cur-rent, and I al-lowed I'd have a chance
to see who was aboard when she come along, be-cause she would come in
close, where the bread did.  When she'd got pretty well along down
to-wards me, I put out my pipe and went to where I fished out the bread,
and laid down be-hind a log on the bank in a little open place.  Where
the log forked I could peep through.

By and by she come along, and she drif-ted in so close that they could
a run out a plank and walked ashore.  Most every-body was on the boat.
 Pap, and Judge Thatcher, and Bessie Thatcher, and Jo Harper, and Tom
Saw-yer, and his old Aunt Polly, and Sid and Mary, and plenty more.
 Every-body was talk-ing about the murder, but the cap-tain broke in and
says:

“Look sharp, now; the cur-rent sets in the closest here, and maybe he's
washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush at the wa-ter's edge.  I
hope so, any-way.”

I didn't hope so.  They all crowded up and leaned over the rails, nearly
in my face, and kept still, watch-ing with all their might.  I could see
them first-rate, but they couldn't see me.  Then the cap-tain sung out:

“Stand away!” and the can-non let off such a blast right be-fore me that
it made me deef with the noise and pretty near blind with the smoke, and
I judged I was gone.  If they'd a had some bul-lets in, I reckon they'd
a got the corpse they was after.  Well, I see I warn't hurt, thanks to
good-ness. The boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder
of the is-land.  I could hear the boom-ing now and then, fur-ther and
fur-ther off, and by and by, after an hour, I didn't hear it no more.
 The is-land was three mile long.  I judged they had got to the foot, and
was giv-ing it up.  But they didn't yet a while.  They turned around
the foot of the is-land and star-ted up the chan-nel on the Mis-souri side,
un-der steam, and boom-ing once in a while as they went.  I crossed over
to that side and watched them. When they got abreast the head of the
is-land they quit shoot-ing and dropped over to the Mis-souri shore and
went home to the town.

I knowed I was all right now.  Nobody else would come a-hunt-ing after
me. I got my traps out of the ca-noe and made me a nice camp in the thick
woods.  I made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my things
un-der so the rain couldn't get at them.  I catched a cat-fish and haggled
him open with my saw, and to-wards sun-down I star-ted my camp fire and had
sup-per.  Then I set out a line to catch some fish for break-fast.

When it was dark I set by my camp fire smoking, and feel-ing pretty well
sat-is-fied; but by and by it got sort of lone-some, and so I went and set
on the bank and listened to the cur-rent swash-ing along, and coun-ted the
stars and drift logs and rafts that come down, and then went to bed;
there ain't no bet-ter way to put in time when you are lone-some; you
can't stay so, you soon get over it.

And so for three days and nights.  No dif-fer-ence--just the same thing.
But the next day I went ex-plor-ing around down through the is-land.  I was
boss of it; it all be-longed to me, so to say, and I wanted to know
all about it; but mainly I wanted to put in the time.  I found plenty
straw-ber-ries, ripe and prime; and green sum-mer grapes, and green
raz-ber-ries; and the green black-ber-ries was just be-gin-ning to show.  They
would all come handy by and by, I judged.

Well, I went fool-ing along in the deep woods till I judged I warn't
far from the foot of the is-land.  I had my gun along, but I hadn't shot
noth-ing; it was for pro-tec-tion; thought I would kill some game nigh
home. About this time I mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake,
and it went slid-ing off through the grass and flowers, and I after
it, try-ing to get a shot at it. I clipped along, and all of a sud-den I
bounded right on to the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking.

My heart jumped up amongst my lungs.  I never waited for to look
fur-ther, but un-cocked my gun and went sneak-ing back on my tip-toes as
fast as ever I could.  Every now and then I stopped a second amongst the
thick leaves and listened, but my breath come so hard I couldn't hear
noth-ing else.  I slunk along an-other piece fur-ther, then listened again;
and so on, and so on.  If I see a stump, I took it for a man; if I trod
on a stick and broke it, it made me feel like a per-son had cut one of my
breaths in two and I only got half, and the short half, too.

When I got to camp I warn't feel-ing very brash, there warn't much sand
in my craw; but I says, this ain't no time to be fool-ing around.  So I
got all my traps into my ca-noe again so as to have them out of sight,
and I put out the fire and scattered the ashes around to look like an
old last year's camp, and then clumb a tree.

I reckon I was up in the tree two hours; but I didn't see noth-ing,
I didn't hear noth-ing--I only _thought_ I heard and seen as much as a
thou-sand things.  Well, I couldn't stay up there forever; so at last I
got down, but I kept in the thick woods and on the lookout all the
time. All I could get to eat was ber-ries and what was left over from
break-fast.

By the time it was night I was pretty hungry.  So when it was good
and dark I slid out from shore be-fore moon-rise and paddled over to the
Illinois bank--about a quarter of a mile.  I went out in the woods and
cooked a sup-per, and I had about made up my mind I would stay there
all night when I hear a _plun-kety-plunk, plun-kety-plunk_, and says
to my-self, horses com-ing; and next I hear people's voices.  I got
everything into the ca-noe as quick as I could, and then went creep-ing
through the woods to see what I could find out.  I hadn't got far when I
hear a man say:

“We bet-ter camp here if we can find a good place; the horses is about
beat out.  Let's look around.”

I didn't wait, but shoved out and paddled away easy.  I tied up in the
old place, and reckoned I would sleep in the ca-noe.

I didn't sleep much.  I couldn't, some-how, for think-ing.  And every time
I waked up I thought some-body had me by the neck.  So the sleep didn't
do me no good.  By and by I says to my-self, I can't live this way; I'm
a-go-ing to find out who it is that's here on the is-land with me; I'll
find it out or bust.  Well, I felt bet-ter right off.

So I took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two, and
then let the ca-noe drop along down amongst the shad-ows.  The moon was
shin-ing, and out-side of the shad-ows it made it most as light as day.
 I poked along well on to an hour, everything still as rocks and sound
asleep. Well, by this time I was most down to the foot of the is-land.  A
little ripply, cool breeze be-gun to blow, and that was as good as say-ing
the night was about done.  I give her a turn with the paddle and brung
her nose to shore; then I got my gun and slipped out and into the edge
of the woods.  I sat down there on a log, and looked out through the
leaves.  I see the moon go off watch, and the dark-ness be-gin to blanket
the river. But in a little while I see a pale streak over the tree-tops,
and knowed the day was com-ing.  So I took my gun and slipped off to-wards
where I had run across that camp fire, stop-ping every minute or two
to listen.  But I hadn't no luck some-how; I couldn't seem to find the
place.  But by and by, sure enough, I catched a glimpse of fire away
through the trees.  I went for it, cau-tious and slow.  By and by I was
close enough to have a look, and there laid a man on the ground.  It
most give me the fan-tods. He had a blanket around his head, and his
head was nearly in the fire.  I set there be-hind a clump of bushes, in
about six foot of him, and kept my eyes on him steady.  It was get-ting
gray day-light now.  Pretty soon he gapped and stretched him-self and hove
off the blanket, and it was Miss Wat-son's Jim!  I bet I was glad to see
him.  I says:

“Hello, Jim!” and skipped out.

He bounced up and stared at me wild.  Then he drops down on his knees,
and puts his hands to-gether and says:

“Doan' hurt me--don't!  I hain't ever done no harm to a ghos'.  I al-wuz
liked dead people, en done all I could for 'em.  You go en git in de
river agin, whah you b'longs, en doan' do nuffn to Ole Jim, 'at 'uz
awluz yo' fren'.”

Well, I warn't long mak-ing him un-der-stand I warn't dead.  I was ever so
glad to see Jim.  I warn't lone-some now.  I told him I warn't afraid of
_him_ telling the people where I was.  I talked along, but he only set
there and looked at me; never said noth-ing.  Then I says:

“It's good day-light.  Le's get break-fast.  Make up your camp fire good.”

“What's de use er makin' up de camp fire to cook straw-bries en sich
truck? But you got a gun, hain't you?  Den we kin git sumfn bet-ter den
straw-bries.”

“Straw-ber-ries and such truck,” I says.  “Is that what you live on?”

“I couldn' git nuffn else,” he says.

“Why, how long you been on the is-land, Jim?”

“I come heah de night arter you's killed.”

“What, all that time?”

“Yes--in-deedy.”

“And ain't you had noth-ing but that kind of rub-bage to eat?”

“No, sah--nuffn else.”

“Well, you must be most starved, ain't you?”

“I reck'n I could eat a hoss.  I think I could. How long you ben on de
is-lan'?”

“Since the night I got killed.”

“No!  W'y, what has you lived on?  But you got a gun.  Oh, yes, you got
a gun.  Dat's good.  Now you kill sumfn en I'll make up de fire.”

So we went over to where the ca-noe was, and while he built a fire in
a grassy open place amongst the trees, I fetched meal and ba-con and
cof-fee, and cof-fee-pot and fry-ing-pan, and sugar and tin cups, and the
nig-ger was set back con-sid-er-able, be-cause he reckoned it was all done
with witch-craft. I catched a good big cat-fish, too, and Jim cleaned him
with his knife, and fried him.

When break-fast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot.
Jim laid it in with all his might, for he was most about starved.  Then
when we had got pretty well stuffed, we laid off and lazied.  By and by
Jim says:

“But looky here, Huck, who wuz it dat 'uz killed in dat shanty ef it
warn't you?”

Then I told him the whole thing, and he said it was smart.  He said Tom
Saw-yer couldn't get up no bet-ter plan than what I had.  Then I says:

“How do you come to be here, Jim, and how'd you get here?”

He looked pretty un-easy, and didn't say noth-ing for a minute.  Then he
says:

“Maybe I bet-ter not tell.”

“Why, Jim?”

“Well, dey's reas-ons.  But you wouldn' tell on me ef I uz to tell you,
would you, Huck?”

“Blamed if I would, Jim.”

“Well, I b'lieve you, Huck.  I--_I run off_.”

“Jim!”

“But mind, you said you wouldn' tell--you know you said you wouldn' tell,
Huck.”

“Well, I did.  I said I wouldn't, and I'll stick to it.  Hon-est _in-jun_,
I will.  People would call me a low-down Abol-i-tion-ist and des-pise me for
keep-ing mum--but that don't make no dif-fer-ence.  I ain't a-go-ing to tell,
and I ain't a-go-ing back there, any-ways.  So, now, le's know all about
it.”

“Well, you see, it 'uz dis way.  Ole mis-sus--dat's Miss Wat-son--she pecks
on me all de time, en treats me pooty rough, but she awluz said she
wouldn' sell me down to Or-leans.  But I no-ticed dey wuz a nig-ger trader
roun' de place con-sid-able lately, en I be-gin to git oneasy.  Well, one
night I creeps to de do' pooty late, en de do' warn't quite shet, en I
hear old mis-sus tell de wid-der she gwyne to sell me down to Or-leans, but
she didn' want to, but she could git eight hund'd dol-lars for me, en it
'uz sich a big stack o' money she couldn' resis'.  De wid-der she try to
git her to say she wouldn' do it, but I never waited to hear de res'.  I
lit out mighty quick, I tell you.

“I tuck out en shin down de hill, en 'spec to steal a skift 'long de
sho' som'ers 'bove de town, but dey wuz people a-stir-ring yit, so I hid
in de ole tumble-down cooper-shop on de bank to wait for every-body to
go 'way. Well, I wuz dah all night.  Dey wuz some-body roun' all de time.
 'Long 'bout six in de mawnin' skifts be-gin to go by, en 'bout eight er
nine every skift dat went 'long wuz talkin' 'bout how yo' pap come over
to de town en say you's killed.  Dese las' skifts wuz full o' ladies en
gen-l-men a-goin' over for to see de place.  So-me-times dey'd pull up at
de sho' en take a res' b'fo' dey star-ted ac-rost, so by de talk I got to
know all 'bout de kil-lin'.  I 'uz power-ful sorry you's killed, Huck, but
I ain't no mo' now.

“I laid dah un-der de shavin's all day.  I 'uz hungry, but I warn't
afeard; bekase I knowed ole mis-sus en de wid-der wuz goin' to start to
de camp-meet'n' right arter break-fas' en be gone all day, en dey knows
I goes off wid de cattle 'bout day-light, so dey wouldn' 'spec to see me
roun' de place, en so dey wouldn' miss me tell arter dark in de evenin'.
De yuther ser-vants wouldn' miss me, kase dey'd shin out en take hol-i-day
soon as de ole folks 'uz out'n de way.

“Well, when it come dark I tuck out up de river road, en went 'bout two
mile er more to whah dey warn't no houses.  I'd made up my mine 'bout
what I's ag-wyne to do.  You see, ef I kep' on tryin' to git away afoot,
de dogs 'ud track me; ef I stole a skift to cross over, dey'd miss dat
skift, you see, en dey'd know 'bout whah I'd lan' on de yuther side, en
whah to pick up my track.  So I says, a raff is what I's arter; it doan'
_make_ no track.

“I see a light a-comin' roun' de p'int by-meby, so I wade' in en shove'
a log ahead o' me en swum more'n half way ac-rost de river, en got in
'mongst de drift-wood, en kep' my head down low, en kinder swum agin de
cur-rent tell de raff come along.  Den I swum to de stern uv it en tuck
a-holt.  It clouded up en 'uz pooty dark for a little while.  So I clumb
up en laid down on de planks.  De men 'uz all 'way yon-der in de middle,
whah de lan-tern wuz.  De river wuz a-risin', en dey wuz a good cur-rent;
so I reck'n'd 'at by fo' in de mawnin' I'd be twenty-five mile down de
river, en den I'd slip in jis b'fo' day-light en swim asho', en take to
de woods on de Illinois side.

“But I didn' have no luck.  When we 'uz mos' down to de head er de
is-lan' a man be-gin to come aft wid de lan-tern, I see it warn't no use
fer to wait, so I slid over-board en struck out fer de is-lan'.  Well, I
had a no-tion I could lan' mos' any-whers, but I couldn't--bank too bluff.
 I 'uz mos' to de foot er de is-lan' b'fo' I found' a good place.  I went
into de woods en jedged I wouldn' fool wid raffs no mo', long as dey
move de lan-tern roun' so.  I had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg, en some
matches in my cap, en dey warn't wet, so I 'uz all right.”

“And so you ain't had no meat nor bread to eat all this time?  Why
didn't you get mud-turkles?”

“How you gwyne to git 'm?  You can't slip up on um en grab um; en how's
a body gwyne to hit um wid a rock?  How could a body do it in de night?
 En I warn't gwyne to show mysef on de bank in de day-time.”

“Well, that's so.  You've had to keep in the woods all the time, of
course. Did you hear 'em shoot-ing the can-non?”

“Oh, yes.  I knowed dey was arter you.  I see um go by heah--watched um
thoo de bushes.”

Some young birds come along, fly-ing a yard or two at a time and
light-ing. Jim said it was a sign it was go-ing to rain.  He said it was
a sign when young chick-ens flew that way, and so he reckoned it was the
same way when young birds done it.  I was go-ing to catch some of them,
but Jim wouldn't let me.  He said it was death.  He said his father laid
mighty sick once, and some of them catched a bird, and his old granny
said his father would die, and he did.

And Jim said you mustn't count the things you are go-ing to cook for
din-ner, be-cause that would bring bad luck.  The same if you shook the
table-cloth after sun-down.  And he said if a man owned a bee-hive
and that man died, the bees must be told about it be-fore sun-up next
morn-ing, or else the bees would all weaken down and quit work and die.
 Jim said bees wouldn't sting idi-ots; but I didn't be-lieve that, be-cause
I had tried them lots of times my-self, and they wouldn't sting me.

I had heard about some of these things be-fore, but not all of them.  Jim
knowed all kinds of signs.  He said he knowed most everything.  I said
it looked to me like all the signs was about bad luck, and so I asked
him if there warn't any good-luck signs.  He says:

“Mighty few--an' _dey_ ain't no use to a body.  What you want to know
when good luck's a-comin' for?  Want to keep it off?”  And he said:  “Ef
you's got hairy arms en a hairy breas', it's a sign dat you's ag-wyne
to be rich. Well, dey's some use in a sign like dat, 'kase it's so fur
ahead. You see, maybe you's got to be po' a long time fust, en so you
might git dis-cour-age' en kill yo'sef 'f you didn' know by de sign dat
you gwyne to be rich by-meby.”

“Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast, Jim?”

“What's de use to ax dat ques-tion?  Don't you see I has?”

“Well, are you rich?”

“No, but I ben rich wunst, and gwyne to be rich agin.  Wunst I had
foteen dol-lars, but I tuck to specalat'n', en got bus-ted out.”

“What did you spec-u-late in, Jim?”

“Well, fust I tackled stock.”

“What kind of stock?”

“Why, live stock--cattle, you know.  I put ten dol-lars in a cow.  But
I ain' gwyne to resk no mo' money in stock.  De cow up 'n' died on my
han's.”

“So you lost the ten dol-lars.”

“No, I didn't lose it all.  I on'y los' 'bout nine of it.  I sole de
hide en taller for a dol-lar en ten cents.”

“You had five dol-lars and ten cents left.  Did you spec-u-late any more?”

“Yes.  You know that one-laigged nig-ger dat b'longs to old Misto
Bradish? Well, he sot up a bank, en say any-body dat put in a dol-lar
would git fo' dol-lars mo' at de en' er de year.  Well, all de nig-gers
went in, but dey didn't have much.  I wuz de on'y one dat had much.  So
I stuck out for mo' dan fo' dol-lars, en I said 'f I didn' git it I'd
start a bank mysef. Well, o' course dat nig-ger want' to keep me out er
de busi-ness, bekase he says dey warn't busi-ness 'nough for two banks, so
he say I could put in my five dol-lars en he pay me thirty-five at de en'
er de year.

“So I done it.  Den I reck'n'd I'd inves' de thirty-five dol-lars right
off en keep things a-movin'.  Dey wuz a nig-ger name' Bob, dat had
ketched a wood-flat, en his marster didn' know it; en I bought it off'n
him en told him to take de thirty-five dol-lars when de en' er de
year come; but some-body stole de wood-flat dat night, en nex day de
one-laigged nig-ger say de bank's bus-ted.  So dey didn' none uv us git no
money.”

“What did you do with the ten cents, Jim?”

“Well, I 'uz gwyne to spen' it, but I had a dream, en de dream tole me
to give it to a nig-ger name' Balum--Balum's Ass dey call him for short;
he's one er dem chuckle-heads, you know.  But he's lucky, dey say, en I
see I warn't lucky.  De dream say let Balum inves' de ten cents en he'd
make a raise for me.  Well, Balum he tuck de money, en when he wuz in
church he hear de preacher say dat who-ever give to de po' len' to de
Lord, en boun' to git his money back a hund'd times.  So Balum he tuck
en give de ten cents to de po', en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to
come of it.”

“Well, what did come of it, Jim?”

“Nuffn never come of it.  I couldn' man-age to k'leck dat money no way;
en Balum he couldn'.  I ain' gwyne to len' no mo' money 'dout I see de
se-cur-ity.  Boun' to git yo' money back a hund'd times, de preacher says!
Ef I could git de ten _cents_ back, I'd call it squah, en be glad er de
chanst.”

“Well, it's all right any-way, Jim, long as you're go-ing to be rich again
some time or other.”

“Yes; en I's rich now, come to look at it.  I owns mysef, en I's wuth
eight hund'd dol-lars.  I wisht I had de money, I wouldn' want no mo'.”




CHAPTER IX.

I wanted to go and look at a place right about the middle of the is-land
that I'd found when I was ex-plor-ing; so we star-ted and soon got to it,
be-cause the is-land was only three miles long and a quarter of a mile
wide.

This place was a tol-er-able long, steep hill or ridge about forty foot
high. We had a rough time get-ting to the top, the sides was so steep and
the bushes so thick.  We tramped and clumb around all over it, and by
and by found a good big cav-ern in the rock, most up to the top on the
side to-wards Illinois.  The cav-ern was as big as two or three rooms
bunched to-gether, and Jim could stand up straight in it.  It was cool in
there. Jim was for put-ting our traps in there right away, but I said we
didn't want to be climb-ing up and down there all the time.

Jim said if we had the ca-noe hid in a good place, and had all the traps
in the cav-ern, we could rush there if any-body was to come to the is-land,
and they would never find us without dogs.  And, be-sides, he said them
little birds had said it was go-ing to rain, and did I want the things to
get wet?

So we went back and got the ca-noe, and paddled up abreast the cav-ern,
and lugged all the traps up there.  Then we hunted up a place close by
to hide the ca-noe in, amongst the thick wil-lows.  We took some fish off
of the lines and set them again, and be-gun to get ready for din-ner.

The door of the cav-ern was big enough to roll a hogshead in, and on one
side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit, and was flat and a
good place to build a fire on.  So we built it there and cooked din-ner.

We spread the blankets in-side for a car-pet, and eat our din-ner in there.
We put all the other things handy at the back of the cav-ern.  Pretty
soon it darkened up, and be-gun to thun-der and lighten; so the birds was
right about it.  Dir-ectly it be-gun to rain, and it rained like all fury,
too, and I never see the wind blow so.  It was one of these reg-u-lar
sum-mer storms.  It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black
out-side, and lovely; and the rain would thrash along by so thick that
the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webby; and here would
come a blast of wind that would bend the trees down and turn up the
pale un-der-side of the leaves; and then a per-fect rip-per of a gust would
fol-low along and set the branches to toss-ing their arms as if they
was just wild; and next, when it was just about the bluest and
black-est--_FST_! it was as bright as glory, and you'd have a little
glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away off yon-der in the storm,
hun-dreds of yards fur-ther than you could see be-fore; dark as sin again
in a second, and now you'd hear the thun-der let go with an aw-ful crash,
and then go rum-bling, grumbling, tum-bling, down the sky to-wards the
un-der side of the world, like rolling empty bar-rels down stairs--where
it's long stairs and they bounce a good deal, you know.

“Jim, this is nice,” I says.  “I wouldn't want to be nowhere else but
here. Pass me along an-other hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread.”

“Well, you wouldn't a ben here 'f it hadn't a ben for Jim.  You'd a ben
down dah in de woods widout any din-ner, en gittn' mos' drown-ded, too;
dat you would, honey.  Chick-ens knows when it's gwyne to rain, en so do
de birds, chile.”

The river went on rais-ing and rais-ing for ten or twelve days, till at
last it was over the banks.  The wa-ter was three or four foot deep on
the is-land in the low places and on the Illinois bot-tom.  On that side
it was a good many miles wide, but on the Mis-souri side it was the same
old dis-tance across--a half a mile--be-cause the Mis-souri shore was just a
wall of high bluffs.

Day-times we paddled all over the is-land in the ca-noe, It was mighty cool
and shady in the deep woods, even if the sun was blaz-ing out-side.  We
went wind-ing in and out amongst the trees, and some-times the vines hung
so thick we had to back away and go some other way.  Well, on every old
broken-down tree you could see rab-bits and snakes and such things; and
when the is-land had been over-flowed a day or two they got so tame, on
ac-count of be-ing hungry, that you could paddle right up and put your
hand on them if you wanted to; but not the snakes and turtles--they would
slide off in the wa-ter.  The ridge our cav-ern was in was full of them.
We could a had pets enough if we'd wanted them.

One night we catched a little sec-tion of a lum-ber raft--nice pine planks.
It was twelve foot wide and about fif-teen or six-teen foot long, and
the top stood above wa-ter six or seven inches--a solid, level floor.  We
could see saw-logs go by in the day-light some-times, but we let them go;
we didn't show ourselves in day-light.

Another night when we was up at the head of the is-land, just be-fore
day-light, here comes a frame-house down, on the west side.  She was
a two-story, and tilted over con-sid-er-able.  We paddled out and got
aboard--clumb in at an up-stairs win-dow.  But it was too dark to see yet,
so we made the ca-noe fast and set in her to wait for day-light.

The light be-gun to come be-fore we got to the foot of the is-land.  Then
we looked in at the win-dow.  We could make out a bed, and a table, and
two old chairs, and lots of things around about on the floor, and there
was clothes hanging against the wall.  There was some-thing lay-ing on the
floor in the far corner that looked like a man.  So Jim says:

“Hello, you!”

But it didn't budge.  So I hollered again, and then Jim says:

“De man ain't asleep--he's dead.  You hold still--I'll go en see.”

He went, and bent down and looked, and says:

“It's a dead man.  Yes, in-deedy; na-ked, too.  He's ben shot in de back.
I reck'n he's ben dead two er three days.  Come in, Huck, but doan' look
at his face--it's too gashly.”

I didn't look at him at all.  Jim throwed some old rags over him, but
he needn't done it; I didn't want to see him.  There was heaps of old
greasy cards scattered around over the floor, and old whisky bottles,
and a couple of masks made out of black cloth; and all over the walls
was the ig-nor-antest kind of words and pic-tures made with char-coal.
 There was two old dirty calico dresses, and a sun-bon-net, and some
wo-men's un-der-clothes hanging against the wall, and some men's cloth-ing,
too.  We put the lot into the ca-noe--it might come good.  There was a
boy's old speckled straw hat on the floor; I took that, too.  And there
was a bottle that had had milk in it, and it had a rag stop-per for a
baby to suck.  We would a took the bottle, but it was broke.  There was
a seedy old chest, and an old hair trunk with the hinges broke.  They
stood open, but there warn't noth-ing left in them that was any ac-count.
 The way things was scattered about we reckoned the people left in a
hurry, and warn't fixed so as to carry off most of their stuff.

We got an old tin lan-tern, and a butcher-knife without any handle, and
a bran-new Bar-low knife worth two bits in any store, and a lot of tal-low
candles, and a tin can-dle-stick, and a gourd, and a tin cup, and a ratty
old bedquilt off the bed, and a retic-ule with needles and pins and
beeswax and but-tons and thread and all such truck in it, and a hatchet
and some nails, and a fish-line as thick as my little fin-ger with some
mon-strous hooks on it, and a roll of buck-skin, and a leather dog-col-lar,
and a horse-shoe, and some vi-als of medi-cine that didn't have no la-bel
on them; and just as we was leav-ing I found a tol-er-able good curry-comb,
and Jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow, and a wooden leg.  The straps
was broke off of it, but, bar-ring that, it was a good enough leg, though
it was too long for me and not long enough for Jim, and we couldn't find
the other one, though we hunted all around.

And so, take it all around, we made a good haul.  When we was ready to
shove off we was a quarter of a mile be-low the is-land, and it was pretty
broad day; so I made Jim lay down in the ca-noe and cover up with the
quilt, be-cause if he set up people could tell he was a nig-ger a good
ways off.  I paddled over to the Illinois shore, and drif-ted down most
a half a mile do-ing it.  I crept up the dead wa-ter un-der the bank, and
hadn't no ac-ci-dents and didn't see nobody.  We got home all safe.




CHAPTER X.

AFTER break-fast I wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how he
come to be killed, but Jim didn't want to.  He said it would fetch bad
luck; and be-sides, he said, he might come and ha'nt us; he said a man
that warn't bur-ied was more likely to go a-ha'nt-ing around than one
that was planted and com-fort-able.  That soun-ded pretty reas-on-able, so
I didn't say no more; but I couldn't keep from study-ing over it and
wish-ing I knowed who shot the man, and what they done it for.

We rum-maged the clothes we'd got, and found eight dol-lars in sil-ver
sewed up in the lin-ing of an old blanket over-coat.  Jim said he reckoned
the people in that house stole the coat, be-cause if they'd a knowed the
money was there they wouldn't a left it.  I said I reckoned they killed
him, too; but Jim didn't want to talk about that.  I says:

“Now you think it's bad luck; but what did you say when I fetched in the
snake-skin that I found on the top of the ridge day be-fore yes-ter-day?
You said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin
with my hands.  Well, here's your bad luck!  We've raked in all this
truck and eight dol-lars be-sides.  I wish we could have some bad luck
like this every day, Jim.”

“Never you mind, honey, never you mind.  Don't you git too peart.  It's
a-comin'.  Mind I tell you, it's a-comin'.”

It did come, too.  It was a Tues-day that we had that talk.  Well, after
din-ner Fri-day we was lay-ing around in the grass at the up-per end of the
ridge, and got out of to-bacco.  I went to the cav-ern to get some, and
found a rattlesnake in there.  I killed him, and curled him up on the
foot of Jim's blanket, ever so nat-ural, think-ing there'd be some fun
when Jim found him there.  Well, by night I for-got all about the snake,
and when Jim flung him-self down on the blanket while I struck a light
the snake's mate was there, and bit him.

He jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed was the
var-mint curled up and ready for an-other spring.  I laid him out in a
second with a stick, and Jim grabbed pap's whisky-jug and be-gun to pour
it down.

He was bare-footed, and the snake bit him right on the heel.  That all
comes of my be-ing such a fool as to not re-mem-ber that wherever you leave
a dead snake its mate al-ways comes there and curls around it.  Jim told
me to chop off the snake's head and throw it away, and then skin the
body and roast a piece of it.  I done it, and he eat it and said it
would help cure him. He made me take off the rattles and tie them around
his wrist, too.  He said that that would help.  Then I slid out quiet
and throwed the snakes clear away amongst the bushes; for I warn't go-ing
to let Jim find out it was all my fault, not if I could help it.

Jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then he got out of his
head and pitched around and yelled; but every time he come to him-self he
went to suck-ing at the jug again.  His foot swelled up pretty big, and
so did his leg; but by and by the drunk be-gun to come, and so I judged
he was all right; but I'd druther been bit with a snake than pap's
whisky.

Jim was laid up for four days and nights.  Then the swell-ing was all
gone and he was around again.  I made up my mind I wouldn't ever take
a-holt of a snake-skin again with my hands, now that I see what had come
of it. Jim said he reckoned I would be-lieve him next time.  And he said
that hand-ling a snake-skin was such aw-ful bad luck that maybe we hadn't
got to the end of it yet.  He said he druther see the new moon over his
left shoulder as much as a thou-sand times than take up a snake-skin
in his hand.  Well, I was get-ting to feel that way my-self, though I've
al-ways reckoned that look-ing at the new moon over your left shoulder is
one of the care-lessest and fool-ishest things a body can do.  Old Hank
Bunker done it once, and bragged about it; and in less than two years he
got drunk and fell off of the shot-tower, and spread him-self out so
that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say; and they slid him
edge-ways between two barn doors for a coffin, and bur-ied him so, so
they say, but I didn't see it.  Pap told me.  But any-way it all come of
look-ing at the moon that way, like a fool.

Well, the days went along, and the river went down between its banks
again; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big
hooks with a skinned rab-bit and set it and catch a cat-fish that was
as big as a man, be-ing six foot two inches long, and weighed over two
hun-dred pounds. We couldn't handle him, of course; he would a flung us
into Illinois.  We just set there and watched him rip and tear around
till he drown-ded.  We found a brass but-ton in his stom-ach and a round
ball, and lots of rub-bage.  We split the ball open with the hatchet,
and there was a spool in it.  Jim said he'd had it there a long time, to
coat it over so and make a ball of it.  It was as big a fish as was ever
catched in the Mis-sis-sippi, I reckon.  Jim said he hadn't ever seen
a big-ger one.  He would a been worth a good deal over at the vil-lage.
 They peddle out such a fish as that by the pound in the mar-ket-house
there; every-body buys some of him; his meat's as white as snow and makes
a good fry.

Next morn-ing I said it was get-ting slow and dull, and I wanted to get a
stir-ring up some way.  I said I reckoned I would slip over the river and
find out what was go-ing on.  Jim liked that no-tion; but he said I
must go in the dark and look sharp.  Then he stud-ied it over and said,
couldn't I put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl?
 That was a good no-tion, too.  So we shortened up one of the calico
gowns, and I turned up my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it.  Jim
hitched it be-hind with the hooks, and it was a fair fit.  I put on the
sun-bon-net and tied it un-der my chin, and then for a body to look in
and see my face was like look-ing down a joint of stove-pipe.  Jim said
nobody would know me, even in the day-time, hardly.  I prac-ticed around
all day to get the hang of the things, and by and by I could do pretty
well in them, only Jim said I didn't walk like a girl; and he said
I must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches-pocket.  I took
no-tice, and done bet-ter.

I star-ted up the Illinois shore in the ca-noe just after dark.

I star-ted across to the town from a little be-low the ferry-land-ing, and
the drift of the cur-rent fetched me in at the bot-tom of the town.  I
tied up and star-ted along the bank.  There was a light burn-ing in a
little shanty that hadn't been lived in for a long time, and I wondered
who had took up quar-ters there.  I slipped up and peeped in at the
win-dow.  There was a wo-man about forty year old in there knit-ting by
a candle that was on a pine table.  I didn't know her face; she was a
stranger, for you couldn't start a face in that town that I didn't know.
 Now this was lucky, be-cause I was weak-en-ing; I was get-ting afraid I had
come; people might know my voice and find me out.  But if this wo-man had
been in such a little town two days she could tell me all I wanted to
know; so I knocked at the door, and made up my mind I wouldn't for-get I
was a girl.




CHAPTER XI.

“COME in,” says the wo-man, and I did.  She says:  “Take a cheer.”

I done it.  She looked me all over with her little shiny eyes, and says:

“What might your name be?”

“Sarah Wil-li-ams.”

“Where 'bouts do you live?  In this neigh-bor-hood?'

“No'm.  In Hook-erville, seven mile be-low.  I've walked all the way and
I'm all tired out.”

“Hungry, too, I reckon.  I'll find you some-thing.”

“No'm, I ain't hungry.  I was so hungry I had to stop two miles be-low
here at a farm; so I ain't hungry no more.  It's what makes me so late.
My mother's down sick, and out of money and everything, and I come to
tell my uncle Ab-ner Moore.  He lives at the up-per end of the town, she
says.  I hain't ever been here be-fore.  Do you know him?”

“No; but I don't know every-body yet.  I haven't lived here quite two
weeks. It's a con-sid-er-able ways to the up-per end of the town.  You
bet-ter stay here all night.  Take off your bon-net.”

“No,” I says; “I'll rest a while, I reckon, and go on.  I ain't afeared
of the dark.”

She said she wouldn't let me go by my-self, but her hus-band would be in
by and by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she'd send him along with me.
Then she got to talk-ing about her hus-band, and about her re-la-tions up
the river, and her re-la-tions down the river, and about how much bet-ter
off they used to was, and how they didn't know but they'd made a mis-take
com-ing to our town, in-stead of let-ting well alone--and so on and so on,
till I was afeard I had made a mis-take com-ing to her to find out what
was go-ing on in the town; but by and by she dropped on to pap and the
murder, and then I was pretty will-ing to let her clat-ter right along.
 She told about me and Tom Saw-yer find-ing the six thou-sand dol-lars (only
she got it ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he was, and what
a hard lot I was, and at last she got down to where I was murdered.  I
says:

“Who done it?  We've heard con-sid-er-able about these go-ings on down in
Hook-erville, but we don't know who 'twas that killed Huck Finn.”

“Well, I reckon there's a right smart chance of people _here_ that'd
like to know who killed him.  Some think old Finn done it him-self.”

“No--is that so?”

“Most every-body thought it at first.  He'll never know how nigh he come
to get-ting lynched.  But be-fore night they changed around and judged it
was done by a run-away nig-ger named Jim.”

“Why _he_--”

I stopped.  I reckoned I bet-ter keep still.  She run on, and never
no-ticed I had put in at all:

“The nig-ger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed.  So there's a
re-ward out for him--three hun-dred dol-lars.  And there's a re-ward out for
old Finn, too--two hun-dred dol-lars.  You see, he come to town the
morn-ing after the murder, and told about it, and was out with 'em on the
ferry-boat hunt, and right away after he up and left.  Be-fore night they
wanted to lynch him, but he was gone, you see.  Well, next day they
found out the nig-ger was gone; they found out he hadn't ben seen sence
ten o'clock the night the murder was done.  So then they put it on him,
you see; and while they was full of it, next day, back comes old Finn,
and went boo-hoo-ing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the
nig-ger all over Illinois with. The judge gave him some, and that even-ing
he got drunk, and was around till after mid-night with a couple of mighty
hard-look-ing strangers, and then went off with them.  Well, he hain't
come back sence, and they ain't look-ing for him back till this thing
blows over a little, for people thinks now that he killed his boy and
fixed things so folks would think rob-bers done it, and then he'd get
Huck's money without hav-ing to bother a long time with a law-suit.
 People do say he warn't any too good to do it.  Oh, he's sly, I reckon.
 If he don't come back for a year he'll be all right.  You can't prove
any-thing on him, you know; everything will be quieted down then, and
he'll walk in Huck's money as easy as noth-ing.”

“Yes, I reckon so, 'm.  I don't see noth-ing in the way of it.  Has
every-body quit think-ing the nig-ger done it?”

“Oh, no, not every-body.  A good many thinks he done it.  But they'll get
the nig-ger pretty soon now, and maybe they can scare it out of him.”

“Why, are they after him yet?”

“Well, you're in-no-cent, ain't you!  Does three hun-dred dol-lars lay
around every day for people to pick up?  Some folks think the nig-ger
ain't far from here.  I'm one of them--but I hain't talked it around.  A
few days ago I was talk-ing with an old couple that lives next door in
the log shanty, and they happened to say hardly any-body ever goes to
that is-land over yon-der that they call Jack-son's Is-land.  Don't any-body
live there? says I. No, nobody, says they.  I didn't say any more, but
I done some think-ing.  I was pretty near cer-tain I'd seen smoke over
there, about the head of the is-land, a day or two be-fore that, so I says
to my-self, like as not that nig-ger's hid-ing over there; any-way, says
I, it's worth the trouble to give the place a hunt.  I hain't seen any
smoke sence, so I reckon maybe he's gone, if it was him; but hus-band's
go-ing over to see--him and an-other man.  He was gone up the river; but he
got back to-day, and I told him as soon as he got here two hours ago.”

I had got so un-easy I couldn't set still.  I had to do some-thing with my
hands; so I took up a needle off of the table and went to thread-ing
it. My hands shook, and I was mak-ing a bad job of it.  When the wo-man
stopped talk-ing I looked up, and she was look-ing at me pretty curi-ous
and smil-ing a little.  I put down the needle and thread, and let on to
be in-ter-ested--and I was, too--and says:

“Three hun-dred dol-lars is a power of money.  I wish my mother could get
it. Is your hus-band go-ing over there to-night?”

“Oh, yes.  He went up-town with the man I was telling you of, to get a
boat and see if they could bor-row an-other gun.  They'll go over after
mid-night.”

“Couldn't they see bet-ter if they was to wait till day-time?”

“Yes.  And couldn't the nig-ger see bet-ter, too?  After mid-night he'll
likely be asleep, and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up
his camp fire all the bet-ter for the dark, if he's got one.”

“I didn't think of that.”

The wo-man kept look-ing at me pretty curi-ous, and I didn't feel a bit
com-fort-able.  Pretty soon she says,

“What did you say your name was, honey?”

“M--Mary Wil-li-ams.”

Some-how it didn't seem to me that I said it was Mary be-fore, so I didn't
look up--seemed to me I said it was Sarah; so I felt sort of cornered,
and was afeared maybe I was look-ing it, too.  I wished the wo-man would
say some-thing more; the longer she set still the un-easier I was.  But
now she says:

“Honey, I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come in?”

“Oh, yes'm, I did.  Sarah Mary Wil-li-ams.  Sarah's my first name.  Some
calls me Sarah, some calls me Mary.”

“Oh, that's the way of it?”

“Yes'm.”

I was feel-ing bet-ter then, but I wished I was out of there, any-way.  I
couldn't look up yet.

Well, the wo-man fell to talk-ing about how hard times was, and how poor
they had to live, and how the rats was as free as if they owned the
place, and so forth and so on, and then I got easy again.  She was right
about the rats. You'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner
every little while.  She said she had to have things handy to throw at
them when she was alone, or they wouldn't give her no peace.  She showed
me a bar of lead twis-ted up into a knot, and said she was a good shot
with it gen-erly, but she'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago, and didn't
know whether she could throw true now.  But she watched for a chance,
and dir-ectly banged away at a rat; but she missed him wide, and said
“Ouch!” it hurt her arm so.  Then she told me to try for the next one.
 I wanted to be get-ting away be-fore the old man got back, but of course
I didn't let on.  I got the thing, and the first rat that showed his
nose I let drive, and if he'd a stayed where he was he'd a been a
tol-er-able sick rat.  She said that was first-rate, and she reckoned I
would hive the next one.  She went and got the lump of lead and fetched
it back, and brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help
her with.  I held up my two hands and she put the hank over them, and
went on talk-ing about her and her hus-band's mat-ters.  But she broke off
to say:

“Keep your eye on the rats.  You bet-ter have the lead in your lap,
handy.”

So she dropped the lump into my lap just at that mo-ment, and I clapped
my legs to-gether on it and she went on talk-ing.  But only about a
minute. Then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face,
and very pleas-ant, and says:

“Come, now, what's your real name?”

“Wh--what, mum?”

“What's your real name?  Is it Bill, or Tom, or Bob?--or what is it?”

I reckon I shook like a leaf, and I didn't know hardly what to do.  But
I says:

“Please to don't poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum.  If I'm in the
way here, I'll--”

“No, you won't.  Set down and stay where you are.  I ain't go-ing to hurt
you, and I ain't go-ing to tell on you, nuther.  You just tell me your
secret, and trust me.  I'll keep it; and, what's more, I'll help
you. So'll my old man if you want him to.  You see, you're a run-away
'pren-tice, that's all.  It ain't any-thing.  There ain't no harm in it.
You've been treated bad, and you made up your mind to cut.  Bless you,
child, I wouldn't tell on you.  Tell me all about it now, that's a good
boy.”

So I said it wouldn't be no use to try to play it any longer, and I
would just make a clean breast and tell her everything, but she musn't
go back on her prom-ise.  Then I told her my father and mother was dead,
and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the coun-try thirty
mile back from the river, and he treated me so bad I couldn't stand it
no longer; he went away to be gone a couple of days, and so I took my
chance and stole some of his daugh-ter's old clothes and cleared out, and
I had been three nights com-ing the thirty miles.  I traveled nights,
and hid day-times and slept, and the bag of bread and meat I car-ried from
home las-ted me all the way, and I had a-plenty.  I said I be-lieved my
uncle Ab-ner Moore would take care of me, and so that was why I struck
out for this town of Goshen.

“Goshen, child?  This ain't Goshen.  This is St. Peters-burg.  Goshen's
ten mile fur-ther up the river.  Who told you this was Goshen?”

“Why, a man I met at day-break this morn-ing, just as I was go-ing to turn
into the woods for my reg-u-lar sleep.  He told me when the roads forked I
must take the right hand, and five mile would fetch me to Goshen.”

“He was drunk, I reckon.  He told you just ex-actly wrong.”

“Well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain't no mat-ter now.  I got
to be mov-ing along.  I'll fetch Goshen be-fore day-light.”

“Hold on a minute.  I'll put you up a snack to eat.  You might want it.”

So she put me up a snack, and says:

“Say, when a cow's lay-ing down, which end of her gets up first?  An-swer
up prompt now--don't stop to study over it.  Which end gets up first?”

“The hind end, mum.”

“Well, then, a horse?”

“The for'rard end, mum.”

“Which side of a tree does the moss grow on?”

“North side.”

“If fif-teen cows is brows-ing on a hill-side, how many of them eats with
their heads poin-ted the same dir-ec-tion?”

“The whole fif-teen, mum.”

“Well, I reckon you _have_ lived in the coun-try.  I thought maybe you
was try-ing to ho-cus me again.  What's your real name, now?”

“Ge-orge Peters, mum.”

“Well, try to re-mem-ber it, Ge-orge.  Don't for-get and tell me it's
El-ex-an-der be-fore you go, and then get out by say-ing it's Ge-orge
El-ex-an-der when I catch you.  And don't go about wo-men in that old
calico.  You do a girl tol-er-able poor, but you might fool men, maybe.
 Bless you, child, when you set out to thread a needle don't hold the
thread still and fetch the needle up to it; hold the needle still and
poke the thread at it; that's the way a wo-man most al-ways does, but a
man al-ways does t'other way.  And when you throw at a rat or any-thing,
hitch your-self up a tip-toe and fetch your hand up over your head as
awk-ward as you can, and miss your rat about six or seven foot. Throw
stiff-armed from the shoulder, like there was a pivot there for it to
turn on, like a girl; not from the wrist and el-bow, with your arm out
to one side, like a boy.  And, mind you, when a girl tries to catch
any-thing in her lap she throws her knees apart; she don't clap them
to-gether, the way you did when you catched the lump of lead.  Why, I
spot-ted you for a boy when you was thread-ing the needle; and I con-trived
the other things just to make cer-tain.  Now trot along to your uncle,
Sarah Mary Wil-li-ams Ge-orge El-ex-an-der Peters, and if you get into trouble
you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus, which is me, and I'll do what I can
to get you out of it.  Keep the river road all the way, and next time
you tramp take shoes and socks with you. The river road's a rocky one,
and your feet'll be in a con-di-tion when you get to Goshen, I reckon.”

I went up the bank about fifty yards, and then I doubled on my tracks
and slipped back to where my ca-noe was, a good piece be-low the house.  I
jumped in, and was off in a hurry.  I went up-stream far enough to
make the head of the is-land, and then star-ted across.  I took off the
sun-bon-net, for I didn't want no blinders on then.  When I was about the
middle I heard the clock be-gin to strike, so I stops and listens; the
sound come faint over the wa-ter but clear--el-even.  When I struck the
head of the is-land I never waited to blow, though I was most win-ded, but
I shoved right into the tim-ber where my old camp used to be, and star-ted
a good fire there on a high and dry spot.

Then I jumped in the ca-noe and dug out for our place, a mile and a half
be-low, as hard as I could go.  I landed, and slopped through the tim-ber
and up the ridge and into the cav-ern.  There Jim laid, sound asleep on
the ground.  I roused him out and says:

“Git up and hump your-self, Jim!  There ain't a minute to lose.  They're
after us!”

Jim never asked no ques-tions, he never said a word; but the way he
worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared.  By
that time everything we had in the world was on our raft, and she was
ready to be shoved out from the wil-low cove where she was hid.  We
put out the camp fire at the cav-ern the first thing, and didn't show a
candle out-side after that.

I took the ca-noe out from the shore a little piece, and took a look;
but if there was a boat around I couldn't see it, for stars and shad-ows
ain't good to see by.  Then we got out the raft and slipped along down
in the shade, past the foot of the is-land dead still--never say-ing a
word.




CHAPTER XII.

IT must a been close on to one o'clock when we got be-low the is-land at
last, and the raft did seem to go mighty slow.  If a boat was to come
along we was go-ing to take to the ca-noe and break for the Illinois
shore; and it was well a boat didn't come, for we hadn't ever thought to
put the gun in the ca-noe, or a fish-ing-line, or any-thing to eat.  We
was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things.  It warn't
good judg-ment to put _everything_ on the raft.

If the men went to the is-land I just ex-pect they found the camp fire I
built, and watched it all night for Jim to come.  Any-ways, they stayed
away from us, and if my build-ing the fire never fooled them it warn't no
fault of mine.  I played it as low down on them as I could.

When the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a tow-head in a
big bend on the Illinois side, and hacked off cot-ton-wood branches with
the hatchet, and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there
had been a cave-in in the bank there.  A tow-head is a sand-bar that has
cot-ton-woods on it as thick as har-row-teeth.

We had moun-tains on the Mis-souri shore and heavy tim-ber on the Illinois
side, and the chan-nel was down the Mis-souri shore at that place, so we
warn't afraid of any-body run-ning across us.  We laid there all day,
and watched the rafts and steam-boats spin down the Mis-souri shore, and
up-bound steam-boats fight the big river in the middle.  I told Jim all
about the time I had jab-ber-ing with that wo-man; and Jim said she was
a smart one, and if she was to start after us her-self she wouldn't set
down and watch a camp fire--no, sir, she'd fetch a dog.  Well, then, I
said, why couldn't she tell her hus-band to fetch a dog?  Jim said he
bet she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start, and he
be-lieved they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that
time, or else we wouldn't be here on a tow-head six-teen or sev-en-teen mile
be-low the vil-lage--no, in-deedy, we would be in that same old town again.
 So I said I didn't care what was the reason they didn't get us as long
as they didn't.

When it was be-gin-ning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the
cot-ton-wood thicket, and looked up and down and across; noth-ing in sight;
so Jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug
wig-wam to get un-der in blaz-ing weather and rainy, and to keep the things
dry. Jim made a floor for the wig-wam, and raised it a foot or more above
the level of the raft, so now the blankets and all the traps was out of
reach of steam-boat waves.  Right in the middle of the wig-wam we made a
layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for
to hold it to its place; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather
or chilly; the wig-wam would keep it from be-ing seen.  We made an ex-tra
steer-ing-oar, too, be-cause one of the oth-ers might get broke on a snag
or some-thing. We fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lan-tern
on, be-cause we must al-ways light the lan-tern whenever we see a steam-boat
com-ing down-stream, to keep from get-ting run over; but we wouldn't have
to light it for up-stream boats un-less we see we was in what they call
a “cross-ing”; for the river was pretty high yet, very low banks be-ing
still a little un-der wa-ter; so up-bound boats didn't al-ways run the
chan-nel, but hunted easy wa-ter.

This second night we run between seven and eight hours, with a cur-rent
that was mak-ing over four mile an hour.  We catched fish and talked,
and we took a swim now and then to keep off sleep-i-ness.  It was kind of
sol-emn, drift-ing down the big, still river, lay-ing on our backs look-ing
up at the stars, and we didn't ever feel like talk-ing loud, and it
warn't of-ten that we laughed--only a little kind of a low chuckle.  We
had mighty good weather as a gen-eral thing, and noth-ing ever happened to
us at all--that night, nor the next, nor the next.

Every night we passed towns, some of them away up on black hill-sides,
noth-ing but just a shiny bed of lights; not a house could you see.  The
fifth night we passed St. Louis, and it was like the whole world lit up.
In St. Peters-burg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thou-sand
people in St. Louis, but I never be-lieved it till I see that won-der-ful
spread of lights at two o'clock that still night.  There warn't a sound
there; every-body was asleep.

Every night now I used to slip ashore to-wards ten o'clock at some little
vil-lage, and buy ten or fif-teen cents' worth of meal or ba-con or other
stuff to eat; and some-times I lif-ted a chicken that warn't roost-ing
com-fort-able, and took him along.  Pap al-ways said, take a chicken when
you get a chance, be-cause if you don't want him your-self you can easy
find some-body that does, and a good deed ain't ever for-got.  I never see
pap when he didn't want the chicken him-self, but that is what he used to
say, any-way.

Morn-ings be-fore day-light I slipped into corn-fields and bor-rowed a
wa-ter-melon, or a mush-melon, or a punkin, or some new corn, or things of
that kind.  Pap al-ways said it warn't no harm to bor-row things if you
was mean-ing to pay them back some time; but the widow said it warn't
any-thing but a soft name for steal-ing, and no de-cent body would do it.
 Jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly
right; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things
from the list and say we wouldn't bor-row them any more--then he reckoned
it wouldn't be no harm to bor-row the oth-ers.  So we talked it over all
one night, drift-ing along down the river, try-ing to make up our minds
whether to drop the wa-ter-mel-ons, or the cante-lopes, or the mush-mel-ons,
or what.  But to-wards day-light we got it all settled sat-is-fact-ory, and
con-cluded to drop cra-bapples and p'sim-mons.  We warn't feel-ing just
right be-fore that, but it was all com-fort-able now.  I was glad the way
it come out, too, be-cause cra-bapples ain't ever good, and the p'sim-mons
wouldn't be ripe for two or three months yet.

We shot a wa-ter-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morn-ing
or didn't go to bed early enough in the even-ing.  Take it all round, we
lived pretty high.

The fifth night be-low St. Louis we had a big storm after mid-night, with
a power of thun-der and light-ning, and the rain poured down in a solid
sheet. We stayed in the wig-wam and let the raft take care of it-self.
When the light-ning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead,
and high, rocky bluffs on both sides.  By and by says I, “Hel-_lo_, Jim,
looky yon-der!” It was a steam-boat that had killed her-self on a rock.
 We was drift-ing straight down for her.  The light-ning showed her very
dis-tinct.  She was lean-ing over, with part of her up-per deck above
wa-ter, and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear, and a
chair by the big bell, with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it,
when the flashes come.

Well, it be-ing away in the night and stormy, and all so mys-ter-i-ous-like,
I felt just the way any other boy would a felt when I see that wreck
lay-ing there so mourn-ful and lone-some in the middle of the river.  I
wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little, and see what
there was there.  So I says:

“Le's land on her, Jim.”

But Jim was dead against it at first.  He says:

“I doan' want to go fool'n 'long er no wrack.  We's doin' blame' well,
en we bet-ter let blame' well alone, as de good book says.  Like as not
dey's a watch-man on dat wrack.”

“Watch-man your grand-mother,” I says; “there ain't noth-ing to watch but
the texas and the pi-lot-house; and do you reckon any-body's go-ing to resk
his life for a texas and a pi-lot-house such a night as this, when
it's likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute?”  Jim
couldn't say noth-ing to that, so he didn't try.  “And be-sides,” I says,
“we might bor-row some-thing worth hav-ing out of the cap-tain's state-room.
 See-gars, I bet you--and cost five cents apiece, solid cash.  Steam-boat
cap-tains is al-ways rich, and get sixty dol-lars a month, and _they_ don't
care a cent what a thing costs, you know, long as they want it.  Stick a
candle in your pocket; I can't rest, Jim, till we give her a rum-ma-ging.
 Do you reckon Tom Saw-yer would ever go by this thing?  Not for pie, he
wouldn't. He'd call it an ad-ven-ture--that's what he'd call it; and he'd
land on that wreck if it was his last act.  And wouldn't he throw style
into it?--wouldn't he spread him-self, nor noth-ing?  Why, you'd think it
was Chris-topher C'lum-bus dis-cov-er-ing King-dom-Come.  I wish Tom Saw-yer
_was_ here.”

Jim he grumbled a little, but give in.  He said we mustn't talk any more
than we could help, and then talk mighty low.  The light-ning showed us
the wreck again just in time, and we fetched the stab-board der-rick, and
made fast there.

The deck was high out here.  We went sneak-ing down the slope of it to
lab-board, in the dark, to-wards the texas, feel-ing our way slow with our
feet, and spread-ing our hands out to fend off the guys, for it was so
dark we couldn't see no sign of them.  Pretty soon we struck the for-ward
end of the sky-light, and clumb on to it; and the next step fetched us in
front of the cap-tain's door, which was open, and by Jim-miny, away down
through the texas-hall we see a light! and all in the same second we
seem to hear low voices in yon-der!

Jim whispered and said he was feel-ing power-ful sick, and told me to come
along.  I says, all right, and was go-ing to start for the raft; but just
then I heard a voice wail out and say:

“Oh, please don't, boys; I swear I won't ever tell!”

Another voice said, pretty loud:

“It's a lie, Jim Turner.  You've ac-ted this way be-fore.  You al-ways want
more'n your share of the truck, and you've al-ways got it, too, be-cause
you've swore 't if you didn't you'd tell.  But this time you've said
it jest one time too many.  You're the mean-est, treach-erousest hound in
this coun-try.”

By this time Jim was gone for the raft.  I was just a-bil-ing with
curi-os-ity; and I says to my-self, Tom Saw-yer wouldn't back out now,
and so I won't either; I'm a-go-ing to see what's go-ing on here.  So I
dropped on my hands and knees in the little pas-sage, and crept aft
in the dark till there warn't but one state-room betwixt me and the
cross-hall of the texas.  Then in there I see a man stretched on the
floor and tied hand and foot, and two men stand-ing over him, and one
of them had a dim lan-tern in his hand, and the other one had a pis-tol.
 This one kept point-ing the pis-tol at the man's head on the floor, and
say-ing:

“I'd _like_ to!  And I or-ter, too--a mean skunk!”

The man on the floor would shrivel up and say, “Oh, please don't, Bill;
I hain't ever goin' to tell.”

And every time he said that the man with the lan-tern would laugh and
say:

“'Deed you _ain't!_  You never said no truer thing 'n that, you bet
you.” And once he said:  “Hear him beg! and yit if we hadn't got the
best of him and tied him he'd a killed us both.  And what _for_?  Jist
for noth'n. Jist be-cause we stood on our _rights_--that's what for.  But
I lay you ain't a-goin' to threaten nobody any more, Jim Turner.  Put
_up_ that pis-tol, Bill.”

Bill says:

“I don't want to, Jake Pack-ard.  I'm for kil-lin' him--and didn't he kill
old Hat-field jist the same way--and don't he de-serve it?”

“But I don't _want_ him killed, and I've got my reas-ons for it.”

“Bless yo' heart for them words, Jake Pack-ard!  I'll never for-git you
long's I live!” says the man on the floor, sort of blub-ber-ing.

Pack-ard didn't take no no-tice of that, but hung up his lan-tern on a nail
and star-ted to-wards where I was there in the dark, and mo-tioned Bill
to come.  I craw-fished as fast as I could about two yards, but the boat
slanted so that I couldn't make very good time; so to keep from get-ting
run over and catched I crawled into a state-room on the up-per side.
 The man came a-paw-ing along in the dark, and when Pack-ard got to my
state-room, he says:

“Here--come in here.”

And in he come, and Bill after him.  But be-fore they got in I was up
in the up-per berth, cornered, and sorry I come.  Then they stood there,
with their hands on the ledge of the berth, and talked.  I couldn't see
them, but I could tell where they was by the whisky they'd been hav-ing.
 I was glad I didn't drink whisky; but it wouldn't made much dif-fer-ence
any-way, be-cause most of the time they couldn't a treed me be-cause I
didn't breathe.  I was too scared.  And, be-sides, a body _couldn't_
breathe and hear such talk.  They talked low and earn-est.  Bill wanted
to kill Turner.  He says:

“He's said he'll tell, and he will.  If we was to give both our shares
to him _now_ it wouldn't make no dif-fer-ence after the row and the way
we've served him.  Shore's you're born, he'll turn State's evid-ence; now
you hear _me_.  I'm for put-ting him out of his troubles.”

“So'm I,” says Pack-ard, very quiet.

“Blame it, I'd sorter be-gun to think you wasn't.  Well, then, that's all
right.  Le's go and do it.”

“Hold on a minute; I hain't had my say yit.  You listen to me.
Shoot-ing's good, but there's quieter ways if the thing's _got_ to be
done. But what I say is this:  it ain't good sense to go court'n around
after a hal-ter if you can git at what you're up to in some way that's
jist as good and at the same time don't bring you into no resks.  Ain't
that so?”

“You bet it is.  But how you goin' to man-age it this time?”

“Well, my idea is this:  we'll rustle around and gather up whatever
pickins we've over-looked in the state-rooms, and shove for shore and hide
the truck. Then we'll wait.  Now I say it ain't a-goin' to be more'n two
hours befo' this wrack breaks up and washes off down the river.  See?
He'll be drown-ded, and won't have nobody to blame for it but his own
self.  I reckon that's a con-siderble sight bet-ter 'n kil-lin' of him.
 I'm un-fa-vor-able to kil-lin' a man as long as you can git aroun' it; it
ain't good sense, it ain't good mor-als.  Ain't I right?”

“Yes, I reck'n you are.  But s'pose she _don't_ break up and wash off?”

“Well, we can wait the two hours any-way and see, can't we?”

“All right, then; come along.”

So they star-ted, and I lit out, all in a cold sweat, and scrambled
for-ward. It was dark as pitch there; but I said, in a kind of a coarse
whis-per, “Jim!” and he answered up, right at my el-bow, with a sort of a
moan, and I says:

“Quick, Jim, it ain't no time for fool-ing around and moan-ing; there's a
gang of mur-der-ers in yon-der, and if we don't hunt up their boat and set
her drift-ing down the river so these fel-lows can't get away from the
wreck there's one of 'em go-ing to be in a bad fix.  But if we find their
boat we can put _all_ of 'em in a bad fix--for the sher-iff 'll get 'em.
Quick--hurry!  I'll hunt the lab-board side, you hunt the stab-board. You
start at the raft, and--”

“Oh, my lordy, lordy!  _raf'_?  Dey ain' no raf' no mo'; she done broke
loose en gone I--en here we is!”




CHAPTER XIII.

WELL, I catched my breath and most fain-ted.  Shut up on a wreck with
such a gang as that!  But it warn't no time to be sen-ti-men-ter-ing.  We'd
_got_ to find that boat now--had to have it for ourselves.  So we went
a-quak-ing and shak-ing down the stab-board side, and slow work it was,
too--seemed a week be-fore we got to the stern.  No sign of a boat.  Jim
said he didn't be-lieve he could go any fur-ther--so scared he hadn't
hardly any strength left, he said.  But I said, come on, if we get left
on this wreck we are in a fix, sure.  So on we prowled again.  We struck
for the stern of the texas, and found it, and then scrabbled along
for-wards on the sky-light, hanging on from shut-ter to shut-ter, for the
edge of the sky-light was in the wa-ter.  When we got pretty close to the
cross-hall door there was the skiff, sure enough!  I could just barely
see her.  I felt ever so thank-ful.  In an-other second I would a been
aboard of her, but just then the door opened.  One of the men stuck his
head out only about a couple of foot from me, and I thought I was gone;
but he jerked it in again, and says:

“Heave that blame lan-tern out o' sight, Bill!”

He flung a bag of some-thing into the boat, and then got in him-self and
set down.  It was Pack-ard.  Then Bill _he_ come out and got in.  Pack-ard
says, in a low voice:

“All ready--shove off!”

I couldn't hardly hang on to the shut-ters, I was so weak.  But Bill
says:

“Hold on--'d you go through him?”

“No.  Didn't you?”

“No.  So he's got his share o' the cash yet.”

“Well, then, come along; no use to take truck and leave money.”

“Say, won't he sus-pi-cion what we're up to?”

“Maybe he won't.  But we got to have it any-way. Come along.”

So they got out and went in.

The door slammed to be-cause it was on the ca-reened side; and in a half
second I was in the boat, and Jim come tum-bling after me.  I out with my
knife and cut the rope, and away we went!

We didn't touch an oar, and we didn't speak nor whis-per, nor hardly even
breathe.  We went glid-ing swift along, dead si-lent, past the tip of the
paddle-box, and past the stern; then in a second or two more we was a
hun-dred yards be-low the wreck, and the dark-ness soaked her up, every
last sign of her, and we was safe, and knowed it.

When we was three or four hun-dred yards down-stream we see the lan-tern
show like a little spark at the texas door for a second, and we knowed
by that that the ras-cals had missed their boat, and was be-gin-ning to
un-der-stand that they was in just as much trouble now as Jim Turner was.

Then Jim manned the oars, and we took out after our raft.  Now was the
first time that I be-gun to worry about the men--I reckon I hadn't
had time to be-fore.  I be-gun to think how dread-ful it was, even for
mur-der-ers, to be in such a fix.  I says to my-self, there ain't no
telling but I might come to be a mur-derer my-self yet, and then how would
I like it?  So says I to Jim:

“The first light we see we'll land a hun-dred yards be-low it or above
it, in a place where it's a good hid-ing-place for you and the skiff, and
then I'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn, and get some-body to go for
that gang and get them out of their scrape, so they can be hung when
their time comes.”

But that idea was a fail-ure; for pretty soon it be-gun to storm again,
and this time worse than ever.  The rain poured down, and never a light
showed; every-body in bed, I reckon.  We boomed along down the river,
watch-ing for lights and watch-ing for our raft.  After a long time the
rain let up, but the clouds stayed, and the light-ning kept whim-per-ing,
and by and by a flash showed us a black thing ahead, float-ing, and we
made for it.

It was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again.  We
seen a light now away down to the right, on shore.  So I said I would
go for it. The skiff was half full of plun-der which that gang had stole
there on the wreck.  We hustled it on to the raft in a pile, and I told
Jim to float along down, and show a light when he judged he had gone
about two mile, and keep it burn-ing till I come; then I manned my oars
and shoved for the light.  As I got down to-wards it three or four more
showed--up on a hill-side.  It was a vil-lage.  I closed in above the shore
light, and laid on my oars and floated.  As I went by I see it was a
lan-tern hanging on the jack-staff of a double-hull ferry-boat.  I skimmed
around for the watch-man, a-won-der-ing where-abouts he slept; and by and
by I found him roost-ing on the bitts for-ward, with his head down between
his knees.  I gave his shoulder two or three little shoves, and be-gun to
cry.

He stirred up in a kind of a start-l-ish way; but when he see it was only
me he took a good gap and stretch, and then he says:

“Hello, what's up?  Don't cry, bub.  What's the trouble?”

I says:

“Pap, and mam, and sis, and--”

Then I broke down.  He says:

“Oh, dang it now, _don't_ take on so; we all has to have our troubles,
and this 'n 'll come out all right.  What's the mat-ter with 'em?”

“They're--they're--are you the watch-man of the boat?”

“Yes,” he says, kind of pretty-well-sat-is-fied like.  “I'm the cap-tain
and the owner and the mate and the pi-lot and watch-man and head
deck-hand; and some-times I'm the freight and pas-sen-gers.  I ain't as
rich as old Jim Horn-back, and I can't be so blame' gen-er-ous and good
to Tom, Dick, and Harry as what he is, and slam around money the way he
does; but I've told him a many a time 't I wouldn't trade places with
him; for, says I, a sailor's life's the life for me, and I'm derned if
_I'd_ live two mile out o' town, where there ain't noth-ing ever goin'
on, not for all his spon-dulicks and as much more on top of it.  Says I--”

I broke in and says:

“They're in an aw-ful peck of trouble, and--”

“_Who_ is?”

“Why, pap and mam and sis and Miss Hooker; and if you'd take your
ferry-boat and go up there--”

“Up where?  Where are they?”

“On the wreck.”

“What wreck?”

“Why, there ain't but one.”

“What, you don't mean the Wal-ter Scott?”

“Yes.”

“Good land! what are they doin' _there_, for gra-cious sakes?”

“Well, they didn't go there a-pur-pose.”

“I bet they didn't!  Why, great good-ness, there ain't no chance for 'em
if they don't git off mighty quick!  Why, how in the na-tion did they
ever git into such a scrape?”

“Easy enough.  Miss Hooker was a-vis-it-ing up there to the town--”

“Yes, Booth's Land-ing--go on.”

“She was a-vis-it-ing there at Booth's Land-ing, and just in the edge of
the even-ing she star-ted over with her nig-ger wo-man in the horse-ferry
to stay all night at her friend's house, Miss What-you-may-call-her I
dis-re-mem-ber her name--and they lost their steer-ing-oar, and swung
around and went a-float-ing down, stern first, about two mile, and
saddle-baggsed on the wreck, and the fer-ry-man and the nig-ger wo-man and
the horses was all lost, but Miss Hooker she made a grab and got aboard
the wreck.  Well, about an hour after dark we come along down in our
trad-ing-scow, and it was so dark we didn't no-tice the wreck till we was
right on it; and so _we_ saddle-baggsed; but all of us was saved but
Bill Whipple--and oh, he _was_ the best cre-tur!--I most wish 't it had
been me, I do.”

“My Ge-orge!  It's the beaten-est thing I ever struck.  And _then_ what
did you all do?”

“Well, we hollered and took on, but it's so wide there we couldn't
make nobody hear.  So pap said some-body got to get ashore and get help
some-how. I was the only one that could swim, so I made a dash for it,
and Miss Hooker she said if I didn't strike help sooner, come here and
hunt up her uncle, and he'd fix the thing.  I made the land about a mile
be-low, and been fool-ing along ever since, try-ing to get people to do
some-thing, but they said, 'What, in such a night and such a cur-rent?
There ain't no sense in it; go for the steam ferry.'  Now if you'll go
and--”

“By Jack-son, I'd _like_ to, and, blame it, I don't know but I will; but
who in the ding-na-tion's a-go-ing' to _pay_ for it?  Do you reckon your
pap--”

“Why _that's_ all right.  Miss Hooker she tole me, _par-tic-u-lar_, that
her uncle Horn-back--”

“Great guns! is _he_ her uncle?  Looky here, you break for that light
over yon-der-way, and turn out west when you git there, and about a
quarter of a mile out you'll come to the tav-ern; tell 'em to dart you
out to Jim Horn-back's, and he'll foot the bill.  And don't you fool
around any, be-cause he'll want to know the news.  Tell him I'll have
his niece all safe be-fore he can get to town.  Hump your-self, now; I'm
a-go-ing up around the corner here to roust out my en-gin-eer.”

I struck for the light, but as soon as he turned the corner I went back
and got into my skiff and bailed her out, and then pulled up shore in
the easy wa-ter about six hun-dred yards, and tucked my-self in among
some wood-boats; for I couldn't rest easy till I could see the ferry-boat
start. But take it all around, I was feel-ing ruther com-fort-able on
ac-counts of tak-ing all this trouble for that gang, for not many would
a done it.  I wished the widow knowed about it.  I judged she would be
proud of me for help-ing these rapscal-lions, be-cause rapscal-lions and
dead beats is the kind the widow and good people takes the most in-terest
in.

Well, be-fore long here comes the wreck, dim and dusky, slid-ing along
down! A kind of cold shiver went through me, and then I struck out for
her.  She was very deep, and I see in a minute there warn't much chance
for any-body be-ing alive in her.  I pulled all around her and hollered
a little, but there wasn't any an-swer; all dead still.  I felt a little
bit heavy-hearted about the gang, but not much, for I reckoned if they
could stand it I could.

Then here comes the ferry-boat; so I shoved for the middle of the river
on a long down-stream slant; and when I judged I was out of eye-reach
I laid on my oars, and looked back and see her go and smell around the
wreck for Miss Hooker's re-main-ders, be-cause the cap-tain would know her
uncle Horn-back would want them; and then pretty soon the ferry-boat give
it up and went for the shore, and I laid into my work and went a-boom-ing
down the river.

It did seem a power-ful long time be-fore Jim's light showed up; and when
it did show it looked like it was a thou-sand mile off.  By the time I
got there the sky was be-gin-ning to get a little gray in the east; so we
struck for an is-land, and hid the raft, and sunk the skiff, and turned
in and slept like dead people.




CHAPTER XIV.

BY and by, when we got up, we turned over the truck the gang had stole
off of the wreck, and found boots, and blankets, and clothes, and all
sorts of other things, and a lot of books, and a spy-glass, and three
boxes of see-gars.  We hadn't ever been this rich be-fore in neither of
our lives.  The see-gars was prime.  We laid off all the af-ter-noon in the
woods talk-ing, and me read-ing the books, and hav-ing a gen-eral good
time. I told Jim all about what happened in-side the wreck and at the
ferry-boat, and I said these kinds of things was ad-ven-tures; but he said
he didn't want no more ad-ven-tures.  He said that when I went in the
texas and he crawled back to get on the raft and found her gone he
nearly died, be-cause he judged it was all up with _him_ any-way it could
be fixed; for if he didn't get saved he would get drown-ded; and if he
did get saved, who-ever saved him would send him back home so as to get
the re-ward, and then Miss Wat-son would sell him South, sure.  Well, he
was right; he was most al-ways right; he had an un-com-mon level head for a
nig-ger.

I read con-sid-er-able to Jim about kings and dukes and earls and such, and
how gaudy they dressed, and how much style they put on, and called each
other your majesty, and your grace, and your lord-ship, and so on, 'stead
of mis-ter; and Jim's eyes bugged out, and he was in-ter-ested.  He says:

“I didn' know dey was so many un um.  I hain't hearn 'bout none un um,
skasely, but ole King Soller-mun, on-less you counts dem kings dat's in a
pack er k'yards.  How much do a king git?”

“Get?”  I says; “why, they get a thou-sand dol-lars a month if they want
it; they can have just as much as they want; everything be-longs to
them.”

“_Ain'_ dat gay?  En what dey got to do, Huck?”

“_They_ don't do noth-ing!  Why, how you talk! They just set around.”

“No; is dat so?”

“Of course it is.  They just set around--ex-cept, maybe, when there's a
war; then they go to the war.  But other times they just lazy around; or
go hawk-ing--just hawk-ing and sp--Sh!--d' you hear a noise?”

We skipped out and looked; but it warn't noth-ing but the flut-ter of a
steam-boat's wheel away down, com-ing around the point; so we come back.

“Yes,” says I, “and other times, when things is dull, they fuss with the
par-ly-ment; and if every-body don't go just so he whacks their heads off.
But mostly they hang round the harem.”

“Roun' de which?”

“Harem.”

“What's de harem?”

“The place where he keeps his wives.  Don't you know about the harem?
So-lomon had one; he had about a mil-lion wives.”

“Why, yes, dat's so; I--I'd done for-got it.  A harem's a bo'd'n-house, I
reck'n.  Mos' likely dey has rack-ety times in de nussery.  En I reck'n
de wives quar-rels con-sid-able; en dat 'crease de racket.  Yit dey say
Soller-mun de wises' man dat ever live'.  I doan' take no stock in
dat. Bekase why: would a wise man want to live in de mids' er sich a
blim-blam-min' all de time?  No--'deed he wouldn't.  A wise man 'ud take
en buil' a biler-factry; en den he could shet _down_ de biler-factry
when he want to res'.”

“Well, but he _was_ the wisest man, any-way; be-cause the widow she told
me so, her own self.”

“I doan k'yer what de wid-der say, he _warn't_ no wise man nuther.  He
had some er de dad-fetchedes' ways I ever see.  Does you know 'bout dat
chile dat he 'uz gwyne to chop in two?”

“Yes, the widow told me all about it.”

“_Well_, den!  Warn' dat de beatenes' no-tion in de worl'?  You jes'
take en look at it a minute.  Dah's de stump, dah--dat's one er de wo-men;
heah's you--dat's de yuther one; I's Soller-mun; en dish yer dol-lar bill's
de chile.  Bofe un you claims it.  What does I do?  Does I shin aroun'
mongs' de neigh-bors en fine out which un you de bill _do_ b'long to, en
han' it over to de right one, all safe en soun', de way dat any-body dat
had any gump-tion would?  No; I take en whack de bill in _t-wo_, en give
half un it to you, en de yuther half to de yuther wo-man.  Dat's de way
Soller-mun was gwyne to do wid de chile.  Now I want to ast you:  what's
de use er dat half a bill?--can't buy noth'n wid it.  En what use is a
half a chile?  I wouldn' give a dern for a mil-lion un um.”

“But hang it, Jim, you've clean missed the point--blame it, you've missed
it a thou-sand mile.”

“Who?  Me?  Go 'long.  Doan' talk to me 'bout yo' pints.  I reck'n I
knows sense when I sees it; en dey ain' no sense in sich doin's as
dat. De 'spute warn't 'bout a half a chile, de 'spute was 'bout a whole
chile; en de man dat think he kin settle a 'spute 'bout a whole chile
wid a half a chile doan' know enough to come in out'n de rain.  Doan'
talk to me 'bout Soller-mun, Huck, I knows him by de back.”

“But I tell you you don't get the point.”

“Blame de point!  I reck'n I knows what I knows.  En mine you, de _real_
pint is down furder--it's down deeper.  It lays in de way Soller-mun was
raised.  You take a man dat's got on'y one or two chil-len; is dat man
gwyne to be wase-ful o' chil-len?  No, he ain't; he can't 'ford it.  _He_
know how to value 'em.  But you take a man dat's got 'bout five mil-lion
chil-len run-nin' roun' de house, en it's dif-funt.  _He_ as soon chop a
chile in two as a cat. Dey's plenty mo'.  A chile er two, mo' er less,
warn't no con-sek-ens to Soller-mun, dad fatch him!”

I never see such a nig-ger.  If he got a no-tion in his head once, there
warn't no get-ting it out again.  He was the most down on So-lomon of
any nig-ger I ever see.  So I went to talk-ing about other kings, and let
So-lomon slide.  I told about Louis Six-teenth that got his head cut off
in France long time ago; and about his little boy the dol-phin, that
would a been a king, but they took and shut him up in jail, and some say
he died there.

“Po' little chap.”

“But some says he got out and got away, and come to Amer-ica.”

“Dat's good!  But he'll be pooty lone-some--dey ain' no kings here, is
dey, Huck?”

“No.”

“Den he cain't git no situ-ation.  What he gwyne to do?”

“Well, I don't know.  Some of them gets on the po-lice, and some of them
learns people how to talk French.”

“Why, Huck, doan' de French people talk de same way we does?”

“_No_, Jim; you couldn't un-der-stand a word they said--not a single word.”

“Well, now, I be ding-bus-ted!  How do dat come?”

“I don't know; but it's so.  I got some of their jab-ber out of a book.
S'pose a man was to come to you and say Polly-voo-franzy--what would you
think?”

“I wouldn' think nuff'n; I'd take en bust him over de head--dat is, if he
warn't white.  I wouldn't 'low no nig-ger to call me dat.”

“Shucks, it ain't call-ing you any-thing.  It's only say-ing, do you know
how to talk French?”

“Well, den, why couldn't he _say_ it?”

“Why, he _is_ a-say-ing it.  That's a French-man's _way_ of say-ing it.”

“Well, it's a blame ridick-lous way, en I doan' want to hear no mo' 'bout
it.  Dey ain' no sense in it.”

“Looky here, Jim; does a cat talk like we do?”

“No, a cat don't.”

“Well, does a cow?”

“No, a cow don't, nuther.”

“Does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat?”

“No, dey don't.”

“It's nat-ural and right for 'em to talk dif-fer-ent from each other, ain't
it?”

“Course.”

“And ain't it nat-ural and right for a cat and a cow to talk dif-fer-ent
from _us_?”

“Why, mos' sholy it is.”

“Well, then, why ain't it nat-ural and right for a _French-man_ to talk
dif-fer-ent from us?  You an-swer me that.”

“Is a cat a man, Huck?”

“No.”

“Well, den, dey ain't no sense in a cat talkin' like a man.  Is a cow a
man?--er is a cow a cat?”

“No, she ain't either of them.”

“Well, den, she ain't got no busi-ness to talk like either one er the
yuther of 'em.  Is a French-man a man?”

“Yes.”

“_Well_, den!  Dad blame it, why doan' he _talk_ like a man?  You an-swer
me _d-at_!”

I see it warn't no use wast-ing words--you can't learn a nig-ger to ar-gue.
So I quit.




CHAPTER XV.

WE judged that three nights more would fetch us to Cairo, at the bot-tom
of Illinois, where the Ohio River comes in, and that was what we was
after.  We would sell the raft and get on a steam-boat and go way up the
Ohio amongst the free States, and then be out of trouble.

Well, the second night a fog be-gun to come on, and we made for a tow-head
to tie to, for it wouldn't do to try to run in a fog; but when I paddled
ahead in the ca-noe, with the line to make fast, there warn't any-thing
but little sap-lings to tie to.  I passed the line around one of them
right on the edge of the cut bank, but there was a stiff cur-rent, and
the raft come boom-ing down so lively she tore it out by the roots and
away she went.  I see the fog clos-ing down, and it made me so sick and
scared I couldn't budge for most a half a minute it seemed to me--and
then there warn't no raft in sight; you couldn't see twenty yards.  I
jumped into the ca-noe and run back to the stern, and grabbed the paddle
and set her back a stroke.  But she didn't come.  I was in such a hurry
I hadn't un-tied her.  I got up and tried to un-tie her, but I was so
ex-cited my hands shook so I couldn't hardly do any-thing with them.

As soon as I got star-ted I took out after the raft, hot and heavy, right
down the tow-head.  That was all right as far as it went, but the tow-head
warn't sixty yards long, and the minute I flew by the foot of it I shot
out into the solid white fog, and hadn't no more idea which way I was
go-ing than a dead man.

Thinks I, it won't do to paddle; first I know I'll run into the bank
or a tow-head or some-thing; I got to set still and float, and yet it's
mighty fid-gety busi-ness to have to hold your hands still at such a time.
 I whooped and listened.  Away down there some-wheres I hears a small
whoop, and up comes my spir-its.  I went tear-ing after it, listen-ing
sharp to hear it again.  The next time it come I see I warn't head-ing
for it, but head-ing away to the right of it.  And the next time I was
head-ing away to the left of it--and not gain-ing on it much either, for
I was fly-ing around, this way and that and t'other, but it was go-ing
straight ahead all the time.

I did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan, and beat it all the
time, but he never did, and it was the still places between the whoops
that was mak-ing the trouble for me.  Well, I fought along, and dir-ectly
I hears the whoop _be-hind_ me.  I was tangled good now.  That was
some-body else's whoop, or else I was turned around.

I throwed the paddle down.  I heard the whoop again; it was be-hind me
yet, but in a dif-fer-ent place; it kept com-ing, and kept chan-ging its
place, and I kept an-swer-ing, till by and by it was in front of me again,
and I knowed the cur-rent had swung the ca-noe's head down-stream, and I
was all right if that was Jim and not some other rafts-man holler-ing.
 I couldn't tell noth-ing about voices in a fog, for noth-ing don't look
nat-ural nor sound nat-ural in a fog.

The whoop-ing went on, and in about a minute I come a-boom-ing down on a
cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it, and the cur-rent throwed
me off to the left and shot by, amongst a lot of snags that fairly
roared, the currrent was tear-ing by them so swift.

In an-other second or two it was solid white and still again.  I set
per-fectly still then, listen-ing to my heart thump, and I reckon I didn't
draw a breath while it thumped a hun-dred.

I just give up then.  I knowed what the mat-ter was.  That cut bank
was an is-land, and Jim had gone down t'other side of it.  It warn't no
tow-head that you could float by in ten minutes.  It had the big tim-ber
of a reg-u-lar is-land; it might be five or six miles long and more than
half a mile wide.

I kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fif-teen minutes, I reckon.  I
was float-ing along, of course, four or five miles an hour; but you don't
ever think of that.  No, you _feel_ like you are lay-ing dead still on
the wa-ter; and if a little glimpse of a snag slips by you don't think to
your-self how fast _you're_ go-ing, but you catch your breath and think,
my! how that snag's tear-ing along.  If you think it ain't dis-mal and
lone-some out in a fog that way by your-self in the night, you try it
once--you'll see.

Next, for about a half an hour, I whoops now and then; at last I hears
the an-swer a long ways off, and tries to fol-low it, but I couldn't do
it, and dir-ectly I judged I'd got into a nest of tow-heads, for I had
little dim glimpses of them on both sides of me--some-times just a nar-row
chan-nel between, and some that I couldn't see I knowed was there be-cause
I'd hear the wash of the cur-rent against the old dead brush and trash
that hung over the banks.  Well, I warn't long loos-ing the whoops down
amongst the tow-heads; and I only tried to chase them a little while,
any-way, be-cause it was worse than chas-ing a Jack-o'-lan-tern.  You never
knowed a sound dodge around so, and swap places so quick and so much.

I had to claw away from the bank pretty lively four or five times, to
keep from knock-ing the is-lands out of the river; and so I judged the
raft must be but-ting into the bank every now and then, or else it would
get fur-ther ahead and clear out of hear-ing--it was float-ing a little
faster than what I was.

Well, I seemed to be in the open river again by and by, but I couldn't
hear no sign of a whoop nowheres.  I reckoned Jim had fetched up on a
snag, maybe, and it was all up with him.  I was good and tired, so I
laid down in the ca-noe and said I wouldn't bother no more.  I didn't
want to go to sleep, of course; but I was so sleepy I couldn't help it;
so I thought I would take jest one little cat-nap.

But I reckon it was more than a cat-nap, for when I waked up the stars
was shin-ing bright, the fog was all gone, and I was spin-ning down a
big bend stern first.  First I didn't know where I was; I thought I was
dream-ing; and when things began to come back to me they seemed to come
up dim out of last week.

It was a mon-strous big river here, with the tallest and the thick-est
kind of tim-ber on both banks; just a solid wall, as well as I could see
by the stars.  I looked away down-stream, and seen a black speck on the
wa-ter. I took after it; but when I got to it it warn't noth-ing but a
couple of saw-logs made fast to-gether.  Then I see an-other speck, and
chased that; then an-other, and this time I was right.  It was the raft.

When I got to it Jim was set-ting there with his head down between his
knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the steer-ing-oar.  The
other oar was smashed off, and the raft was littered up with leaves and
branches and dirt.  So she'd had a rough time.

I made fast and laid down un-der Jim's nose on the raft, and began to
gap, and stretch my fists out against Jim, and says:

“Hello, Jim, have I been asleep?  Why didn't you stir me up?”

“Good-ness gra-cious, is dat you, Huck?  En you ain' dead--you ain'
drown-ded--you's back agin?  It's too good for true, honey, it's too good
for true. Lemme look at you chile, lemme feel o' you.  No, you ain'
dead! you's back agin, 'live en soun', jis de same ole Huck--de same ole
Huck, thanks to good-ness!”

“What's the mat-ter with you, Jim?  You been a-drink-ing?”

“Drinkin'?  Has I ben a-drinkin'?  Has I had a chance to be a-drinkin'?”

“Well, then, what makes you talk so wild?”

“How does I talk wild?”

“_How_?  Why, hain't you been talk-ing about my com-ing back, and all that
stuff, as if I'd been gone away?”

“Huck--Huck Finn, you look me in de eye; look me in de eye.  _Hain't_ you
ben gone away?”

“Gone away?  Why, what in the na-tion do you mean?  I hain't been gone
any-wheres.  Where would I go to?”

“Well, looky here, boss, dey's sumf'n wrong, dey is.  Is I _me_, or who
_is_ I? Is I heah, or whah _is_ I?  Now dat's what I wants to know.”

“Well, I think you're here, plain enough, but I think you're a
tangle-headed old fool, Jim.”

“I is, is I?  Well, you an-swer me dis:  Didn't you tote out de line in
de ca-noe fer to make fas' to de tow-head?”

“No, I didn't.  What tow-head?  I hain't see no tow-head.”

“You hain't seen no tow-head?  Looky here, didn't de line pull loose en
de raf' go a-hum-min' down de river, en leave you en de ca-noe be-hine in
de fog?”

“What fog?”

“Why, de fog!--de fog dat's been aroun' all night.  En didn't you whoop,
en didn't I whoop, tell we got mix' up in de is-lands en one un us got
los' en t'other one was jis' as good as los', 'kase he didn' know whah
he wuz? En didn't I bust up agin a lot er dem is-lands en have a tur-rible
time en mos' git drown-ded?  Now ain' dat so, boss--ain't it so?  You
an-swer me dat.”

“Well, this is too many for me, Jim.  I hain't seen no fog, nor no
is-lands, nor no troubles, nor noth-ing.  I been set-ting here talk-ing with
you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago, and I reckon
I done the same.  You couldn't a got drunk in that time, so of course
you've been dream-ing.”

“Dad fetch it, how is I gwyne to dream all dat in ten minutes?”

“Well, hang it all, you did dream it, be-cause there didn't any of it
hap-pen.”

“But, Huck, it's all jis' as plain to me as--”

“It don't make no dif-fer-ence how plain it is; there ain't noth-ing in it.
I know, be-cause I've been here all the time.”

Jim didn't say noth-ing for about five minutes, but set there study-ing
over it.  Then he says:

“Well, den, I reck'n I did dream it, Huck; but dog my cats ef it ain't
de power-fullest dream I ever see.  En I hain't ever had no dream b'fo'
dat's tired me like dis one.”

“Oh, well, that's all right, be-cause a dream does tire a body like
everything some-times.  But this one was a stav-ing dream; tell me all
about it, Jim.”

So Jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through, just as
it happened, only he painted it up con-sid-er-able.  Then he said he must
start in and “'terpret” it, be-cause it was sent for a warn-ing.  He said
the first tow-head stood for a man that would try to do us some good, but
the cur-rent was an-other man that would get us away from him.  The whoops
was warn-ings that would come to us every now and then, and if we didn't
try hard to make out to un-der-stand them they'd just take us into bad
luck, 'stead of keep-ing us out of it.  The lot of tow-heads was troubles
we was go-ing to get into with quar-rel-some people and all kinds of mean
folks, but if we minded our busi-ness and didn't talk back and ag-grav-ate
them, we would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big
clear river, which was the free States, and wouldn't have no more
trouble.

It had clouded up pretty dark just after I got on to the raft, but it
was clear-ing up again now.

“Oh, well, that's all in-ter-preted well enough as far as it goes, Jim,” I
says; “but what does _these_ things stand for?”

It was the leaves and rub-bish on the raft and the smashed oar.  You
could see them first-rate now.

Jim looked at the trash, and then looked at me, and back at the trash
again.  He had got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he
couldn't seem to shake it loose and get the facts back into its place
again right away.  But when he did get the thing straightened around he
looked at me steady without ever smil-ing, and says:

“What do dey stan' for?  I'se gwyne to tell you.  When I got all wore
out wid work, en wid de cal-lin' for you, en went to sleep, my heart wuz
mos' broke bekase you wuz los', en I didn' k'yer no' mo' what be-come
er me en de raf'.  En when I wake up en fine you back agin, all safe
en soun', de tears come, en I could a got down on my knees en kiss yo'
foot, I's so thank-ful. En all you wuz thinkin' 'bout wuz how you could
make a fool uv ole Jim wid a lie.  Dat truck dah is _trash_; en trash
is what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren's en makes 'em
ashamed.”

Then he got up slow and walked to the wig-wam, and went in there without
say-ing any-thing but that.  But that was enough.  It made me feel so mean
I could al-most kissed _his_ foot to get him to take it back.

It was fif-teen minutes be-fore I could work my-self up to go and humble
my-self to a nig-ger; but I done it, and I warn't ever sorry for it
af-ter-wards, neither.  I didn't do him no more mean tricks, and I
wouldn't done that one if I'd a knowed it would make him feel that way.




CHAPTER XVI.

WE slept most all day, and star-ted out at night, a little ways be-hind a
mon-strous long raft that was as long go-ing by as a pro-ces-sion.  She had
four long sweeps at each end, so we judged she car-ried as many as thirty
men, likely.  She had five big wig-wams aboard, wide apart, and an open
camp fire in the middle, and a tall flag-pole at each end.  There was a
power of style about her.  It _amoun-ted_ to some-thing be-ing a rafts-man
on such a craft as that.

We went drift-ing down into a big bend, and the night clouded up and got
hot.  The river was very wide, and was walled with solid tim-ber on
both sides; you couldn't see a break in it hardly ever, or a light.  We
talked about Cairo, and wondered whether we would know it when we got to
it.  I said likely we wouldn't, be-cause I had heard say there warn't but
about a dozen houses there, and if they didn't hap-pen to have them lit
up, how was we go-ing to know we was passing a town?  Jim said if the two
big rivers joined to-gether there, that would show.  But I said maybe
we might think we was passing the foot of an is-land and com-ing into the
same old river again. That dis-turbed Jim--and me too.  So the ques-tion
was, what to do?  I said, paddle ashore the first time a light showed,
and tell them pap was be-hind, com-ing along with a trad-ing-scow, and
was a green hand at the busi-ness, and wanted to know how far it was to
Cairo.  Jim thought it was a good idea, so we took a smoke on it and
waited.

There warn't noth-ing to do now but to look out sharp for the town, and
not pass it without see-ing it.  He said he'd be mighty sure to see it,
be-cause he'd be a free man the minute he seen it, but if he missed it
he'd be in a slave coun-try again and no more show for free-dom.  Every
little while he jumps up and says:

“Dah she is?”

But it warn't.  It was Jack-o'-lan-terns, or light-ning bugs; so he set
down again, and went to watch-ing, same as be-fore.  Jim said it made him
all over trembly and fe-ver-ish to be so close to free-dom.  Well, I can
tell you it made me all over trembly and fe-ver-ish, too, to hear him,
be-cause I be-gun to get it through my head that he _was_ most free--and
who was to blame for it?  Why, _me_.  I couldn't get that out of my
con-science, no how nor no way. It got to troub-ling me so I couldn't
rest; I couldn't stay still in one place.  It hadn't ever come home to
me be-fore, what this thing was that I was do-ing.  But now it did; and it
stayed with me, and scorched me more and more.  I tried to make out to
my-self that I warn't to blame, be-cause I didn't run Jim off from his
right-ful owner; but it warn't no use, con-science up and says, every
time, “But you knowed he was run-ning for his free-dom, and you could a
paddled ashore and told some-body.”  That was so--I couldn't get around
that no-way.  That was where it pinched.  Con-science says to me, “What
had poor Miss Wat-son done to you that you could see her nig-ger go off
right un-der your eyes and never say one single word?  What did that poor
old wo-man do to you that you could treat her so mean?  Why, she tried to
learn you your book, she tried to learn you your man-ners, she tried to
be good to you every way she knowed how.  _That's_ what she done.”

I got to feel-ing so mean and so miser-able I most wished I was dead.  I
fid-geted up and down the raft, ab-us-ing my-self to my-self, and Jim was
fid-get-ing up and down past me.  We neither of us could keep still.
 Every time he danced around and says, “Dah's Cairo!” it went through me
like a shot, and I thought if it _was_ Cairo I reckoned I would die of
miser-able-ness.

Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talk-ing to my-self.  He was
say-ing how the first thing he would do when he got to a free State he
would go to sav-ing up money and never spend a single cent, and when he
got enough he would buy his wife, which was owned on a farm close to
where Miss Wat-son lived; and then they would both work to buy the
two chil-dren, and if their mas-ter wouldn't sell them, they'd get an
Ab'li-tion-ist to go and steal them.

It most froze me to hear such talk.  He wouldn't ever dared to talk such
talk in his life be-fore.  Just see what a dif-fer-ence it made in him the
minute he judged he was about free.  It was ac-cord-ing to the old say-ing,
“Give a nig-ger an inch and he'll take an ell.”  Thinks I, this is what
comes of my not think-ing.  Here was this nig-ger, which I had as good
as helped to run away, com-ing right out flat-footed and say-ing he would
steal his chil-dren--chil-dren that be-longed to a man I didn't even know; a
man that hadn't ever done me no harm.

I was sorry to hear Jim say that, it was such a lower-ing of him.  My
con-science got to stir-ring me up hot-ter than ever, un-til at last I says
to it, “Let up on me--it ain't too late yet--I'll paddle ashore at the
first light and tell.”  I felt easy and happy and light as a feather
right off.  All my troubles was gone.  I went to look-ing out sharp for a
light, and sort of singing to my-self.  By and by one showed.  Jim sings
out:

“We's safe, Huck, we's safe!  Jump up and crack yo' heels!  Dat's de
good ole Cairo at las', I jis knows it!”

I says:

“I'll take the ca-noe and go and see, Jim.  It mightn't be, you know.”

He jumped and got the ca-noe ready, and put his old coat in the bot-tom
for me to set on, and give me the paddle; and as I shoved off, he says:

“Pooty soon I'll be a-shout'n' for joy, en I'll say, it's all on
ac-counts o' Huck; I's a free man, en I couldn't ever ben free ef it
hadn' ben for Huck; Huck done it.  Jim won't ever for-git you, Huck;
you's de bes' fren' Jim's ever had; en you's de _only_ fren' ole Jim's
got now.”

I was pad-dling off, all in a sweat to tell on him; but when he says
this, it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me.  I went along
slow then, and I warn't right down cer-tain whether I was glad I star-ted
or whether I warn't.  When I was fifty yards off, Jim says:

“Dah you goes, de ole true Huck; de on'y white gen-l-man dat ever kep' his
prom-ise to ole Jim.”

Well, I just felt sick.  But I says, I _got_ to do it--I can't get _out_
of it.  Right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns, and
they stopped and I stopped.  One of them says:

“What's that yon-der?”

“A piece of a raft,” I says.

“Do you be-long on it?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Any men on it?”

“Only one, sir.”

“Well, there's five nig-gers run off to-night up yon-der, above the head
of the bend.  Is your man white or black?”

I didn't an-swer up prompt.  I tried to, but the words wouldn't come. I
tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it, but I warn't man
enough--hadn't the spunk of a rab-bit.  I see I was weak-en-ing; so I just
give up try-ing, and up and says:

“He's white.”

“I reckon we'll go and see for ourselves.”

“I wish you would,” says I, “be-cause it's pap that's there, and maybe
you'd help me tow the raft ashore where the light is.  He's sick--and so
is mam and Mary Ann.”

“Oh, the devil! we're in a hurry, boy.  But I s'pose we've got to.
 Come, buckle to your paddle, and let's get along.”

I buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars.  When we had made a
stroke or two, I says:

“Pap'll be mighty much ob-lee-ged to you, I can tell you.  Every-body goes
away when I want them to help me tow the raft ashore, and I can't do it
by my-self.”

“Well, that's in-fernal mean.  Odd, too.  Say, boy, what's the mat-ter
with your father?”

“It's the--a--the--well, it ain't any-thing much.”

They stopped pulling.  It warn't but a mighty little ways to the raft
now. One says:

“Boy, that's a lie.  What _is_ the mat-ter with your pap?  An-swer up
square now, and it'll be the bet-ter for you.”

“I will, sir, I will, hon-est--but don't leave us, please.  It's
the--the--Gen-tle-men, if you'll only pull ahead, and let me heave you the
head-line, you won't have to come a-near the raft--please do.”

“Set her back, John, set her back!” says one.  They backed wa-ter.  “Keep
away, boy--keep to looard.  Con-found it, I just ex-pect the wind has
blowed it to us.  Your pap's got the small-pox, and you know it pre-cious
well.  Why didn't you come out and say so?  Do you want to spread it all
over?”

“Well,” says I, a-blub-ber-ing, “I've told every-body be-fore, and they just
went away and left us.”

“Poor devil, there's some-thing in that.  We are right down sorry for
you, but we--well, hang it, we don't want the small-pox, you see.  Look
here, I'll tell you what to do.  Don't you try to land by your-self, or
you'll smash everything to pieces.  You float along down about twenty
miles, and you'll come to a town on the left-hand side of the river.  It
will be long after sun-up then, and when you ask for help you tell them
your folks are all down with chills and fever.  Don't be a fool again,
and let people guess what is the mat-ter.  Now we're try-ing to do you a
kind-ness; so you just put twenty miles between us, that's a good boy.
 It wouldn't do any good to land yon-der where the light is--it's only a
wood-yard. Say, I reckon your father's poor, and I'm bound to say he's
in pretty hard luck.  Here, I'll put a twenty-dol-lar gold piece on this
board, and you get it when it floats by.  I feel mighty mean to leave
you; but my king-dom! it won't do to fool with small-pox, don't you see?”

“Hold on, Parker,” says the other man, “here's a twenty to put on the
board for me.  Good-bye, boy; you do as Mr. Parker told you, and you'll
be all right.”

“That's so, my boy--good-bye, good-bye.  If you see any run-away nig-gers
you get help and nab them, and you can make some money by it.”

“Good-bye, sir,” says I; “I won't let no run-away nig-gers get by me if I
can help it.”

They went off and I got aboard the raft, feel-ing bad and low, be-cause I
knowed very well I had done wrong, and I see it warn't no use for me
to try to learn to do right; a body that don't get _star-ted_ right when
he's little ain't got no show--when the pinch comes there ain't noth-ing
to back him up and keep him to his work, and so he gets beat.  Then I
thought a minute, and says to my-self, hold on; s'pose you'd a done right
and give Jim up, would you felt bet-ter than what you do now?  No, says
I, I'd feel bad--I'd feel just the same way I do now.  Well, then, says
I, what's the use you learn-ing to do right when it's trouble-some to do
right and ain't no trouble to do wrong, and the wages is just the same?
 I was stuck.  I couldn't an-swer that.  So I reckoned I wouldn't bother
no more about it, but after this al-ways do whichever come han-di-est at
the time.

I went into the wig-wam; Jim warn't there.  I looked all around; he
warn't any-where.  I says:

“Jim!”

“Here I is, Huck.  Is dey out o' sight yit?  Don't talk loud.”

He was in the river un-der the stern oar, with just his nose out.  I told
him they were out of sight, so he come aboard.  He says:

“I was a-listenin' to all de talk, en I slips into de river en was gwyne
to shove for sho' if dey come aboard.  Den I was gwyne to swim to de
raf' agin when dey was gone.  But lawsy, how you did fool 'em, Huck!
 Dat _wuz_ de smartes' dodge!  I tell you, chile, I'spec it save' ole
Jim--ole Jim ain't go-ing to for-git you for dat, honey.”

Then we talked about the money.  It was a pretty good raise--twenty
dol-lars apiece.  Jim said we could take deck pas-sage on a steam-boat
now, and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free
States. He said twenty mile more warn't far for the raft to go, but he
wished we was already there.

Towards day-break we tied up, and Jim was mighty par-tic-u-lar about hid-ing
the raft good.  Then he worked all day fix-ing things in bundles, and
get-ting all ready to quit raft-ing.

That night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town away down
in a left-hand bend.

I went off in the ca-noe to ask about it.  Pretty soon I found a man out
in the river with a skiff, set-ting a trot-line.  I ranged up and says:

“Mister, is that town Cairo?”

“Cairo? no.  You must be a blame' fool.”

“What town is it, mis-ter?”

“If you want to know, go and find out.  If you stay here both-erin'
around me for about a half a minute longer you'll get some-thing you
won't want.”

I paddled to the raft.  Jim was aw-ful dis-ap-poin-ted, but I said never
mind, Cairo would be the next place, I reckoned.

We passed an-other town be-fore day-light, and I was go-ing out again; but
it was high ground, so I didn't go.  No high ground about Cairo, Jim
said. I had for-got it.  We laid up for the day on a tow-head tol-er-able
close to the left-hand bank.  I be-gun to sus-pi-cion some-thing.  So did
Jim.  I says:

“Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night.”

He says:

“Doan' le's talk about it, Huck.  Po' nig-gers can't have no luck.  I
awluz 'spec-ted dat rattlesnake-skin warn't done wid its work.”

“I wish I'd never seen that snake-skin, Jim--I do wish I'd never laid
eyes on it.”

“It ain't yo' fault, Huck; you didn' know.  Don't you blame yo'self
'bout it.”

When it was day-light, here was the clear Ohio wa-ter in-shore, sure
enough, and out-side was the old reg-u-lar Muddy!  So it was all up with
Cairo.

We talked it all over.  It wouldn't do to take to the shore; we couldn't
take the raft up the stream, of course.  There warn't no way but to wait
for dark, and start back in the ca-noe and take the chances.  So we slept
all day amongst the cot-ton-wood thicket, so as to be fresh for the work,
and when we went back to the raft about dark the ca-noe was gone!

We didn't say a word for a good while.  There warn't any-thing to
say.  We both knowed well enough it was some more work of the
rattlesnake-skin; so what was the use to talk about it?  It would only
look like we was find-ing fault, and that would be bound to fetch more
bad luck--and keep on fetch-ing it, too, till we knowed enough to keep
still.

By and by we talked about what we bet-ter do, and found there warn't no
way but just to go along down with the raft till we got a chance to buy
a ca-noe to go back in.  We warn't go-ing to bor-row it when there warn't
any-body around, the way pap would do, for that might set people after
us.

So we shoved out after dark on the raft.

Anybody that don't be-lieve yet that it's fool-ish-ness to handle a
snake-skin, after all that that snake-skin done for us, will be-lieve it
now if they read on and see what more it done for us.

The place to buy ca-noes is off of rafts lay-ing up at shore.  But we
didn't see no rafts lay-ing up; so we went along dur-ing three hours and
more.  Well, the night got gray and ruther thick, which is the next
mean-est thing to fog.  You can't tell the shape of the river, and you
can't see no dis-tance. It got to be very late and still, and then along
comes a steam-boat up the river.  We lit the lan-tern, and judged she
would see it.  Up-stream boats didn't gen-erly come close to us; they
go out and fol-low the bars and hunt for easy wa-ter un-der the reefs; but
nights like this they bull right up the chan-nel against the whole river.

We could hear her pound-ing along, but we didn't see her good till she
was close.  She aimed right for us.  Often they do that and try to see
how close they can come without touch-ing; some-times the wheel bites off
a sweep, and then the pi-lot sticks his head out and laughs, and thinks
he's mighty smart.  Well, here she comes, and we said she was go-ing to
try and shave us; but she didn't seem to be sheer-ing off a bit.  She
was a big one, and she was com-ing in a hurry, too, look-ing like a black
cloud with rows of glow-worms around it; but all of a sud-den she bulged
out, big and scary, with a long row of wide-open fur-nace doors shin-ing
like red-hot teeth, and her mon-strous bows and guards hanging right
over us.  There was a yell at us, and a jingling of bells to stop the
en-gines, a pow-wow of cuss-ing, and whist-ling of steam--and as Jim went
over-board on one side and I on the other, she come smash-ing straight
through the raft.

I dived--and I aimed to find the bot-tom, too, for a thirty-foot wheel
had got to go over me, and I wanted it to have plenty of room.  I could
al-ways stay un-der wa-ter a minute; this time I reckon I stayed un-der a
minute and a half.  Then I bounced for the top in a hurry, for I was
nearly bust-ing.  I popped out to my armpits and blowed the wa-ter out of
my nose, and puffed a bit.  Of course there was a boom-ing cur-rent; and
of course that boat star-ted her en-gines again ten seconds after she
stopped them, for they never cared much for rafts-men; so now she was
churn-ing along up the river, out of sight in the thick weather, though I
could hear her.

I sung out for Jim about a dozen times, but I didn't get any an-swer;
so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was “tread-ing wa-ter,” and
struck out for shore, shov-ing it ahead of me.  But I made out to see
that the drift of the cur-rent was to-wards the left-hand shore, which
meant that I was in a cross-ing; so I changed off and went that way.

It was one of these long, slant-ing, two-mile cross-ings; so I was a good
long time in get-ting over.  I made a safe land-ing, and clumb up the
bank. I couldn't see but a little ways, but I went pok-ing along over
rough ground for a quarter of a mile or more, and then I run across a
big old-fash-ioned double log-house be-fore I no-ticed it.  I was go-ing to
rush by and get away, but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howl-ing
and bark-ing at me, and I knowed bet-ter than to move an-other peg.




CHAPTER XVII.

IN about a minute some-body spoke out of a win-dow without put-ting his
head out, and says:

“Be done, boys!  Who's there?”

I says:

“It's me.”

“Who's me?”

“Ge-orge Jack-son, sir.”

“What do you want?”

“I don't want noth-ing, sir.  I only want to go along by, but the dogs
won't let me.”

“What are you prowl-ing around here this time of night for--hey?”

“I warn't prowl-ing around, sir, I fell over-board off of the steam-boat.”

“Oh, you did, did you?  Strike a light there, some-body.  What did you
say your name was?”

“Ge-orge Jack-son, sir.  I'm only a boy.”

“Look here, if you're telling the truth you needn't be afraid--nobody'll
hurt you.  But don't try to budge; stand right where you are.  Rouse out
Bob and Tom, some of you, and fetch the guns.  Ge-orge Jack-son, is there
any-body with you?”

“No, sir, nobody.”

I heard the people stir-ring around in the house now, and see a light.
The man sung out:

“Sn-atch that light away, Betsy, you old fool--ain't you got any sense?
Put it on the floor be-hind the front door.  Bob, if you and Tom are
ready, take your places.”

“All ready.”

“Now, Ge-orge Jack-son, do you know the Shep-herd-sons?”

“No, sir; I never heard of them.”

“Well, that may be so, and it mayn't.  Now, all ready.  Step for-ward,
Ge-orge Jack-son.  And mind, don't you hurry--come mighty slow.  If there's
any-body with you, let him keep back--if he shows him-self he'll be shot.
Come along now.  Come slow; push the door open your-self--just enough to
squeeze in, d' you hear?”

I didn't hurry; I couldn't if I'd a wanted to.  I took one slow step at
a time and there warn't a sound, only I thought I could hear my heart.
 The dogs were as still as the hu-mans, but they fol-lowed a little be-hind
me. When I got to the three log door-steps I heard them un-lock-ing and
un-bar-ring and un-bolt-ing.  I put my hand on the door and pushed it a
little and a little more till some-body said, “There, that's enough--put
your head in.” I done it, but I judged they would take it off.

The candle was on the floor, and there they all was, look-ing at me, and
me at them, for about a quarter of a minute:  Three big men with guns
poin-ted at me, which made me wince, I tell you; the old-est, gray
and about sixty, the other two thirty or more--all of them fine and
hand-some--and the sweetest old gray-headed lady, and back of her two
young wo-men which I couldn't see right well.  The old gen-tle-man says:

“There; I reckon it's all right.  Come in.”

As soon as I was in the old gen-tle-man he locked the door and barred it
and bolted it, and told the young men to come in with their guns, and
they all went in a big par-lor that had a new rag car-pet on the floor,
and got to-gether in a corner that was out of the range of the front
win-dows--there warn't none on the side.  They held the candle, and took a
good look at me, and all said, “Why, _he_ ain't a Shep-herd-son--no, there
ain't any Shep-herd-son about him.”  Then the old man said he hoped I
wouldn't mind be-ing searched for arms, be-cause he didn't mean no harm by
it--it was only to make sure.  So he didn't pry into my pock-ets, but only
felt out-side with his hands, and said it was all right.  He told me to
make my-self easy and at home, and tell all about my-self; but the old
lady says:

“Why, bless you, Saul, the poor thing's as wet as he can be; and don't
you reckon it may be he's hungry?”

“True for you, Rachel--I for-got.”

So the old lady says:

“Betsy” (this was a nig-ger wo-man), “you fly around and get him some-thing
to eat as quick as you can, poor thing; and one of you girls go and wake
up Buck and tell him--oh, here he is him-self.  Buck, take this little
stranger and get the wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some
of yours that's dry.”

Buck looked about as old as me--thir-teen or four-teen or along there,
though he was a little big-ger than me.  He hadn't on any-thing but a
shirt, and he was very frowzy-headed.  He came in gap-ing and dig-ging one
fist into his eyes, and he was drag-ging a gun along with the other one.
He says:

“Ain't they no Shep-herd-sons around?”

They said, no, 'twas a false alarm.

“Well,” he says, “if they'd a ben some, I reckon I'd a got one.”

They all laughed, and Bob says:

“Why, Buck, they might have scalped us all, you've been so slow in
com-ing.”

“Well, nobody come after me, and it ain't right I'm al-ways kept down; I
don't get no show.”

“Never mind, Buck, my boy,” says the old man, “you'll have show enough,
all in good time, don't you fret about that.  Go 'long with you now, and
do as your mother told you.”

When we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt and a
round-about and pants of his, and I put them on.  While I was at it he
asked me what my name was, but be-fore I could tell him he star-ted to
tell me about a blue-jay and a young rab-bit he had catched in the woods
day be-fore yes-ter-day, and he asked me where Moses was when the candle
went out.  I said I didn't know; I hadn't heard about it be-fore, no way.

“Well, guess,” he says.

“How'm I go-ing to guess,” says I, “when I never heard tell of it
be-fore?”

“But you can guess, can't you?  It's just as easy.”

“_Which_ candle?”  I says.

“Why, any candle,” he says.

“I don't know where he was,” says I; “where was he?”

“Why, he was in the _dark_!  That's where he was!”

“Well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me for?”

“Why, blame it, it's a riddle, don't you see?  Say, how long are you
go-ing to stay here?  You got to stay al-ways.  We can just have boom-ing
times--they don't have no school now.  Do you own a dog?  I've got a
dog--and he'll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in.  Do
you like to comb up Sundays, and all that kind of fool-ish-ness?  You bet
I don't, but ma she makes me.  Con-found these ole britches!  I reckon
I'd bet-ter put 'em on, but I'd ruther not, it's so warm.  Are you all
ready? All right.  Come along, old hoss.”

Cold corn-pone, cold corn-beef, but-ter and but-ter-milk--that is what they
had for me down there, and there ain't noth-ing bet-ter that ever I've
come across yet.  Buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes,
ex-cept the nig-ger wo-man, which was gone, and the two young wo-men.  They
all smoked and talked, and I eat and talked.  The young wo-men had
quilts around them, and their hair down their backs.  They all asked me
ques-tions, and I told them how pap and me and all the fam-ily was liv-ing
on a little farm down at the bot-tom of Arkansaw, and my sis-ter Mary Ann
run off and got mar-ried and never was heard of no more, and Bill went
to hunt them and he warn't heard of no more, and Tom and Mort died,
and then there warn't nobody but just me and pap left, and he was just
trimmed down to noth-ing, on ac-count of his troubles; so when he died
I took what there was left, be-cause the farm didn't be-long to us, and
star-ted up the river, deck pas-sage, and fell over-board; and that was how
I come to be here.  So they said I could have a home there as long as I
wanted it.  Then it was most day-light and every-body went to bed, and I
went to bed with Buck, and when I waked up in the morn-ing, drat it all,
I had for-got what my name was. So I laid there about an hour try-ing to
think, and when Buck waked up I says:

“Can you spell, Buck?”

“Yes,” he says.

“I bet you can't spell my name,” says I.

“I bet you what you dare I can,” says he.

“All right,” says I, “go ahead.”

“G-e-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n--there now,” he says.

“Well,” says I, “you done it, but I didn't think you could.  It ain't no
slouch of a name to spell--right off without study-ing.”

I set it down, private, be-cause some-body might want _me_ to spell it
next, and so I wanted to be handy with it and rattle it off like I was
used to it.

It was a mighty nice fam-ily, and a mighty nice house, too.  I hadn't
seen no house out in the coun-try be-fore that was so nice and had so much
style.  It didn't have an iron latch on the front door, nor a wooden one
with a buck-skin string, but a brass knob to turn, the same as houses in
town. There warn't no bed in the par-lor, nor a sign of a bed; but heaps
of par-lors in towns has beds in them.  There was a big fire-place that
was bricked on the bot-tom, and the bricks was kept clean and red by
pour-ing wa-ter on them and scrub-bing them with an-other brick; some-times
they wash them over with red wa-ter-paint that they call Span-ish-brown,
same as they do in town.  They had big brass dog-irons that could hold
up a saw-log. There was a clock on the middle of the man-tel-piece, with
a pic-ture of a town painted on the bot-tom half of the glass front, and
a round place in the middle of it for the sun, and you could see the
pen-du-lum swinging be-hind it.  It was beau-ti-ful to hear that clock tick;
and some-times when one of these ped-dlers had been along and scoured her
up and got her in good shape, she would start in and strike a hun-dred
and fifty be-fore she got tuckered out.  They wouldn't took any money for
her.

Well, there was a big out-land-ish par-rot on each side of the clock,
made out of some-thing like chalk, and painted up gaudy.  By one of the
par-rots was a cat made of crock-ery, and a crock-ery dog by the other;
and when you pressed down on them they squeaked, but didn't open
their mouths nor look dif-fer-ent nor in-ter-ested.  They squeaked through
un-der-neath.  There was a couple of big wild-tur-key-wing fans spread out
be-hind those things.  On the table in the middle of the room was a kind
of a lovely crock-ery bas-ket that had apples and or-anges and peaches and
grapes piled up in it, which was much red-der and yel-lower and pret-tier
than real ones is, but they warn't real be-cause you could see where
pieces had got chipped off and showed the white chalk, or whatever it
was, un-der-neath.

This table had a cover made out of beau-ti-ful oil-cloth, with a red and
blue spread-eagle painted on it, and a painted bor-der all around.  It
come all the way from Phil-adelphia, they said.  There was some books,
too, piled up per-fectly ex-act, on each corner of the table.  One was a
big fam-ily Bible full of pic-tures.  One was Pil-grim's Pro-gress, about a
man that left his fam-ily, it didn't say why.  I read con-sid-er-able in it
now and then.  The state-ments was in-ter-est-ing, but tough.  Another was
Friend-ship's Of-fer-ing, full of beau-ti-ful stuff and po-etry; but I didn't
read the po-etry.  Another was Henry Clay's Speeches, and an-other was Dr.
Gunn's Fam-ily Medi-cine, which told you all about what to do if a body
was sick or dead.  There was a hymn book, and a lot of other books.  And
there was nice split-bot-tom chairs, and per-fectly sound, too--not bagged
down in the middle and bus-ted, like an old bas-ket.

They had pic-tures hung on the walls--mainly Wash-ing-tons and La-fay-ettes,
and battles, and High-land Marys, and one called “Sign-ing the
De-clar-a-tion.” There was some that they called cray-ons, which one of the
daugh-ters which was dead made her own self when she was only
fif-teen years old.  They was dif-fer-ent from any pic-tures I ever see
be-fore--blacker, mostly, than is com-mon.  One was a wo-man in a slim black
dress, belted small un-der the armpits, with bulges like a cab-bage in
the middle of the sleeves, and a large black scoop-shovel bon-net with
a black veil, and white slim ankles crossed about with black tape, and
very wee black slip-pers, like a chisel, and she was lean-ing pens-ive on a
tomb-stone on her right el-bow, un-der a weep-ing wil-low, and her other hand
hanging down her side hold-ing a white handker-chief and a retic-ule,
and un-der-neath the pic-ture it said “Shall I Never See Thee More Alas.”
  Another one was a young lady with her hair all combed up straight
to the top of her head, and knot-ted there in front of a comb like a
chair-back, and she was cry-ing into a handker-chief and had a dead bird
lay-ing on its back in her other hand with its heels up, and un-der-neath
the pic-ture it said “I Shall Never Hear Thy Sweet Chir-rup More Alas.”
  There was one where a young lady was at a win-dow look-ing up at the
moon, and tears run-ning down her cheeks; and she had an open let-ter in
one hand with black seal-ing wax show-ing on one edge of it, and she was
mash-ing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth, and un-der-neath
the pic-ture it said “And Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art Gone Alas.”  These
was all nice pic-tures, I reckon, but I didn't some-how seem to take
to them, be-cause if ever I was down a little they al-ways give me the
fan-tods.  Every-body was sorry she died, be-cause she had laid out a lot
more of these pic-tures to do, and a body could see by what she had done
what they had lost.  But I reckoned that with her dis-pos-i-tion she was
hav-ing a bet-ter time in the grave-yard.  She was at work on what they
said was her greatest pic-ture when she took sick, and every day and
every night it was her prayer to be al-lowed to live till she got it
done, but she never got the chance.  It was a pic-ture of a young wo-man
in a long white gown, stand-ing on the rail of a bridge all ready to jump
off, with her hair all down her back, and look-ing up to the moon, with
the tears run-ning down her face, and she had two arms fol-ded across her
breast, and two arms stretched out in front, and two more reach-ing up
to-wards the moon--and the idea was to see which pair would look best,
and then scratch out all the other arms; but, as I was say-ing, she died
be-fore she got her mind made up, and now they kept this pic-ture over the
head of the bed in her room, and every time her birth-day come they hung
flowers on it.  Other times it was hid with a little cur-tain.  The young
wo-man in the pic-ture had a kind of a nice sweet face, but there was so
many arms it made her look too spidery, seemed to me.

This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and used to paste
ob-it-u-ar-ies and ac-ci-dents and cases of pa-tient suf-fer-ing in it out of the
Pres-by-terian Ob-server, and write po-etry after them out of her own head.
It was very good po-etry. This is what she wrote about a boy by the name
of Stephen Dowl-ing Bots that fell down a well and was drown-ded:

ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS, DEC'D

And did young Stephen sicken,    And did young Stephen die? And did the
sad hearts thicken,    And did the mourn-ers cry?

No; such was not the fate of    Young Stephen Dowl-ing Bots; Though sad
hearts round him thickened,    'Twas not from sick-ness' shots.

No whoop-ing-cough did rack his frame,    Nor measles drear with spots;
Not these im-paired the sac-red name    Of Stephen Dowl-ing Bots.

Despised love struck not with woe    That head of curly knots, Nor
stom-ach troubles laid him low,    Young Stephen Dowl-ing Bots.

O no. Then list with tear-ful eye,    Whilst I his fate do tell. His soul
did from this cold world fly    By fall-ing down a well.

They got him out and emp-tied him;    Alas it was too late; His spirit
was gone for to sport aloft    In the realms of the good and great.

If Em-meline Granger-ford could make po-etry like that be-fore she was
four-teen, there ain't no telling what she could a done by and by.  Buck
said she could rattle off po-etry like noth-ing.  She didn't ever have to
stop to think.  He said she would slap down a line, and if she couldn't
find any-thing to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down
an-other one, and go ahead. She warn't par-tic-u-lar; she could write about
any-thing you choose to give her to write about just so it was sad-ful.
Every time a man died, or a wo-man died, or a child died, she would be on
hand with her “trib-ute” be-fore he was cold.  She called them trib-utes.
The neigh-bors said it was the doc-tor first, then Em-meline, then the
un-der-taker--the un-der-taker never got in ahead of Em-meline but once, and
then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead per-son's name, which was
Whist-ler.  She warn't ever the same after that; she never com-plained,
but she kinder pined away and did not live long.  Poor thing, many's the
time I made my-self go up to the little room that used to be hers and get
out her poor old scrap-book and read in it when her pic-tures had been
ag-grav-at-ing me and I had soured on her a little.  I liked all that
fam-ily, dead ones and all, and warn't go-ing to let any-thing come between
us.  Poor Em-meline made po-etry about all the dead people when she was
alive, and it didn't seem right that there warn't nobody to make some
about her now she was gone; so I tried to sweat out a verse or two
my-self, but I couldn't seem to make it go some-how.  They kept Em-meline's
room trim and nice, and all the things fixed in it just the way she
liked to have them when she was alive, and nobody ever slept there.
 The old lady took care of the room her-self, though there was plenty
of nig-gers, and she sewed there a good deal and read her Bible there
mostly.

Well, as I was say-ing about the par-lor, there was beau-ti-ful cur-tains on
the win-dows:  white, with pic-tures painted on them of castles with vines
all down the walls, and cattle com-ing down to drink.  There was a little
old pi-ano, too, that had tin pans in it, I reckon, and noth-ing was ever
so lovely as to hear the young ladies sing “The Last Link is Broken”
 and play “The Battle of Prague” on it.  The walls of all the rooms was
plastered, and most had car-pets on the floors, and the whole house was
white-washed on the out-side.

It was a double house, and the big open place betwixt them was roofed
and floored, and some-times the table was set there in the middle of the
day, and it was a cool, com-fort-able place.  Noth-ing couldn't be bet-ter.
 And warn't the cook-ing good, and just bushels of it too!




CHAPTER XVIII.

COL.  Granger-ford was a gen-tle-man, you see.  He was a gen-tle-man all
over; and so was his fam-ily.  He was well born, as the say-ing is, and
that's worth as much in a man as it is in a horse, so the Widow Douglas
said, and nobody ever denied that she was of the first ar-is-to-cracy
in our town; and pap he al-ways said it, too, though he warn't no more
qual-ity than a mud-cat him-self.  Col.  Granger-ford was very tall and
very slim, and had a dark-ish-paly com-plex-ion, not a sign of red in it
any-wheres; he was clean shaved every morn-ing all over his thin face, and
he had the thin-nest kind of lips, and the thin-nest kind of nos-trils, and
a high nose, and heavy eye-brows, and the black-est kind of eyes, sunk so
deep back that they seemed like they was look-ing out of cav-erns at
you, as you may say.  His fore-head was high, and his hair was black and
straight and hung to his shoulders. His hands was long and thin, and
every day of his life he put on a clean shirt and a full suit from head
to foot made out of linen so white it hurt your eyes to look at it;
and on Sundays he wore a blue tail-coat with brass but-tons on it.  He
car-ried a ma-hogany cane with a sil-ver head to it.  There warn't no
frivol-ish-ness about him, not a bit, and he warn't ever loud.  He was
as kind as he could be--you could feel that, you know, and so you had
con-fid-ence.  So-me-times he smiled, and it was good to see; but when he
straightened him-self up like a liberty-pole, and the light-ning be-gun to
flicker out from un-der his eye-brows, you wanted to climb a tree first,
and find out what the mat-ter was af-ter-wards.  He didn't ever have to
tell any-body to mind their man-ners--every-body was al-ways good-mannered
where he was.  Every-body loved to have him around, too; he was sun-shine
most al-ways--I mean he made it seem like good weather.  When he turned
into a cloud-bank it was aw-ful dark for half a minute, and that was
enough; there wouldn't noth-ing go wrong again for a week.

When him and the old lady come down in the morn-ing all the fam-ily got
up out of their chairs and give them good-day, and didn't set down again
till they had set down.  Then Tom and Bob went to the side-board where
the de-canter was, and mixed a glass of bit-ters and handed it to him, and
he held it in his hand and waited till Tom's and Bob's was mixed, and
then they bowed and said, “Our duty to you, sir, and madam;” and _they_
bowed the least bit in the world and said thank you, and so they drank,
all three, and Bob and Tom poured a spoon-ful of wa-ter on the sugar and
the mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bot-tom of their tum-blers, and
give it to me and Buck, and we drank to the old people too.

Bob was the old-est and Tom next--tall, beau-ti-ful men with very broad
shoulders and brown faces, and long black hair and black eyes.  They
dressed in white linen from head to foot, like the old gen-tle-man, and
wore broad Panama hats.

Then there was Miss Char-lotte; she was twenty-five, and tall and proud
and grand, but as good as she could be when she warn't stirred up; but
when she was she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks,
like her father.  She was beau-ti-ful.

So was her sis-ter, Miss Sophia, but it was a dif-fer-ent kind.  She was
gentle and sweet like a dove, and she was only twenty.

Each per-son had their own nig-ger to wait on them--Buck too.  My nig-ger
had a mon-strous easy time, be-cause I warn't used to hav-ing any-body do
any-thing for me, but Buck's was on the jump most of the time.

This was all there was of the fam-ily now, but there used to be
more--three sons; they got killed; and Em-meline that died.

The old gen-tle-man owned a lot of farms and over a hun-dred nig-gers.
So-me-times a stack of people would come there, horse-back, from ten or
fif-teen mile around, and stay five or six days, and have such jun-ket-ings
round about and on the river, and dances and pic-nics in the woods
day-times, and balls at the house nights.  These people was mostly
kin-folks of the fam-ily.  The men brought their guns with them.  It was a
hand-some lot of qual-ity, I tell you.

There was an-other clan of ar-is-to-cracy around there--five or six
fam-il-ies--mostly of the name of Shep-herd-son.  They was as high-toned
and well born and rich and grand as the tribe of Granger-fords.  The
Shep-herd-sons and Granger-fords used the same steam-boat land-ing, which was
about two mile above our house; so some-times when I went up there with a
lot of our folks I used to see a lot of the Shep-herd-sons there on their
fine horses.

One day Buck and me was away out in the woods hunt-ing, and heard a horse
com-ing.  We was cross-ing the road.  Buck says:

“Quick!  Jump for the woods!”

We done it, and then peeped down the woods through the leaves.  Pretty
soon a splen-did young man come gal-lop-ing down the road, set-ting his
horse easy and look-ing like a sol-dier.  He had his gun across his
pom-mel.  I had seen him be-fore.  It was young Har-ney Shep-herd-son.  I
heard Buck's gun go off at my ear, and Har-ney's hat tumbled off from his
head.  He grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we was
hid.  But we didn't wait.  We star-ted through the woods on a run.  The
woods warn't thick, so I looked over my shoulder to dodge the bul-let,
and twice I seen Har-ney cover Buck with his gun; and then he rode away
the way he come--to get his hat, I reckon, but I couldn't see.  We never
stopped run-ning till we got home.  The old gen-tle-man's eyes blazed a
minute--'twas pleas-ure, mainly, I judged--then his face sort of smoothed
down, and he says, kind of gentle:

“I don't like that shoot-ing from be-hind a bush.  Why didn't you step
into the road, my boy?”

“The Shep-herd-sons don't, father.  They al-ways take ad-vant-age.”

Miss Char-lotte she held her head up like a queen while Buck was telling
his tale, and her nos-trils spread and her eyes snapped.  The two young
men looked dark, but never said noth-ing.  Miss Sophia she turned pale,
but the color come back when she found the man warn't hurt.

Soon as I could get Buck down by the corn-cribs un-der the trees by
ourselves, I says:

“Did you want to kill him, Buck?”

“Well, I bet I did.”

“What did he do to you?”

“Him?  He never done noth-ing to me.”

“Well, then, what did you want to kill him for?”

“Why, noth-ing--only it's on ac-count of the feud.”

“What's a feud?”

“Why, where was you raised?  Don't you know what a feud is?”

“Never heard of it be-fore--tell me about it.”

“Well,” says Buck, “a feud is this way:  A man has a quar-rel with
an-other man, and kills him; then that other man's brother kills _him_;
then the other broth-ers, on both sides, goes for one an-other; then the
_cous-ins_ chip in--and by and by every-body's killed off, and there ain't
no more feud.  But it's kind of slow, and takes a long time.”

“Has this one been go-ing on long, Buck?”

“Well, I should _reck-on_!  It star-ted thirty year ago, or som'ers along
there.  There was trouble 'bout some-thing, and then a law-suit to settle
it; and the suit went agin one of the men, and so he up and shot the
man that won the suit--which he would nat-ur-ally do, of course.  Anybody
would.”

“What was the trouble about, Buck?--land?”

“I reckon maybe--I don't know.”

“Well, who done the shoot-ing?  Was it a Granger-ford or a Shep-herd-son?”

“Laws, how do I know?  It was so long ago.”

“Don't any-body know?”

“Oh, yes, pa knows, I reckon, and some of the other old people; but they
don't know now what the row was about in the first place.”

“Has there been many killed, Buck?”

“Yes; right smart chance of fu-ner-als.  But they don't al-ways kill.  Pa's
got a few buck-shot in him; but he don't mind it 'cuz he don't weigh
much, any-way.  Bob's been carved up some with a bowie, and Tom's been
hurt once or twice.”

“Has any-body been killed this year, Buck?”

“Yes; we got one and they got one.  'Bout three months ago my cousin
Bud, four-teen year old, was rid-ing through the woods on t'other side
of the river, and didn't have no weapon with him, which was blame'
fool-ish-ness, and in a lone-some place he hears a horse a-com-ing be-hind
him, and sees old Baldy Shep-herd-son a-linkin' after him with his gun in
his hand and his white hair a-fly-ing in the wind; and 'stead of jump-ing
off and tak-ing to the brush, Bud 'lowed he could out-run him; so they
had it, nip and tuck, for five mile or more, the old man a-gain-ing all
the time; so at last Bud seen it warn't any use, so he stopped and faced
around so as to have the bul-let holes in front, you know, and the old
man he rode up and shot him down.  But he didn't git much chance to
en-joy his luck, for in-side of a week our folks laid _him_ out.”

“I reckon that old man was a cow-ard, Buck.”

“I reckon he _warn't_ a cow-ard.  Not by a blame' sight.  There ain't a
cow-ard amongst them Shep-herd-sons--not a one.  And there ain't no cow-ards
amongst the Granger-fords either.  Why, that old man kep' up his end in a
fight one day for half an hour against three Granger-fords, and come
out win-ner.  They was all a-horse-back; he lit off of his horse and got
be-hind a little wood-pile, and kep' his horse be-fore him to stop the
bul-lets; but the Granger-fords stayed on their horses and capered around
the old man, and peppered away at him, and he peppered away at them.
 Him and his horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled, but the
Granger-fords had to be _fetched_ home--and one of 'em was dead, and
an-other died the next day.  No, sir; if a body's out hunt-ing for cow-ards
he don't want to fool away any time amongst them Shep-herd-sons, becuz
they don't breed any of that _kind_.”

Next Sunday we all went to church, about three mile, every-body
a-horse-back. The men took their guns along, so did Buck, and kept
them between their knees or stood them handy against the wall.  The
Shep-herd-sons done the same.  It was pretty ornery preach-ing--all about
broth-erly love, and such-like tire-some-ness; but every-body said it was
a good ser-mon, and they all talked it over go-ing home, and had such
a power-ful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and
pre-fore-ordes-tin-a-tion, and I don't know what all, that it did seem to me
to be one of the roughest Sundays I had run across yet.

About an hour after din-ner every-body was doz-ing around, some in their
chairs and some in their rooms, and it got to be pretty dull.  Buck and
a dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep.  I went up
to our room, and judged I would take a nap my-self.  I found that sweet
Miss Sophia stand-ing in her door, which was next to ours, and she took
me in her room and shut the door very soft, and asked me if I liked her,
and I said I did; and she asked me if I would do some-thing for her and
not tell any-body, and I said I would.  Then she said she'd for-got her
Testa-ment, and left it in the seat at church between two other books,
and would I slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her, and not say
noth-ing to nobody.  I said I would. So I slid out and slipped off up the
road, and there warn't any-body at the church, ex-cept maybe a hog or two,
for there warn't any lock on the door, and hogs likes a puncheon floor
in sum-mer-time be-cause it's cool.  If you no-tice, most folks don't go to
church only when they've got to; but a hog is dif-fer-ent.

Says I to my-self, some-thing's up; it ain't nat-ural for a girl to be in
such a sweat about a Testa-ment.  So I give it a shake, and out drops a
little piece of pa-per with “HALF-PAST TWO” wrote on it with a pen-cil.  I
ran-sacked it, but couldn't find any-thing else.  I couldn't make any-thing
out of that, so I put the pa-per in the book again, and when I got home
and up-stairs there was Miss Sophia in her door wait-ing for me.  She
pulled me in and shut the door; then she looked in the Testa-ment till
she found the pa-per, and as soon as she read it she looked glad; and
be-fore a body could think she grabbed me and give me a squeeze, and
said I was the best boy in the world, and not to tell any-body.  She was
mighty red in the face for a minute, and her eyes lighted up, and it
made her power-ful pretty.  I was a good deal as-ton-ished, but when I got
my breath I asked her what the pa-per was about, and she asked me if I
had read it, and I said no, and she asked me if I could read writ-ing,
and I told her “no, only coarse-hand,” and then she said the pa-per
warn't any-thing but a book-mark to keep her place, and I might go and
play now.

I went off down to the river, study-ing over this thing, and pretty soon
I no-ticed that my nig-ger was fol-low-ing along be-hind.  When we was out
of sight of the house he looked back and around a second, and then comes
a-run-ning, and says:

“Mars Jawge, if you'll come down into de swamp I'll show you a whole
stack o' wa-ter-moc-cas-ins.”

Thinks I, that's mighty curi-ous; he said that yes-ter-day.  He oughter
know a body don't love wa-ter-moc-cas-ins enough to go around hunt-ing for
them. What is he up to, any-way?  So I says:

“All right; trot ahead.”

I fol-lowed a half a mile; then he struck out over the swamp, and waded
ankle deep as much as an-other half-mile.  We come to a little flat piece
of land which was dry and very thick with trees and bushes and vines,
and he says:

“You shove right in dah jist a few steps, Mars Jawge; dah's whah dey is.
I's seed 'm befo'; I don't k'yer to see 'em no mo'.”

Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty soon the trees hid
him.  I poked into the place a-ways and come to a little open patch
as big as a bed-room all hung around with vines, and found a man lay-ing
there asleep--and, by jings, it was my old Jim!

I waked him up, and I reckoned it was go-ing to be a grand sur-prise to
him to see me again, but it warn't.  He nearly cried he was so glad, but
he warn't sur-prised.  Said he swum along be-hind me that night, and heard
me yell every time, but dasn't an-swer, be-cause he didn't want nobody to
pick _him_ up and take him into slavery again.  Says he:

“I got hurt a little, en couldn't swim fas', so I wuz a con-sid-able ways
be-hine you to-wards de las'; when you landed I reck'ned I could ketch
up wid you on de lan' 'dout havin' to shout at you, but when I see dat
house I be-gin to go slow.  I 'uz off too fur to hear what dey say to
you--I wuz 'fraid o' de dogs; but when it 'uz all quiet agin I knowed
you's in de house, so I struck out for de woods to wait for day.  Early
in de mawnin' some er de nig-gers come along, gwyne to de fields, en dey
tuk me en showed me dis place, whah de dogs can't track me on ac-counts
o' de wa-ter, en dey brings me truck to eat every night, en tells me how
you's a-gitt'n along.”

“Why didn't you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner, Jim?”

“Well, 'twarn't no use to 'sturb you, Huck, tell we could do sumfn--but
we's all right now.  I ben a-buyin' pots en pans en vittles, as I got a
chanst, en a-patchin' up de raf' nights when--”

“_What_ raft, Jim?”

“Our ole raf'.”

“You mean to say our old raft warn't smashed all to flinders?”

“No, she warn't.  She was tore up a good deal--one en' of her was; but
dey warn't no great harm done, on'y our traps was mos' all los'.  Ef we
hadn' dive' so deep en swum so fur un-der wa-ter, en de night hadn' ben
so dark, en we warn't so sk'yerd, en ben sich punkin-heads, as de sayin'
is, we'd a seed de raf'.  But it's jis' as well we didn't, 'kase now
she's all fixed up agin mos' as good as new, en we's got a new lot o'
stuff, in de place o' what 'uz los'.”

“Why, how did you get hold of the raft again, Jim--did you catch her?”

“How I gwyne to ketch her en I out in de woods?  No; some er de nig-gers
foun' her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben', en dey hid her in a
crick 'mongst de wil-lows, en dey wuz so much jawin' 'bout which un 'um
she b'long to de mos' dat I come to heah 'bout it pooty soon, so I ups
en settles de trouble by tel-lin' 'um she don't b'long to none uv um, but
to you en me; en I ast 'm if dey gwyne to grab a young white gen-l-man's
pro-paty, en git a hid'n for it?  Den I gin 'm ten cents apiece, en dey
'uz mighty well sat-is-fied, en wisht some mo' raf's 'ud come along en
make 'm rich agin. Dey's mighty good to me, dese nig-gers is, en whatever
I wants 'm to do fur me I doan' have to ast 'm twice, honey.  Dat Jack's
a good nig-ger, en pooty smart.”

“Yes, he is.  He ain't ever told me you was here; told me to come, and
he'd show me a lot of wa-ter-moc-cas-ins.  If any-thing hap-pens _he_ ain't
mixed up in it.  He can say he never seen us to-gether, and it 'll be the
truth.”

I don't want to talk much about the next day.  I reckon I'll cut it
pretty short.  I waked up about dawn, and was a-go-ing to turn over and
go to sleep again when I no-ticed how still it was--didn't seem to be
any-body stir-ring.  That warn't usual.  Next I no-ticed that Buck was
up and gone. Well, I gets up, a-won-der-ing, and goes down stairs--nobody
around; everything as still as a mouse.  Just the same out-side.  Thinks
I, what does it mean?  Down by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack, and
says:

“What's it all about?”

Says he:

“Don't you know, Mars Jawge?”

“No,” says I, “I don't.”

“Well, den, Miss Sophia's run off! 'deed she has.  She run off in de
night some time--nobody don't know jis' when; run off to get mar-ried
to dat young Har-ney Shep-herd-son, you know--least-ways, so dey 'spec.  De
fambly foun' it out 'bout half an hour ago--maybe a little mo'--en' I
_tell_ you dey warn't no time los'.  Sich an-other hur-ryin' up guns
en hosses _y-ou_ never see!  De wo-men folks has gone for to stir up de
re-la-tions, en ole Mars Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de
river road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him 'fo' he kin
git ac-rost de river wid Miss Sophia.  I reck'n dey's gwyne to be mighty
rough times.”

“Buck went off 'thout wak-ing me up.”

“Well, I reck'n he _did_!  Dey warn't gwyne to mix you up in it.
 Mars Buck he loaded up his gun en 'lowed he's gwyne to fetch home a
Shep-herd-son or bust. Well, dey'll be plenty un 'm dah, I reck'n, en you
bet you he'll fetch one ef he gits a chanst.”

I took up the river road as hard as I could put.  By and by I be-gin to
hear guns a good ways off.  When I come in sight of the log store and
the wood-pile where the steam-boats lands I worked along un-der the trees
and brush till I got to a good place, and then I clumb up into the
forks of a cot-ton-wood that was out of reach, and watched.  There was a
wood-rank four foot high a little ways in front of the tree, and first I
was go-ing to hide be-hind that; but maybe it was luck-ier I didn't.

There was four or five men ca-vort-ing around on their horses in the open
place be-fore the log store, cuss-ing and yelling, and try-ing to get at
a couple of young chaps that was be-hind the wood-rank along-side of the
steam-boat land-ing; but they couldn't come it.  Every time one of them
showed him-self on the river side of the wood-pile he got shot at.  The
two boys was squat-ting back to back be-hind the pile, so they could watch
both ways.

By and by the men stopped ca-vort-ing around and yelling.  They star-ted
rid-ing to-wards the store; then up gets one of the boys, draws a steady
bead over the wood-rank, and drops one of them out of his saddle.  All
the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed the hurt one and star-ted
to carry him to the store; and that minute the two boys star-ted on the
run.  They got half way to the tree I was in be-fore the men no-ticed.
Then the men see them, and jumped on their horses and took out after
them.  They gained on the boys, but it didn't do no good, the boys had
too good a start; they got to the wood-pile that was in front of my tree,
and slipped in be-hind it, and so they had the bulge on the men again.
One of the boys was Buck, and the other was a slim young chap about
nine-teen years old.

The men ripped around awhile, and then rode away.  As soon as they was
out of sight I sung out to Buck and told him.  He didn't know what
to make of my voice com-ing out of the tree at first.  He was aw-ful
sur-prised.  He told me to watch out sharp and let him know when the
men come in sight again; said they was up to some dev-il-ment or
other--wouldn't be gone long.  I wished I was out of that tree, but I
dasn't come down.  Buck be-gun to cry and rip, and 'lowed that him and
his cousin Joe (that was the other young chap) would make up for this
day yet.  He said his father and his two broth-ers was killed, and two
or three of the en-emy.  Said the Shep-herd-sons laid for them in
am-bush.  Buck said his father and broth-ers ought to waited for their
re-la-tions--the Shep-herd-sons was too strong for them.  I asked him what
was be-come of young Har-ney and Miss Sophia.  He said they'd got across
the river and was safe.  I was glad of that; but the way Buck did take
on be-cause he didn't man-age to kill Har-ney that day he shot at him--I
hain't ever heard any-thing like it.

All of a sud-den, bang! bang! bang! goes three or four guns--the men had
slipped around through the woods and come in from be-hind without their
horses!  The boys jumped for the river--both of them hurt--and as they
swum down the cur-rent the men run along the bank shoot-ing at them and
singing out, “Kill them, kill them!”  It made me so sick I most fell out
of the tree.  I ain't a-go-ing to tell _all_ that happened--it would make
me sick again if I was to do that.  I wished I hadn't ever come ashore
that night to see such things.  I ain't ever go-ing to get shut of
them--lots of times I dream about them.

I stayed in the tree till it be-gun to get dark, afraid to come down.
So-me-times I heard guns away off in the woods; and twice I seen little
gangs of men gal-lop past the log store with guns; so I reckoned the
trouble was still a-go-ing on.  I was mighty down-hearted; so I made up my
mind I wouldn't ever go anear that house again, be-cause I reckoned I
was to blame, some-how. I judged that that piece of pa-per meant that Miss
Sophia was to meet Har-ney some-wheres at half-past two and run off; and
I judged I ought to told her father about that pa-per and the curi-ous way
she ac-ted, and then maybe he would a locked her up, and this aw-ful mess
wouldn't ever happened.

When I got down out of the tree I crept along down the river bank a
piece, and found the two bod-ies lay-ing in the edge of the wa-ter, and
tugged at them till I got them ashore; then I covered up their faces,
and got away as quick as I could.  I cried a little when I was cov-er-ing
up Buck's face, for he was mighty good to me.

It was just dark now.  I never went near the house, but struck through
the woods and made for the swamp.  Jim warn't on his is-land, so I
tramped off in a hurry for the crick, and crowded through the wil-lows,
red-hot to jump aboard and get out of that aw-ful coun-try.  The raft was
gone!  My souls, but I was scared!  I couldn't get my breath for most
a minute. Then I raised a yell.  A voice not twenty-five foot from me
says:

“Good lan'! is dat you, honey?  Doan' make no noise.”

It was Jim's voice--noth-ing ever soun-ded so good be-fore.  I run along the
bank a piece and got aboard, and Jim he grabbed me and hugged me, he was
so glad to see me.  He says:

“Laws bless you, chile, I 'uz right down sho' you's dead agin.  Jack's
been heah; he say he reck'n you's ben shot, kase you didn' come home no
mo'; so I's jes' dis minute a startin' de raf' down to-wards de mouf er
de crick, so's to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as Jack
comes agin en tells me for cer-tain you _is_ dead.  Lawsy, I's mighty
glad to git you back again, honey.”

I says:

“All right--that's mighty good; they won't find me, and they'll think
I've been killed, and floated down the river--there's some-thing up there
that 'll help them think so--so don't you lose no time, Jim, but just
shove off for the big wa-ter as fast as ever you can.”

I never felt easy till the raft was two mile be-low there and out in
the middle of the Mis-sis-sippi.  Then we hung up our sig-nal lan-tern, and
judged that we was free and safe once more.  I hadn't had a bite to eat
since yes-ter-day, so Jim he got out some corn-dodgers and but-ter-milk,
and pork and cab-bage and greens--there ain't noth-ing in the world so good
when it's cooked right--and whilst I eat my sup-per we talked and had a
good time.  I was power-ful glad to get away from the feuds, and so was
Jim to get away from the swamp.  We said there warn't no home like a
raft, after all.  Other places do seem so cramped up and smoth-ery, but a
raft don't.  You feel mighty free and easy and com-fort-able on a raft.




CHAPTER XIX.

TWO or three days and nights went by; I reckon I might say they swum by,
they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely.  Here is the way we put
in the time.  It was a mon-strous big river down there--some-times a mile
and a half wide; we run nights, and laid up and hid day-times; soon as
night was most gone we stopped nav-ig-at-ing and tied up--nearly al-ways
in the dead wa-ter un-der a tow-head; and then cut young cot-ton-woods and
wil-lows, and hid the raft with them.  Then we set out the lines.  Next
we slid into the river and had a swim, so as to freshen up and cool
off; then we set down on the sandy bot-tom where the wa-ter was about knee
deep, and watched the day-light come.  Not a sound any-wheres--per-fectly
still--just like the whole world was asleep, only some-times the bull-frogs
a-clut-ter-ing, maybe.  The first thing to see, look-ing away over the
wa-ter, was a kind of dull line--that was the woods on t'other side; you
couldn't make noth-ing else out; then a pale place in the sky; then more
pale-ness spread-ing around; then the river softened up away off, and
warn't black any more, but gray; you could see little dark spots
drift-ing along ever so far away--trad-ing scows, and such things; and
long black streaks--rafts; some-times you could hear a sweep screak-ing; or
jumbled up voices, it was so still, and sounds come so far; and by and
by you could see a streak on the wa-ter which you know by the look of the
streak that there's a snag there in a swift cur-rent which breaks on it
and makes that streak look that way; and you see the mist curl up off
of the wa-ter, and the east red-dens up, and the river, and you make out a
log-cabin in the edge of the woods, away on the bank on t'other side of
the river, be-ing a wood-y-ard, likely, and piled by them cheats so you can
throw a dog through it any-wheres; then the nice breeze springs up, and
comes fan-ning you from over there, so cool and fresh and sweet to smell
on ac-count of the woods and the flowers; but some-times not that way,
be-cause they've left dead fish lay-ing around, gars and such, and they
do get pretty rank; and next you've got the full day, and everything
smil-ing in the sun, and the song-birds just go-ing it!

A little smoke couldn't be no-ticed now, so we would take some fish off
of the lines and cook up a hot break-fast.  And af-ter-wards we would watch
the lone-some-ness of the river, and kind of lazy along, and by and by
lazy off to sleep.  Wake up by and by, and look to see what done it, and
maybe see a steam-boat cough-ing along up-stream, so far off to-wards the
other side you couldn't tell noth-ing about her only whether she was
a stern-wheel or side-wheel; then for about an hour there wouldn't be
noth-ing to hear nor noth-ing to see--just solid lone-some-ness.  Next
you'd see a raft slid-ing by, away off yon-der, and maybe a ga-loot on it
chop-ping, be-cause they're most al-ways do-ing it on a raft; you'd see the
axe flash and come down--you don't hear noth-ing; you see that axe go
up again, and by the time it's above the man's head then you hear the
_k'chunk_!--it had took all that time to come over the wa-ter.  So we
would put in the day, lazy-ing around, listen-ing to the still-ness.  Once
there was a thick fog, and the rafts and things that went by was beat-ing
tin pans so the steam-boats wouldn't run over them.  A scow or a
raft went by so close we could hear them talk-ing and cuss-ing and
laugh-ing--heard them plain; but we couldn't see no sign of them; it made
you feel crawly; it was like spir-its car-ry-ing on that way in the air.
 Jim said he be-lieved it was spir-its; but I says:

“No; spir-its wouldn't say, 'Dern the dern fog.'”

Soon as it was night out we shoved; when we got her out to about the
middle we let her alone, and let her float wherever the cur-rent wanted
her to; then we lit the pipes, and dangled our legs in the wa-ter, and
talked about all kinds of things--we was al-ways na-ked, day and night,
whenever the mos-qui-toes would let us--the new clothes Buck's folks made
for me was too good to be com-fort-able, and be-sides I didn't go much on
clothes, no-how.

So-me-times we'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest
time. Yon-der was the banks and the is-lands, across the wa-ter; and maybe
a spark--which was a candle in a cabin win-dow; and some-times on the wa-ter
you could see a spark or two--on a raft or a scow, you know; and maybe
you could hear a fiddle or a song com-ing over from one of them crafts.
It's lovely to live on a raft.  We had the sky up there, all speckled
with stars, and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them, and
dis-cuss about whether they was made or only just happened.  Jim he
al-lowed they was made, but I al-lowed they happened; I judged it would
have took too long to _make_ so many.  Jim said the moon could a _laid_
them; well, that looked kind of reas-on-able, so I didn't say noth-ing
against it, be-cause I've seen a frog lay most as many, so of course it
could be done. We used to watch the stars that fell, too, and see them
streak down.  Jim al-lowed they'd got spoiled and was hove out of the
nest.

Once or twice of a night we would see a steam-boat slip-ping along in the
dark, and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out
of her chimb-leys, and they would rain down in the river and look aw-ful
pretty; then she would turn a corner and her lights would wink out and
her pow-wow shut off and leave the river still again; and by and by her
waves would get to us, a long time after she was gone, and joggle the
raft a bit, and after that you wouldn't hear noth-ing for you couldn't
tell how long, ex-cept maybe frogs or some-thing.

After mid-night the people on shore went to bed, and then for two or
three hours the shores was black--no more sparks in the cabin win-dows.
 These sparks was our clock--the first one that showed again meant
morn-ing was com-ing, so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away.

One morn-ing about day-break I found a ca-noe and crossed over a chute to
the main shore--it was only two hun-dred yards--and paddled about a mile
up a crick amongst the cypress woods, to see if I couldn't get some
ber-ries. Just as I was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed
the crick, here comes a couple of men tear-ing up the path as tight as
they could foot it.  I thought I was a goner, for whenever any-body was
after any-body I judged it was _me_--or maybe Jim.  I was about to dig out
from there in a hurry, but they was pretty close to me then, and sung
out and begged me to save their lives--said they hadn't been do-ing
noth-ing, and was be-ing chased for it--said there was men and dogs
a-com-ing.  They wanted to jump right in, but I says:

“Don't you do it.  I don't hear the dogs and horses yet; you've got time
to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways; then you
take to the wa-ter and wade down to me and get in--that'll throw the dogs
off the scent.”

They done it, and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our tow-head,
and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away off,
shout-ing. We heard them come along to-wards the crick, but couldn't
see them; they seemed to stop and fool around a while; then, as we got
fur-ther and fur-ther away all the time, we couldn't hardly hear them at
all; by the time we had left a mile of woods be-hind us and struck the
river, everything was quiet, and we paddled over to the tow-head and hid
in the cot-ton-woods and was safe.

One of these fel-lows was about sev-enty or up-wards, and had a bald head
and very gray whiskers.  He had an old battered-up slouch hat on, and
a greasy blue wool-len shirt, and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed
into his boot-tops, and home-knit gal-luses--no, he only had one.  He had
an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass but-tons flung over
his arm, and both of them had big, fat, ratty-look-ing car-pet-bags.

The other fel-low was about thirty, and dressed about as ornery.  After
break-fast we all laid off and talked, and the first thing that come out
was that these chaps didn't know one an-other.

“What got you into trouble?” says the bald-head to t'other chap.

“Well, I'd been selling an art-icle to take the tar-tar off the teeth--and
it does take it off, too, and gen-erly the enamel along with it--but I
stayed about one night longer than I ought to, and was just in the act
of slid-ing out when I ran across you on the trail this side of town, and
you told me they were com-ing, and begged me to help you to get off.  So
I told you I was ex-pect-ing trouble my-self, and would scat-ter out _with_
you. That's the whole yarn--what's yourn?

“Well, I'd ben a-run-ning' a little tem-per-ance re-vival thar 'bout a week,
and was the pet of the wo-men folks, big and little, for I was makin' it
mighty warm for the rum-mies, I _tell_ you, and takin' as much as five
or six dol-lars a night--ten cents a head, chil-dren and nig-gers free--and
busi-ness a-growin' all the time, when some-how or an-other a little re-port
got around last night that I had a way of put-tin' in my time with a
private jug on the sly.  A nig-ger rous-ted me out this mornin', and told
me the people was geth-erin' on the quiet with their dogs and horses, and
they'd be along pretty soon and give me 'bout half an hour's start,
and then run me down if they could; and if they got me they'd tar
and feather me and ride me on a rail, sure.  I didn't wait for no
break-fast--I warn't hungry.”

“Old man,” said the young one, “I reckon we might double-team it
to-gether; what do you think?”

“I ain't un-dis-posed.  What's your line--mainly?”

“Jour printer by trade; do a little in pat-ent medi-cines;
theater-actor--tragedy, you know; take a turn to mes-mer-ism and phren-o-logy
when there's a chance; teach singing-geo-graphy school for a change;
sling a lec-ture some-times--oh, I do lots of things--most any-thing that
comes handy, so it ain't work.  What's your lay?”

“I've done con-siderble in the doc-tor-ing way in my time.  Layin' on o'
hands is my best holt--for can-cer and para-lysis, and sich things; and I
k'n tell a for-tune pretty good when I've got some-body along to find out
the facts for me.  Preachin's my line, too, and wor-kin' camp-meetin's,
and mis-sion-aryin' around.”

Nobody never said any-thing for a while; then the young man hove a sigh
and says:

“Alas!”

“What 're you alassin' about?” says the bald-head.

“To think I should have lived to be lead-ing such a life, and be de-graded
down into such com-pany.”  And he be-gun to wipe the corner of his eye
with a rag.

“Dern your skin, ain't the com-pany good enough for you?” says the
bald-head, pretty pert and up-pish.

“Yes, it _is_ good enough for me; it's as good as I de-serve; for who
fetched me so low when I was so high?  I did my-self.  I don't blame
_y-ou_, gen-tle-men--far from it; I don't blame any-body.  I de-serve it
all.  Let the cold world do its worst; one thing I know--there's a grave
some-where for me. The world may go on just as it's al-ways done, and take
everything from me--loved ones, prop-erty, everything; but it can't take
that. Some day I'll lie down in it and for-get it all, and my poor broken
heart will be at rest.”  He went on a-wip-ing.

“Drot your pore broken heart,” says the bald-head; “what are you heav-ing
your pore broken heart at _us_ f'r?  _we_ hain't done noth-ing.”

“No, I know you haven't.  I ain't blam-ing you, gen-tle-men.  I brought
my-self down--yes, I did it my-self.  It's right I should suf-fer--per-fectly
right--I don't make any moan.”

“Brought you down from whar?  Whar was you brought down from?”

“Ah, you would not be-lieve me; the world never be-lieves--let it pass--'tis
no mat-ter.  The secret of my birth--”

“The secret of your birth!  Do you mean to say--”

“Gen-tle-men,” says the young man, very sol-emn, “I will re-veal it to you,
for I feel I may have con-fid-ence in you.  By rights I am a duke!”

Jim's eyes bugged out when he heard that; and I reckon mine did, too.
Then the bald-head says:  “No! you can't mean it?”

“Yes.  My great-grand-father, eld-est son of the Duke of Bridge-wa-ter, fled
to this coun-try about the end of the last cen-tury, to breathe the pure
air of free-dom; mar-ried here, and died, leav-ing a son, his own father
dy-ing about the same time.  The second son of the late duke seized the
titles and es-tates--the in-fant real duke was ig-nored.  I am the lin-eal
des-cend-ant of that in-fant--I am the right-ful Duke of Bridge-wa-ter; and
here am I, for-lorn, torn from my high es-tate, hunted of men, des-pised
by the cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken, and de-graded to the
com-pan-ion-ship of felons on a raft!”

Jim pit-ied him ever so much, and so did I. We tried to com-fort him, but
he said it warn't much use, he couldn't be much com-for-ted; said if we
was a mind to ac-know-ledge him, that would do him more good than most
any-thing else; so we said we would, if he would tell us how.  He said we
ought to bow when we spoke to him, and say “Your Grace,” or “My Lord,”
 or “Your Lord-ship”--and he wouldn't mind it if we called him plain
“Bridge-wa-ter,” which, he said, was a title any-way, and not a name; and
one of us ought to wait on him at din-ner, and do any little thing for
him he wanted done.

Well, that was all easy, so we done it.  All through din-ner Jim stood
around and waited on him, and says, “Will yo' Grace have some o' dis or
some o' dat?” and so on, and a body could see it was mighty pleas-ing to
him.

But the old man got pretty si-lent by and by--didn't have much to say, and
didn't look pretty com-fort-able over all that pet-ting that was go-ing on
around that duke.  He seemed to have some-thing on his mind.  So, along
in the af-ter-noon, he says:

“Looky here, Bil-ge-wa-ter,” he says, “I'm na-tion sorry for you, but you
ain't the only per-son that's had troubles like that.”

“No?”

“No you ain't.  You ain't the only per-son that's ben snaked down
wrong-fully out'n a high place.”

“Alas!”

“No, you ain't the only per-son that's had a secret of his birth.”  And,
by jings, _he_ be-gins to cry.

“Hold!  What do you mean?”

“Bil-ge-wa-ter, kin I trust you?” says the old man, still sort of sob-bing.

“To the bit-ter death!”  He took the old man by the hand and squeezed it,
and says, “That secret of your be-ing:  speak!”

“Bil-ge-wa-ter, I am the late Dauphin!”

You bet you, Jim and me stared this time.  Then the duke says:

“You are what?”

“Yes, my friend, it is too true--your eyes is lookin' at this very mo-ment
on the pore dis-ap-peared Dauphin, Looy the Seven-teen, son of Looy the
Six-teen and Marry An-tonette.”

“You!  At your age!  No!  You mean you're the late Char-le-magne; you must
be six or seven hun-dred years old, at the very least.”

“Trouble has done it, Bil-ge-wa-ter, trouble has done it; trouble has brung
these gray hairs and this pre-ma-ture balditude.  Yes, gen-tle-men, you
see be-fore you, in blue jeans and misery, the wan-derin', ex-iled,
trampled-on, and suf-ferin' right-ful King of France.”

Well, he cried and took on so that me and Jim didn't know hardly what to
do, we was so sorry--and so glad and proud we'd got him with us, too.
 So we set in, like we done be-fore with the duke, and tried to com-fort
_him_. But he said it warn't no use, noth-ing but to be dead and done
with it all could do him any good; though he said it of-ten made him feel
easier and bet-ter for a while if people treated him ac-cord-ing to his
rights, and got down on one knee to speak to him, and al-ways called him
“Your Majesty,” and waited on him first at meals, and didn't set down
in his pres-ence till he asked them. So Jim and me set to majesty-ing him,
and do-ing this and that and t'other for him, and stand-ing up till he
told us we might set down.  This done him heaps of good, and so he
got cheer-ful and com-fort-able.  But the duke kind of soured on him, and
didn't look a bit sat-is-fied with the way things was go-ing; still,
the king ac-ted real friendly to-wards him, and said the duke's
great-grand-father and all the other Dukes of Bil-ge-wa-ter was a good
deal thought of by _his_ father, and was al-lowed to come to the palace
con-sid-er-able; but the duke stayed huffy a good while, till by and by the
king says:

“Like as not we got to be to-gether a blamed long time on this h-yer
raft, Bil-ge-wa-ter, and so what's the use o' your bein' sour?  It 'll only
make things on-com-fort-able.  It ain't my fault I warn't born a duke,
it ain't your fault you warn't born a king--so what's the use to worry?
 Make the best o' things the way you find 'em, says I--that's my motto.
 This ain't no bad thing that we've struck here--plenty grub and an easy
life--come, give us your hand, duke, and le's all be friends.”

The duke done it, and Jim and me was pretty glad to see it.  It took
away all the un-com-fort-able-ness and we felt mighty good over it, be-cause
it would a been a miser-able busi-ness to have any un-friend-li-ness on the
raft; for what you want, above all things, on a raft, is for every-body
to be sat-is-fied, and feel right and kind to-wards the oth-ers.

It didn't take me long to make up my mind that these li-ars warn't no
kings nor dukes at all, but just low-down hum-bugs and frauds.  But I
never said noth-ing, never let on; kept it to my-self; it's the best way;
then you don't have no quar-rels, and don't get into no trouble.  If they
wanted us to call them kings and dukes, I hadn't no ob-jec-tions, 'long as
it would keep peace in the fam-ily; and it warn't no use to tell Jim, so
I didn't tell him.  If I never learnt noth-ing else out of pap, I learnt
that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them
have their own way.




CHAPTER XX.

THEY asked us con-sid-er-able many ques-tions; wanted to know what we
covered up the raft that way for, and laid by in the day-time in-stead of
run-ning--was Jim a run-away nig-ger?  Says I:

“Good-ness sakes! would a run-away nig-ger run _south_?”

No, they al-lowed he wouldn't.  I had to ac-count for things some way, so
I says:

“My folks was liv-ing in Pike County, in Mis-souri, where I was born, and
they all died off but me and pa and my brother Ike.  Pa, he 'lowed
he'd break up and go down and live with Uncle Ben, who's got a little
one-horse place on the river, forty-four mile be-low Or-leans.  Pa was
pretty poor, and had some debts; so when he'd squared up there warn't
noth-ing left but six-teen dol-lars and our nig-ger, Jim.  That warn't
enough to take us four-teen hun-dred mile, deck pas-sage nor no other way.
 Well, when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day; he ketched
this piece of a raft; so we reckoned we'd go down to Or-leans on it.
 Pa's luck didn't hold out; a steam-boat run over the for-rard corner of
the raft one night, and we all went over-board and dove un-der the wheel;
Jim and me come up all right, but pa was drunk, and Ike was only four
years old, so they never come up no more.  Well, for the next day or
two we had con-sid-er-able trouble, be-cause people was al-ways com-ing out in
skiffs and try-ing to take Jim away from me, say-ing they be-lieved he was
a run-away nig-ger.  We don't run day-times no more now; nights they don't
bother us.”

The duke says:

“Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the day-time if we
want to.  I'll think the thing over--I'll in-vent a plan that'll fix it.
We'll let it alone for to-day, be-cause of course we don't want to go by
that town yon-der in day-light--it mightn't be healthy.”

Towards night it be-gun to darken up and look like rain; the heat
light-ning was squirt-ing around low down in the sky, and the leaves was
be-gin-ning to shiver--it was go-ing to be pretty ugly, it was easy to see
that.  So the duke and the king went to over-haul-ing our wig-wam, to see
what the beds was like.  My bed was a straw tick bet-ter than Jim's,
which was a corn-shuck tick; there's al-ways cobs around about in a shuck
tick, and they poke into you and hurt; and when you roll over the dry
shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves; it
makes such a rust-ling that you wake up.  Well, the duke al-lowed he would
take my bed; but the king al-lowed he wouldn't.  He says:

“I should a reckoned the dif-fer-ence in rank would a sejes-ted to you that
a corn-shuck bed warn't just fit-ten for me to sleep on.  Your Grace 'll
take the shuck bed your-self.”

Jim and me was in a sweat again for a minute, be-ing afraid there was
go-ing to be some more trouble amongst them; so we was pretty glad when
the duke says:

“'Tis my fate to be al-ways ground into the mire un-der the iron heel of
op-pres-sion.  Mis-for-tune has broken my once haughty spirit; I yield, I
sub-mit; 'tis my fate.  I am alone in the world--let me suf-fer; can bear
it.”

We got away as soon as it was good and dark.  The king told us to stand
well out to-wards the middle of the river, and not show a light till we
got a long ways be-low the town.  We come in sight of the little bunch of
lights by and by--that was the town, you know--and slid by, about a half
a mile out, all right.  When we was three-quar-ters of a mile be-low we
hois-ted up our sig-nal lan-tern; and about ten o'clock it come on to rain
and blow and thun-der and lighten like everything; so the king told us
to both stay on watch till the weather got bet-ter; then him and the duke
crawled into the wig-wam and turned in for the night.  It was my watch
be-low till twelve, but I wouldn't a turned in any-way if I'd had a bed,
be-cause a body don't see such a storm as that every day in the week, not
by a long sight.  My souls, how the wind did scream along!  And every
second or two there'd come a glare that lit up the white-caps for a half
a mile around, and you'd see the is-lands look-ing dusty through the rain,
and the trees thrash-ing around in the wind; then comes a H-WHACK!--bum!
bum! bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum--and the thun-der would go rum-bling
and grumbling away, and quit--and then RIP comes an-other flash and
an-other sock-dol-a-ger.  The waves most washed me off the raft some-times,
but I hadn't any clothes on, and didn't mind.  We didn't have no trouble
about snags; the light-ning was glar-ing and flit-ter-ing around so con-stant
that we could see them plenty soon enough to throw her head this way or
that and miss them.

I had the middle watch, you know, but I was pretty sleepy by that time,
so Jim he said he would stand the first half of it for me; he was al-ways
mighty good that way, Jim was.  I crawled into the wig-wam, but the king
and the duke had their legs sprawled around so there warn't no show for
me; so I laid out-side--I didn't mind the rain, be-cause it was warm, and
the waves warn't run-ning so high now.  About two they come up again,
though, and Jim was go-ing to call me; but he changed his mind, be-cause
he reckoned they warn't high enough yet to do any harm; but he was
mis-taken about that, for pretty soon all of a sud-den along comes a
reg-u-lar rip-per and washed me over-board.  It most killed Jim a-laugh-ing.
 He was the easi-est nig-ger to laugh that ever was, any-way.

I took the watch, and Jim he laid down and snored away; and by and by
the storm let up for good and all; and the first cabin-light that showed
I rous-ted him out, and we slid the raft into hid-ing quar-ters for the
day.

The king got out an old ratty deck of cards after break-fast, and him
and the duke played seven-up a while, five cents a game.  Then they got
tired of it, and al-lowed they would “lay out a cam-paign,” as they called
it. The duke went down into his car-pet-bag, and fetched up a lot of
little prin-ted bills and read them out loud.  One bill said, “The
cel-eb-rated Dr. Ar-mand de Mont-al-ban, of Paris,” would “lec-ture on the
Science of Phren-o-logy” at such and such a place, on the blank day of
blank, at ten cents ad-mis-sion, and “fur-nish charts of char-ac-ter at
twenty-five cents apiece.”  The duke said that was _him_.  In an-other
bill he was the “world-renowned Shakespearian tra-gedian, Gar-rick the
Youn-ger, of Drury Lane, Lon-don.”  In other bills he had a lot of other
names and done other won-der-ful things, like find-ing wa-ter and gold with
a “divin-ing-rod,” “dis-sip-at-ing witch spells,” and so on.  By and by he
says:

“But the his-tri-onic muse is the darling.  Have you ever trod the boards,
Roy-alty?”

“No,” says the king.

“You shall, then, be-fore you're three days older, Fal-len Grandeur,” says
the duke.  “The first good town we come to we'll hire a hall and do the
sword fight in Richard III. and the bal-cony scene in Romeo and Juliet.
How does that strike you?”

“I'm in, up to the hub, for any-thing that will pay, Bil-ge-wa-ter; but, you
see, I don't know noth-ing about play-actin', and hain't ever seen much
of it.  I was too small when pap used to have 'em at the palace.  Do you
reckon you can learn me?”

“Easy!”

“All right.  I'm jist a-freezn' for some-thing fresh, any-way.  Le's
com-mence right away.”

So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was and who Juliet was, and
said he was used to be-ing Romeo, so the king could be Juliet.

“But if Juliet's such a young gal, duke, my peeled head and my white
whiskers is goin' to look on-com-mon odd on her, maybe.”

“No, don't you worry; these coun-try jakes won't ever think of that.
Besides, you know, you'll be in cos-tume, and that makes all the
dif-fer-ence in the world; Juliet's in a bal-cony, en-joy-ing the moon-light
be-fore she goes to bed, and she's got on her night-gown and her ruffled
night-cap.  Here are the cos-tumes for the parts.”

He got out two or three cur-tain-calico suits, which he said was
mee-dyevil ar-mor for Richard III. and t'other chap, and a long white
cot-ton night-shirt and a ruffled night-cap to match.  The king was
sat-is-fied; so the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the
most splen-did spread-eagle way, pran-cing around and act-ing at the same
time, to show how it had got to be done; then he give the book to the
king and told him to get his part by heart.

There was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend, and
after din-ner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run
in day-light without it be-ing danger-some for Jim; so he al-lowed he would
go down to the town and fix that thing.  The king al-lowed he would go,
too, and see if he couldn't strike some-thing.  We was out of cof-fee, so
Jim said I bet-ter go along with them in the ca-noe and get some.

When we got there there warn't nobody stir-ring; streets empty, and
per-fectly dead and still, like Sunday.  We found a sick nig-ger sun-ning
him-self in a back yard, and he said every-body that warn't too young or
too sick or too old was gone to camp-meet-ing, about two mile back in the
woods.  The king got the dir-ec-tions, and al-lowed he'd go and work that
camp-meet-ing for all it was worth, and I might go, too.

The duke said what he was after was a print-ing-of-fice.  We found it;
a little bit of a con-cern, up over a car-penter shop--car-penters and
print-ers all gone to the meet-ing, and no doors locked.  It was a dirty,
littered-up place, and had ink marks, and hand-bills with pic-tures of
horses and run-away nig-gers on them, all over the walls.  The duke shed
his coat and said he was all right now.  So me and the king lit out for
the camp-meet-ing.

We got there in about a half an hour fairly drip-ping, for it was a most
aw-ful hot day.  There was as much as a thou-sand people there from
twenty mile around.  The woods was full of teams and wag-ons, hitched
every-wheres, feed-ing out of the wagon-troughs and stomp-ing to keep
off the flies.  There was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with
branches, where they had lem-on-ade and ginger-bread to sell, and piles of
wa-ter-mel-ons and green corn and such-like truck.

The preach-ing was go-ing on un-der the same kinds of sheds, only they was
big-ger and held crowds of people.  The benches was made out of out-side
slabs of logs, with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into
for legs. They didn't have no backs.  The preach-ers had high plat-forms
to stand on at one end of the sheds.  The wo-men had on sun-bon-nets;
and some had lin-sey-wool-sey frocks, some ging-ham ones, and a few of the
young ones had on calico.  Some of the young men was bare-footed, and
some of the chil-dren didn't have on any clothes but just a tow-linen
shirt.  Some of the old wo-men was knit-ting, and some of the young folks
was court-ing on the sly.

The first shed we come to the preacher was lin-ing out a hymn.  He lined
out two lines, every-body sung it, and it was kind of grand to hear it,
there was so many of them and they done it in such a rous-ing way; then
he lined out two more for them to sing--and so on.  The people woke up
more and more, and sung louder and louder; and to-wards the end some
be-gun to groan, and some be-gun to shout.  Then the preacher be-gun to
preach, and be-gun in earn-est, too; and went weav-ing first to one side of
the plat-form and then the other, and then a-lean-ing down over the front
of it, with his arms and his body go-ing all the time, and shout-ing his
words out with all his might; and every now and then he would hold up
his Bible and spread it open, and kind of pass it around this way and
that, shout-ing, “It's the brazen ser-pent in the wil-der-ness!  Look upon
it and live!”  And people would shout out, “Glory!--A-a-_men_!”  And so
he went on, and the people groan-ing and cry-ing and say-ing amen:

“Oh, come to the mourn-ers' bench! come, black with sin! (_A-men_!) come,
sick and sore! (_A-men_!) come, lame and halt and blind! (_A-men_!) come,
pore and needy, sunk in shame! (_A-A-Men_!) come, all that's worn and
soiled and suf-fer-ing!--come with a broken spirit! come with a con-trite
heart! come in your rags and sin and dirt! the wa-ters that cleanse
is free, the door of heaven stands open--oh, enter in and be at rest!”
 (_A-A-Men_!  _Glory, Glory Hal-le-lu-jah!_)

And so on.  You couldn't make out what the preacher said any more, on
ac-count of the shout-ing and cry-ing.  Folks got up every-wheres in the
crowd, and worked their way just by main strength to the mourn-ers'
bench, with the tears run-ning down their faces; and when all the
mourn-ers had got up there to the front benches in a crowd, they sung and
shouted and flung them-selves down on the straw, just crazy and wild.

Well, the first I knowed the king got a-go-ing, and you could hear him
over every-body; and next he went a-char-ging up on to the plat-form, and
the preacher he begged him to speak to the people, and he done it.  He
told them he was a pir-ate--been a pir-ate for thirty years out in the
In-dian Ocean--and his crew was thinned out con-sid-er-able last spring in
a fight, and he was home now to take out some fresh men, and thanks to
good-ness he'd been robbed last night and put ashore off of a steam-boat
without a cent, and he was glad of it; it was the blessed-est thing that
ever happened to him, be-cause he was a changed man now, and happy for
the first time in his life; and, poor as he was, he was go-ing to start
right off and work his way back to the In-dian Ocean, and put in the rest
of his life try-ing to turn the pir-ates into the true path; for he could
do it bet-ter than any-body else, be-ing ac-quain-ted with all pir-ate crews
in that ocean; and though it would take him a long time to get there
without money, he would get there any-way, and every time he con-vinced
a pir-ate he would say to him, “Don't you thank me, don't you give me no
credit; it all be-longs to them dear people in Pokeville camp-meet-ing,
nat-ural broth-ers and be-ne-fact-ors of the race, and that dear preacher
there, the truest friend a pir-ate ever had!”

And then he bus-ted into tears, and so did every-body.  Then some-body
sings out, “Take up a col-lec-tion for him, take up a col-lec-tion!”  Well,
a half a dozen made a jump to do it, but some-body sings out, “Let _him_
pass the hat around!”  Then every-body said it, the preacher too.

So the king went all through the crowd with his hat swab-bing his eyes,
and bless-ing the people and prais-ing them and thank-ing them for be-ing
so good to the poor pir-ates away off there; and every little while the
pret-ti-est kind of girls, with the tears run-ning down their cheeks, would
up and ask him would he let them kiss him for to re-mem-ber him by; and he
al-ways done it; and some of them he hugged and kissed as many as five or
six times--and he was in-vited to stay a week; and every-body wanted him to
live in their houses, and said they'd think it was an honor; but he said
as this was the last day of the camp-meet-ing he couldn't do no good, and
be-sides he was in a sweat to get to the In-dian Ocean right off and go to
work on the pir-ates.

When we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had
col-lec-ted eighty-seven dol-lars and sev-enty-five cents.  And then he had
fetched away a three-gal-lon jug of whisky, too, that he found un-der a
wagon when he was start-ing home through the woods.  The king said,
take it all around, it laid over any day he'd ever put in in the
mis-sion-ary-ing line.  He said it warn't no use talk-ing, hea-thens don't
amount to shucks along-side of pir-ates to work a camp-meet-ing with.

The duke was think-ing _he'd_ been do-ing pretty well till the king come
to show up, but after that he didn't think so so much.  He had set
up and prin-ted off two little jobs for farm-ers in that
print-ing-of-fice--horse bills--and took the money, four dol-lars.  And he
had got in ten dol-lars' worth of ad-vert-ise-ments for the pa-per, which he
said he would put in for four dol-lars if they would pay in ad-vance--so
they done it. The price of the pa-per was two dol-lars a year, but he took
in three sub-scrip-tions for half a dol-lar apiece on con-di-tion of them
pay-ing him in ad-vance; they were go-ing to pay in cord-wood and onions as
usual, but he said he had just bought the con-cern and knocked down the
price as low as he could af-ford it, and was go-ing to run it for cash.
 He set up a little piece of po-etry, which he made, him-self, out of
his own head--three verses--kind of sweet and sad-dish--the name of it was,
“Yes, crush, cold world, this break-ing heart”--and he left that all set
up and ready to print in the pa-per, and didn't charge noth-ing for it.
 Well, he took in nine dol-lars and a half, and said he'd done a pretty
square day's work for it.

Then he showed us an-other little job he'd prin-ted and hadn't charged
for, be-cause it was for us.  It had a pic-ture of a run-away nig-ger with
a bundle on a stick over his shoulder, and “$200 re-ward” un-der it.  The
read-ing was all about Jim, and just de-scribed him to a dot.  It said
he run away from St. Jacques' plant-a-tion, forty mile be-low New Or-leans,
last winter, and likely went north, and who-ever would catch him and send
him back he could have the re-ward and ex-penses.

“Now,” says the duke, “after to-night we can run in the day-time if we
want to.  Whenever we see any-body com-ing we can tie Jim hand and foot
with a rope, and lay him in the wig-wam and show this hand-bill and say we
cap-tured him up the river, and were too poor to travel on a steam-boat,
so we got this little raft on credit from our friends and are go-ing down
to get the re-ward.  Hand-cuffs and chains would look still bet-ter on Jim,
but it wouldn't go well with the story of us be-ing so poor.  Too much
like jew-elry.  Ropes are the cor-rect thing--we must pre-serve the unit-ies,
as we say on the boards.”

We all said the duke was pretty smart, and there couldn't be no trouble
about run-ning day-times.  We judged we could make miles enough that night
to get out of the reach of the pow-wow we reckoned the duke's work in
the print-ing of-fice was go-ing to make in that little town; then we could
boom right along if we wanted to.

We laid low and kept still, and never shoved out till nearly ten
o'clock; then we slid by, pretty wide away from the town, and didn't
hoist our lan-tern till we was clear out of sight of it.

When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morn-ing, he says:

“Huck, does you reck'n we gwyne to run ac-rost any mo' kings on dis
trip?”

“No,” I says, “I reckon not.”

“Well,” says he, “dat's all right, den.  I doan' mine one er two kings,
but dat's enough.  Dis one's power-ful drunk, en de duke ain' much
bet-ter.”

I found Jim had been try-ing to get him to talk French, so he could hear
what it was like; but he said he had been in this coun-try so long, and
had so much trouble, he'd for-got it.




CHAPTER XXI.

IT was after sun-up now, but we went right on and didn't tie up.  The
king and the duke turned out by and by look-ing pretty rusty; but after
they'd jumped over-board and took a swim it chippered them up a good
deal. After break-fast the king he took a seat on the corner of the raft,
and pulled off his boots and rolled up his britches, and let his legs
dangle in the wa-ter, so as to be com-fort-able, and lit his pipe, and went
to get-ting his Romeo and Juliet by heart.  When he had got it pretty
good him and the duke be-gun to prac-tice it to-gether.  The duke had to
learn him over and over again how to say every speech; and he made him
sigh, and put his hand on his heart, and after a while he said he done
it pretty well; “only,” he says, “you mustn't bel-low out _Romeo_!
that way, like a bull--you must say it soft and sick and lan-guishy,
so--R-o-o-meo! that is the idea; for Juliet's a dear sweet mere child of
a girl, you know, and she doesn't bray like a jack-ass.”

Well, next they got out a couple of long swords that the duke made out
of oak laths, and be-gun to prac-tice the sword fight--the duke called
him-self Richard III.; and the way they laid on and pranced around
the raft was grand to see.  But by and by the king tripped and fell
over-board, and after that they took a rest, and had a talk about all
kinds of ad-ven-tures they'd had in other times along the river.

After din-ner the duke says:

“Well, Ca-pet, we'll want to make this a first-class show, you know, so
I guess we'll add a little more to it.  We want a little some-thing to
an-swer en-cores with, any-way.”

“What's onkores, Bil-ge-wa-ter?”

The duke told him, and then says:

“I'll an-swer by do-ing the High-land fling or the sailor's horn-pipe; and
you--well, let me see--oh, I've got it--you can do Ham-let's so-li-lo-quy.”

“Ham-let's which?”

“Ham-let's so-li-lo-quy, you know; the most cel-eb-rated thing in Shakespeare.
Ah, it's sub-lime, sub-lime!  Al-ways fetches the house.  I haven't got
it in the book--I've only got one volume--but I reckon I can piece it out
from memory.  I'll just walk up and down a minute, and see if I can call
it back from re-col-lec-tion's vaults.”

So he went to march-ing up and down, think-ing, and frown-ing hor-rible
every now and then; then he would hoist up his eye-brows; next he would
squeeze his hand on his fore-head and stag-ger back and kind of moan; next
he would sigh, and next he'd let on to drop a tear.  It was beau-ti-ful
to see him. By and by he got it.  He told us to give at-ten-tion.  Then
he strikes a most noble at-ti-tude, with one leg shoved for-wards, and his
arms stretched away up, and his head tilted back, look-ing up at the sky;
and then he be-gins to rip and rave and grit his teeth; and after that,
all through his speech, he howled, and spread around, and swelled up his
chest, and just knocked the spots out of any act-ing ever I see be-fore.
 This is the speech--I learned it, easy enough, while he was learn-ing it
to the king:

To be, or not to be; that is the bare bodkin That makes calam-ity of
so long life; For who would far-dels bear, till Birnam Wood do come
to Dun-sin-ane, But that the fear of some-thing after death Murders the
in-no-cent sleep, Great nature's second course, And makes us rather sling
the ar-rows of out-rageous for-tune Than fly to oth-ers that we know not of.
There's the re-spect must give us pause: Wake Dun-can with thy knock-ing! I
would thou couldst; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, The
op-pressor's wrong, the proud man's con-tumely, The law's delay, and the
quietus which his pangs might take. In the dead waste and middle of the
night, when church-yards yawn In cus-tom-ary suits of sol-emn black, But
that the un-dis-covered coun-try from whose bourne no trav-eler re-turns,
Breathes forth con-ta-gion on the world, And thus the nat-ive hue of
res-ol-u-tion, like the poor cat i' the ad-age, Is sick-lied o'er with care.
And all the clouds that lowered o'er our house-tops, With this
re-gard their cur-rents turn awry, And lose the name of ac-tion. 'Tis a
con-sum-ma-tion de-voutly to be wished. But soft you, the fair Ophelia: Ope
not thy pon-der-ous and marble jaws. But get thee to a nun-nery&mdash;go!

Well, the old man he liked that speech, and he mighty soon got it so he
could do it first rate. It seemed like he was just born for it; and when
he had his hand in and was ex-cited, it was per-fectly lovely the way he
would rip and tear and rair up be-hind when he was get-ting it off.

The first chance we got, the duke he had some show bills prin-ted; and
after that, for two or three days as we floated along, the raft was a
most un-com-mon lively place, for there warn't noth-ing but sword-fight-ing
and re-hears-ing--as the duke called it--go-ing on all the time. One morn-ing,
when we was pretty well down the State of Arkansaw, we come in sight
of a little one-horse town in a big bend; so we tied up about
three-quar-ters of a mile above it, in the mouth of a crick which was
shut in like a tun-nel by the cypress trees, and all of us but Jim took
the ca-noe and went down there to see if there was any chance in that
place for our show.

We struck it mighty lucky; there was go-ing to be a cir-cus there that
af-ter-noon, and the coun-try people was already be-gin-ning to come in, in
all kinds of old shackly wag-ons, and on horses. The cir-cus would leave
be-fore night, so our show would have a pretty good chance. The duke he
hired the court house, and we went around and stuck up our bills. They
read like this:

Shak-sperean Revival!!!

Won-der-ful At-trac-tion!

For One Night Only! The world renowned tra-gedi-ans,

David Gar-rick the younger, of Drury Lane Theatre, Lon-don,

and

Ed-mund Kean the elder, of the Royal Hay-mar-ket Theatre, White-chapel,
Pud-ding Lane, Pic-ca-dilly, Lon-don, and the Royal Contin-ental Theatres, in
their sub-lime Shak-sperean Spec-tacle en-titled The Bal-cony Scene in

Romeo and Juliet!!!

Romeo...................................... Mr. Gar-rick.

Juliet..................................... Mr. Kean.

Ass-isted by the whole strength of the com-pany!

New cos-tumes, new scenery, new ap-point-ments!

Also:

The thrill-ing, mas-terly, and blood-curd-ling Broad-sword con-flict In
Richard III.!!!

Richard III................................ Mr. Gar-rick.

Rich-mond................................... Mr. Kean.

also:

(by spe-cial re-quest,)

Ham-let's Im-mor-tal So-li-lo-quy!!

By the Il-lus-tri-ous Kean!

Done by him 300 con-sec-ut-ive nights in Paris!

For One Night Only,

On ac-count of im-per-at-ive European en-gage-ments!

Ad-mis-sion 25 cents; chil-dren and ser-vants, 10 cents.

Then we went loaf-ing around the town. The stores and houses was most all
old shackly dried-up frame con-cerns that hadn't ever been painted; they
was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts, so as to be out of
reach of the wa-ter when the river was over-flowed. The houses had little
gar-dens around them, but they didn't seem to raise hardly any-thing in
them but jimpson weeds, and sun-flowers, and ash-piles, and old curled-up
boots and shoes, and pieces of bottles, and rags, and played-out
tin-ware. The fences was made of dif-fer-ent kinds of boards, nailed on
at dif-fer-ent times; and they leaned every which-way, and had gates that
didn't gen-erly have but one hinge--a leather one. Some of the fences
had been white-washed, some time or an-other, but the duke said it was in
Clum-bus's time, like enough. There was gen-erly hogs in the garden, and
people driv-ing them out.

All the stores was along one street.  They had white do-mestic awn-ings in
front, and the coun-try people hitched their horses to the awn-ing-posts.
There was empty drygoods boxes un-der the awn-ings, and loafers roost-ing
on them all day long, whit-tling them with their Bar-low knives; and
chaw-ing to-bacco, and gap-ing and yawn-ing and stretch-ing--a mighty ornery
lot. They gen-erly had on yel-low straw hats most as wide as an um-brella,
but didn't wear no coats nor waist-coats, they called one an-other Bill,
and Buck, and Hank, and Joe, and Andy, and talked lazy and drawly, and
used con-sid-er-able many cuss words.  There was as many as one loafer
lean-ing up against every awn-ing-post, and he most al-ways had his hands
in his britches-pock-ets, ex-cept when he fetched them out to lend a chaw
of to-bacco or scratch.  What a body was hear-ing amongst them all the
time was:

“Gimme a chaw 'v to-backer, Hank.”

“Cain't; I hain't got but one chaw left.  Ask Bill.”

Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw; maybe he lies and says he ain't got
none. Some of them kinds of loafers never has a cent in the world, nor a
chaw of to-bacco of their own.  They get all their chaw-ing by bor-row-ing;
they say to a fel-low, “I wisht you'd len' me a chaw, Jack, I jist this
minute give Ben Thompson the last chaw I had”--which is a lie pretty
much everytime; it don't fool nobody but a stranger; but Jack ain't no
stranger, so he says:

“_You_ give him a chaw, did you?  So did your sis-ter's cat's
grand-mother. You pay me back the chaws you've awready borry'd off'n me,
Lafe Buck-ner, then I'll loan you one or two ton of it, and won't charge
you no back in-trust, nuther.”

“Well, I _did_ pay you back some of it wunst.”

“Yes, you did--'bout six chaws.  You borry'd store to-backer and paid back
nig-ger-head.”

Store to-bacco is flat black plug, but these fel-lows mostly chaws the
nat-ural leaf twis-ted.  When they bor-row a chaw they don't gen-erly cut it
off with a knife, but set the plug in between their teeth, and gnaw with
their teeth and tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in
two; then some-times the one that owns the to-bacco looks mourn-ful at it
when it's handed back, and says, sar-castic:

“Here, gimme the _chaw_, and you take the _plug_.”

All the streets and lanes was just mud; they warn't noth-ing else _but_
mud--mud as black as tar and nigh about a foot deep in some places,
and two or three inches deep in _all_ the places.  The hogs loafed and
grunted around every-wheres.  You'd see a muddy sow and a lit-ter of pigs
come lazy-ing along the street and whol-lop her-self right down in the way,
where folks had to walk around her, and she'd stretch out and shut her
eyes and wave her ears whilst the pigs was milk-ing her, and look as
happy as if she was on salary. And pretty soon you'd hear a loafer
sing out, “Hi!  _so_ boy! sick him, Tige!” and away the sow would go,
squeal-ing most hor-rible, with a dog or two swinging to each ear, and
three or four dozen more a-com-ing; and then you would see all the
loafers get up and watch the thing out of sight, and laugh at the fun
and look grate-ful for the noise.  Then they'd settle back again till
there was a dog fight.  There couldn't any-thing wake them up all over,
and make them happy all over, like a dog fight--un-less it might be
put-ting tur-pen-tine on a stray dog and set-ting fire to him, or ty-ing a
tin pan to his tail and see him run him-self to death.

On the river front some of the houses was stick-ing out over the bank,
and they was bowed and bent, and about ready to tumble in. The people
had moved out of them.  The bank was caved away un-der one corner of some
oth-ers, and that corner was hanging over.  People lived in them yet, but
it was danger-some, be-cause some-times a strip of land as wide as a house
caves in at a time.  So-me-times a belt of land a quarter of a mile deep
will start in and cave along and cave along till it all caves into the
river in one sum-mer. Such a town as that has to be al-ways mov-ing back,
and back, and back, be-cause the river's al-ways gnaw-ing at it.

The nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the
wag-ons and horses in the streets, and more com-ing all the time.
 Fam-il-ies fetched their din-ners with them from the coun-try, and eat them
in the wag-ons.  There was con-sid-er-able whisky drink-ing go-ing on, and I
seen three fights.  By and by some-body sings out:

“Here comes old Boggs!--in from the coun-try for his little old monthly
drunk; here he comes, boys!”

All the loafers looked glad; I reckoned they was used to hav-ing fun out
of Boggs.  One of them says:

“Won-der who he's a-gwyne to chaw up this time.  If he'd a-chawed up all
the men he's ben a-gwyne to chaw up in the last twenty year he'd have
con-sid-er-able ru-pu-ta-tion now.”

Another one says, “I wisht old Boggs 'd threaten me, 'cuz then I'd know
I warn't gwyne to die for a thou-san' year.”

Boggs comes a-tear-ing along on his horse, whoop-ing and yelling like an
In-jun, and singing out:

“Cler the track, thar.  I'm on the waw-path, and the price uv coffins is
a-gwyne to raise.”

He was drunk, and weav-ing about in his saddle; he was over fifty year
old, and had a very red face.  Every-body yelled at him and laughed at
him and sas-sed him, and he sas-sed back, and said he'd at-tend to them and
lay them out in their reg-u-lar turns, but he couldn't wait now be-cause
he'd come to town to kill old Co-l-onel Sherburn, and his motto was, “Meat
first, and spoon vittles to top off on.”

He see me, and rode up and says:

“Whar'd you come f'm, boy?  You pre-pared to die?”

Then he rode on.  I was scared, but a man says:

“He don't mean noth-ing; he's al-ways a-car-ryin' on like that when he's
drunk.  He's the best nature-d-est old fool in Arkansaw--never hurt nobody,
drunk nor sober.”

Boggs rode up be-fore the biggest store in town, and bent his head down
so he could see un-der the cur-tain of the awn-ing and yells:

“Come out here, Sherburn! Come out and meet the man you've swindled.
You're the houn' I'm after, and I'm a-gwyne to have you, too!”

And so he went on, call-ing Sherburn everything he could lay his tongue
to, and the whole street packed with people listen-ing and laugh-ing and
go-ing on.  By and by a proud-look-ing man about fifty-five--and he was a
heap the best dressed man in that town, too--steps out of the store, and
the crowd drops back on each side to let him come.  He says to Boggs,
mighty ca'm and slow--he says:

“I'm tired of this, but I'll en-dure it till one o'clock.  Till one
o'clock, mind--no longer.  If you open your mouth against me only once
after that time you can't travel so far but I will find you.”

Then he turns and goes in.  The crowd looked mighty sober; nobody
stirred, and there warn't no more laugh-ing.  Boggs rode off
black-guard-ing Sherburn as loud as he could yell, all down the street;
and pretty soon back he comes and stops be-fore the store, still keep-ing
it up.  Some men crowded around him and tried to get him to shut up,
but he wouldn't; they told him it would be one o'clock in about fif-teen
minutes, and so he _must_ go home--he must go right away.  But it didn't
do no good.  He cussed away with all his might, and throwed his hat down
in the mud and rode over it, and pretty soon away he went a-ra-ging down
the street again, with his gray hair a-fly-ing. Every-body that could get
a chance at him tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they
could lock him up and get him sober; but it warn't no use--up the street
he would tear again, and give Sherburn an-other cuss-ing.  By and by
some-body says:

“Go for his daugh-ter!--quick, go for his daugh-ter; some-times he'll listen
to her.  If any-body can per-suade him, she can.”

So some-body star-ted on a run.  I walked down street a ways and stopped.
In about five or ten minutes here comes Boggs again, but not on his
horse.  He was a-reel-ing across the street to-wards me, bare-headed, with
a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms and hur-ry-ing him along.
He was quiet, and looked un-easy; and he warn't hanging back any, but was
do-ing some of the hur-ry-ing him-self.  Some-body sings out:

“Boggs!”

I looked over there to see who said it, and it was that Co-l-onel
Sherburn. He was stand-ing per-fectly still in the street, and had a
pis-tol raised in his right hand--not aim-ing it, but hold-ing it out with
the bar-rel tilted up to-wards the sky.  The same second I see a young
girl com-ing on the run, and two men with her.  Boggs and the men turned
round to see who called him, and when they see the pis-tol the men
jumped to one side, and the pis-tol-bar-rel come down slow and steady to
a level--both bar-rels cocked. Boggs throws up both of his hands and says,
“O Lord, don't shoot!”  Bang! goes the first shot, and he stag-gers back,
claw-ing at the air--bang! goes the second one, and he tumbles back-wards
on to the ground, heavy and solid, with his arms spread out.  That young
girl screamed out and comes rush-ing, and down she throws her-self on her
father, cry-ing, and say-ing, “Oh, he's killed him, he's killed him!”  The
crowd closed up around them, and shouldered and jammed one an-other, with
their necks stretched, try-ing to see, and people on the in-side try-ing to
shove them back and shout-ing, “Back, back! give him air, give him air!”

Co-l-onel Sherburn he tossed his pis-tol on to the ground, and turned
around on his heels and walked off.

They took Boggs to a little drug store, the crowd press-ing around just
the same, and the whole town fol-low-ing, and I rushed and got a good
place at the win-dow, where I was close to him and could see in.  They
laid him on the floor and put one large Bible un-der his head, and opened
an-other one and spread it on his breast; but they tore open his shirt
first, and I seen where one of the bul-lets went in.  He made about a
dozen long gasps, his breast lift-ing the Bible up when he drawed in his
breath, and let-ting it down again when he breathed it out--and after that
he laid still; he was dead.  Then they pulled his daugh-ter away from
him, scream-ing and cry-ing, and took her off.  She was about six-teen, and
very sweet and gentle look-ing, but aw-ful pale and scared.

Well, pretty soon the whole town was there, squirm-ing and scrou-ging and
push-ing and shov-ing to get at the win-dow and have a look, but people
that had the places wouldn't give them up, and folks be-hind them was
say-ing all the time, “Say, now, you've looked enough, you fel-lows;
'tain't right and 'tain't fair for you to stay thar all the time, and
never give nobody a chance; other folks has their rights as well as
you.”

There was con-sid-er-able jaw-ing back, so I slid out, think-ing maybe
there was go-ing to be trouble.  The streets was full, and every-body was
ex-cited. Every-body that seen the shoot-ing was telling how it happened,
and there was a big crowd packed around each one of these fel-lows,
stretch-ing their necks and listen-ing.  One long, lanky man, with long
hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the back of his head, and a
crooked-handled cane, marked out the places on the ground where Boggs
stood and where Sherburn stood, and the people fol-low-ing him around from
one place to t'other and watch-ing everything he done, and bob-bing their
heads to show they un-der-stood, and stoop-ing a little and rest-ing their
hands on their thighs to watch him mark the places on the ground with
his cane; and then he stood up straight and stiff where Sherburn had
stood, frown-ing and hav-ing his hat-brim down over his eyes, and sung
out, “Boggs!” and then fetched his cane down slow to a level, and says
“Bang!” staggered back-wards, says “Bang!” again, and fell down flat on
his back. The people that had seen the thing said he done it per-fect;
said it was just ex-actly the way it all happened.  Then as much as a
dozen people got out their bottles and treated him.

Well, by and by some-body said Sherburn ought to be lynched.  In about a
minute every-body was say-ing it; so away they went, mad and yelling, and
snatch-ing down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with.




CHAPTER XXII.

THEY swarmed up to-wards Sherburn's house, a-whoop-ing and ra-ging like
In-juns, and everything had to clear the way or get run over and tromped
to mush, and it was aw-ful to see.  Chil-dren was heel-ing it ahead of the
mob, scream-ing and try-ing to get out of the way; and every win-dow along
the road was full of wo-men's heads, and there was nig-ger boys in every
tree, and bucks and wenches look-ing over every fence; and as soon as the
mob would get nearly to them they would break and skaddle back out of
reach.  Lots of the wo-men and girls was cry-ing and tak-ing on, scared
most to death.

They swarmed up in front of Sherburn's pal-ings as thick as they could
jam to-gether, and you couldn't hear your-self think for the noise.  It
was a little twenty-foot yard.  Some sung out “Tear down the fence! tear
down the fence!”  Then there was a racket of rip-ping and tear-ing and
smash-ing, and down she goes, and the front wall of the crowd be-gins to
roll in like a wave.

Just then Sherburn steps out on to the roof of his little front porch,
with a double-bar-rel gun in his hand, and takes his stand, per-fectly
ca'm and de-lib-er-ate, not say-ing a word.  The racket stopped, and the
wave sucked back.

Sherburn never said a word--just stood there, look-ing down.  The
still-ness was aw-ful creepy and un-com-fort-able.  Sherburn run his eye slow
along the crowd; and wherever it struck the people tried a little to
out-gaze him, but they couldn't; they dropped their eyes and looked
sneaky. Then pretty soon Sherburn sort of laughed; not the pleas-ant
kind, but the kind that makes you feel like when you are eat-ing bread
that's got sand in it.

Then he says, slow and scorn-ful:

“The idea of _y-ou_ lynch-ing any-body!  It's amus-ing.  The idea of you
think-ing you had pluck enough to lynch a _man_!  Be-cause you're brave
enough to tar and feather poor friend-less cast-out wo-men that come along
here, did that make you think you had grit enough to lay your hands on a
_man_?  Why, a _man's_ safe in the hands of ten thou-sand of your kind--as
long as it's day-time and you're not be-hind him.

“Do I know you?  I know you clear through. I was born and raised in the
South, and I've lived in the North; so I know the av-er-age all around.
The av-er-age man's a cow-ard.  In the North he lets any-body walk over him
that wants to, and goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it.
In the South one man all by him-self, has stopped a stage full of men
in the day-time, and robbed the lot.  Your news-pa-pers call you a
brave people so much that you think you are braver than any other
people--whereas you're just _as_ brave, and no braver.  Why don't your
jur-ies hang mur-der-ers?  Be-cause they're afraid the man's friends will
shoot them in the back, in the dark--and it's just what they _would_ do.

“So they al-ways ac-quit; and then a _man_ goes in the night, with a
hun-dred masked cow-ards at his back and lynches the ras-cal.  Your mis-take
is, that you didn't bring a man with you; that's one mis-take, and the
other is that you didn't come in the dark and fetch your masks.  You
brought _part_ of a man--Buck Hark-ness, there--and if you hadn't had him
to start you, you'd a taken it out in blow-ing.

“You didn't want to come.  The av-er-age man don't like trouble and
danger. _You_ don't like trouble and danger.  But if only _half_ a
man--like Buck Hark-ness, there--shouts 'Lynch him! lynch him!' you're
afraid to back down--afraid you'll be found out to be what you
are--_cow-ards_--and so you raise a yell, and hang yourselves on to that
half-a-man's coat-tail, and come ra-ging up here, swear-ing what big
things you're go-ing to do. The pi-ti-fulest thing out is a mob; that's
what an army is--a mob; they don't fight with cour-age that's born in
them, but with cour-age that's bor-rowed from their mass, and from their
of-ficers.  But a mob without any _man_ at the head of it is _be-neath_
pi-ti-ful-ness.  Now the thing for _y-ou_ to do is to droop your tails and
go home and crawl in a hole.  If any real lynch-ing's go-ing to be done it
will be done in the dark, South-ern fash-ion; and when they come they'll
bring their masks, and fetch a _man_ along.  Now _leave_--and take your
half-a-man with you”--toss-ing his gun up across his left arm and cock-ing
it when he says this.

The crowd washed back sud-den, and then broke all apart, and went tear-ing
off every which way, and Buck Hark-ness he heeled it after them, look-ing
tol-er-able cheap.  I could a stayed if I wanted to, but I didn't want to.

I went to the cir-cus and loafed around the back side till the watch-man
went by, and then dived in un-der the tent.  I had my twenty-dol-lar gold
piece and some other money, but I reckoned I bet-ter save it, be-cause
there ain't no telling how soon you are go-ing to need it, away from
home and amongst strangers that way.  You can't be too care-ful.  I ain't
op-posed to spend-ing money on cir-cuses when there ain't no other way, but
there ain't no use in _wast-ing_ it on them.

It was a real bully cir-cus.  It was the splen-did-est sight that ever was
when they all come rid-ing in, two and two, a gen-tle-man and lady, side
by side, the men just in their draw-ers and un-der-shirts, and no shoes
nor stir-rups, and rest-ing their hands on their thighs easy and
com-fort-able--there must a been twenty of them--and every lady with a
lovely com-plex-ion, and per-fectly beau-ti-ful, and look-ing just like a gang
of real sure-enough queens, and dressed in clothes that cost mil-lions of
dol-lars, and just littered with dia-monds.  It was a power-ful fine sight;
I never see any-thing so lovely.  And then one by one they got up
and stood, and went a-weav-ing around the ring so gentle and wavy and
grace-ful, the men look-ing ever so tall and airy and straight, with their
heads bob-bing and skim-ming along, away up there un-der the tent-roof, and
every lady's rose-leafy dress flap-ping soft and silky around her hips,
and she look-ing like the most love-li-est para-sol.

And then faster and faster they went, all of them dan-cing, first one
foot out in the air and then the other, the horses lean-ing more and
more, and the ring-mas-ter go-ing round and round the cen-ter-pole, crack-ing
his whip and shout-ing “Hi!--hi!” and the clown crack-ing jokes be-hind
him; and by and by all hands dropped the reins, and every lady put her
knuckles on her hips and every gen-tle-man fol-ded his arms, and then how
the horses did lean over and hump them-selves!  And so one after the
other they all skipped off into the ring, and made the sweetest bow I
ever see, and then scampered out, and every-body clapped their hands and
went just about wild.

Well, all through the cir-cus they done the most as-ton-ish-ing things; and
all the time that clown car-ried on so it most killed the people.  The
ring-mas-ter couldn't ever say a word to him but he was back at him quick
as a wink with the fun-ni-est things a body ever said; and how he ever
_could_ think of so many of them, and so sud-den and so pat, was what I
couldn't no-way un-der-stand. Why, I couldn't a thought of them in a year.
And by and by a drunk man tried to get into the ring--said he wanted to
ride; said he could ride as well as any-body that ever was.  They ar-gued
and tried to keep him out, but he wouldn't listen, and the whole show
come to a stand-still.  Then the people be-gun to holler at him and make
fun of him, and that made him mad, and he be-gun to rip and tear; so that
stirred up the people, and a lot of men be-gun to pile down off of the
benches and swarm to-wards the ring, say-ing, “Knock him down! throw him
out!” and one or two wo-men be-gun to scream.  So, then, the ring-mas-ter
he made a little speech, and said he hoped there wouldn't be no
dis-turb-ance, and if the man would prom-ise he wouldn't make no more
trouble he would let him ride if he thought he could stay on the horse.
 So every-body laughed and said all right, and the man got on. The minute
he was on, the horse be-gun to rip and tear and jump and ca-vort around,
with two cir-cus men hanging on to his bridle try-ing to hold him, and the
drunk man hanging on to his neck, and his heels fly-ing in the air every
jump, and the whole crowd of people stand-ing up shout-ing and laugh-ing
till tears rolled down.  And at last, sure enough, all the cir-cus men
could do, the horse broke loose, and away he went like the very na-tion,
round and round the ring, with that sot lay-ing down on him and hanging
to his neck, with first one leg hanging most to the ground on one side,
and then t'other one on t'other side, and the people just crazy.  It
warn't funny to me, though; I was all of a tremble to see his danger.
 But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle and grabbed the bridle,
a-reel-ing this way and that; and the next minute he sprung up and
dropped the bridle and stood! and the horse a-go-ing like a house afire
too.  He just stood up there, a-sail-ing around as easy and com-fort-able
as if he warn't ever drunk in his life--and then he be-gun to pull off his
clothes and sling them.  He shed them so thick they kind of clogged up
the air, and al-to-gether he shed sev-en-teen suits. And, then, there he
was, slim and hand-some, and dressed the gaud-i-est and pret-ti-est you
ever saw, and he lit into that horse with his whip and made him fairly
hum--and fi-nally skipped off, and made his bow and danced off to
the dress-ing-room, and every-body just a-howl-ing with pleas-ure and
as-ton-ish-ment.

Then the ring-mas-ter he see how he had been fooled, and he _was_ the
sick-est ring-mas-ter you ever see, I reckon.  Why, it was one of his own
men!  He had got up that joke all out of his own head, and never let on
to nobody. Well, I felt sheep-ish enough to be took in so, but I wouldn't
a been in that ring-mas-ter's place, not for a thou-sand dol-lars.  I don't
know; there may be bul-lier cir-cuses than what that one was, but I
never struck them yet. Any-ways, it was plenty good enough for _me_; and
wherever I run across it, it can have all of _my_ cus-tom every time.

Well, that night we had _our_ show; but there warn't only about twelve
people there--just enough to pay ex-penses.  And they laughed all the
time, and that made the duke mad; and every-body left, any-way, be-fore
the show was over, but one boy which was asleep.  So the duke said these
Arkansaw lunk-heads couldn't come up to Shakespeare; what they wanted
was low com-edy--and maybe some-thing ruther worse than low com-edy, he
reckoned.  He said he could size their style.  So next morn-ing he got
some big sheets of wrap-ping pa-per and some black paint, and drawed off
some hand-bills, and stuck them up all over the vil-lage.  The bills said:




CHAPTER XXIII.

WELL, all day him and the king was hard at it, rig-ging up a stage and
a cur-tain and a row of candles for foot-lights; and that night the house
was jam full of men in no time.  When the place couldn't hold no more,
the duke he quit tend-ing door and went around the back way and come on
to the stage and stood up be-fore the cur-tain and made a little speech,
and praised up this tragedy, and said it was the most thrill-ingest one
that ever was; and so he went on a-brag-ging about the tragedy, and about
Ed-mund Kean the Elder, which was to play the main prin-cipal part in it;
and at last when he'd got every-body's ex-pect-a-tions up high enough, he
rolled up the cur-tain, and the next minute the king come a-pran-cing
out on all fours, na-ked; and he was painted all over,
ring-streaked-and-striped, all sorts of col-ors, as splen-did as a
rain-bow.  And--but never mind the rest of his out-fit; it was just wild,
but it was aw-ful funny. The people most killed them-selves laugh-ing; and
when the king got done caper-ing and capered off be-hind the scenes, they
roared and clapped and stormed and haw-hawed till he come back and done
it over again, and after that they made him do it an-other time. Well, it
would make a cow laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut.

Then the duke he lets the cur-tain down, and bows to the people, and says
the great tragedy will be per-formed only two nights more, on ac-counts of
press-ing Lon-don en-gage-ments, where the seats is all sold already for it
in Drury Lane; and then he makes them an-other bow, and says if he has
suc-ceeded in pleas-ing them and in-struct-ing them, he will be deeply
ob-lee-ged if they will men-tion it to their friends and get them to come
and see it.

Twenty people sings out:

“What, is it over?  Is that _all_?”

The duke says yes.  Then there was a fine time.  Every-body sings
out, “Sold!” and rose up mad, and was a-go-ing for that stage and them
tra-gedi-ans.  But a big, fine look-ing man jumps up on a bench and shouts:

“Hold on!  Just a word, gen-tle-men.”  They stopped to listen.  “We are
sold--mighty badly sold.  But we don't want to be the laugh-ing stock of
this whole town, I reckon, and never hear the last of this thing as long
as we live.  _No_.  What we want is to go out of here quiet, and talk
this show up, and sell the _rest_ of the town!  Then we'll all be in the
same boat.  Ain't that sens-ible?” (“You bet it is!--the jedge is right!”
 every-body sings out.) “All right, then--not a word about any sell.  Go
along home, and ad-vise every-body to come and see the tragedy.”

Next day you couldn't hear noth-ing around that town but how splen-did
that show was.  House was jammed again that night, and we sold this
crowd the same way.  When me and the king and the duke got home to the
raft we all had a sup-per; and by and by, about mid-night, they made Jim
and me back her out and float her down the middle of the river, and
fetch her in and hide her about two mile be-low town.

The third night the house was crammed again--and they warn't new-comers
this time, but people that was at the show the other two nights.  I
stood by the duke at the door, and I see that every man that went in had
his pock-ets bul-ging, or some-thing muffled up un-der his coat--and I see it
warn't no per-fumery, neither, not by a long sight.  I smelt sickly eggs
by the bar-rel, and rot-ten cab-bages, and such things; and if I know the
signs of a dead cat be-ing around, and I bet I do, there was sixty-four
of them went in.  I shoved in there for a minute, but it was too vari-ous
for me; I couldn't stand it.  Well, when the place couldn't hold no more
people the duke he give a fel-low a quarter and told him to tend door
for him a minute, and then he star-ted around for the stage door, I after
him; but the minute we turned the corner and was in the dark he says:

“Walk fast now till you get away from the houses, and then shin for the
raft like the dick-ens was after you!”

I done it, and he done the same.  We struck the raft at the same time,
and in less than two seconds we was glid-ing down stream, all dark and
still, and edging to-wards the middle of the river, nobody say-ing a
word. I reckoned the poor king was in for a gaudy time of it with the
audi-ence, but noth-ing of the sort; pretty soon he crawls out from un-der
the wig-wam, and says:

“Well, how'd the old thing pan out this time, duke?”  He hadn't been
up-town at all.

We never showed a light till we was about ten mile be-low the vil-lage.
Then we lit up and had a sup-per, and the king and the duke fairly
laughed their bones loose over the way they'd served them people.  The
duke says:

“Green-horns, flat-heads!  I knew the first house would keep mum and let
the rest of the town get roped in; and I knew they'd lay for us the
third night, and con-sider it was _their_ turn now.  Well, it _is_ their
turn, and I'd give some-thing to know how much they'd take for it.  I
_would_ just like to know how they're put-ting in their op-por-tun-ity.
 They can turn it into a pic-nic if they want to--they brought plenty
pro-vi-sions.”

Them rapscal-lions took in four hun-dred and sixty-five dol-lars in that
three nights.  I never see money hauled in by the wagon-load like that
be-fore.  By and by, when they was asleep and snor-ing, Jim says:

“Don't it s'prise you de way dem kings car-ries on, Huck?”

“No,” I says, “it don't.”

“Why don't it, Huck?”

“Well, it don't, be-cause it's in the breed.  I reckon they're all
alike.”

“But, Huck, dese kings o' ourn is re-g-lar rapscal-lions; dat's jist what
dey is; dey's re-g-lar rapscal-lions.”

“Well, that's what I'm a-say-ing; all kings is mostly rapscal-lions, as
fur as I can make out.”

“Is dat so?”

“You read about them once--you'll see.  Look at Henry the Eight; this 'n
's a Sunday-school Su-per-in-tend-ent to _him_.  And look at Charles Se-cond,
and Louis Four-teen, and Louis Fif-teen, and James Se-cond, and Ed-ward
Se-cond, and Richard Third, and forty more; be-sides all them Saxon
hept-arch-ies that used to rip around so in old times and raise Cain.  My,
you ought to seen old Henry the Eight when he was in bloom.  He _was_ a
blos-som.  He used to marry a new wife every day, and chop off her head
next morn-ing.  And he would do it just as in-dif-fer-ent as if he was
or-der-ing up eggs.  'Fetch up Nell Gwynn,' he says.  They fetch her up.
Next morn-ing, 'Chop off her head!'  And they chop it off.  'Fetch up
Jane Shore,' he says; and up she comes, Next morn-ing, 'Chop off her
head'--and they chop it off.  'Ring up Fair Rosamun.'  Fair Rosamun
an-swers the bell.  Next morn-ing, 'Chop off her head.'  And he made every
one of them tell him a tale every night; and he kept that up till he had
hogged a thou-sand and one tales that way, and then he put them all in a
book, and called it Domes-day Book--which was a good name and stated the
case.  You don't know kings, Jim, but I know them; and this old rip
of ourn is one of the clean-est I've struck in his-tory.  Well, Henry he
takes a no-tion he wants to get up some trouble with this coun-try. How
does he go at it--give no-tice?--give the coun-try a show?  No.  All of a
sud-den he heaves all the tea in Bo-ston Har-bor over-board, and whacks
out a de-clar-a-tion of in-de-pend-ence, and dares them to come on.  That was
_his_ style--he never give any-body a chance.  He had sus-pi-cions of his
father, the Duke of Wel-ling-ton.  Well, what did he do?  Ask him to show
up?  No--drown-ded him in a butt of mam-sey, like a cat.  S'pose people
left money lay-ing around where he was--what did he do?  He collared it.
 S'pose he con-trac-ted to do a thing, and you paid him, and didn't set
down there and see that he done it--what did he do?  He al-ways done the
other thing. S'pose he opened his mouth--what then?  If he didn't shut it
up power-ful quick he'd lose a lie every time.  That's the kind of a bug
Henry was; and if we'd a had him along 'stead of our kings he'd a fooled
that town a heap worse than ourn done.  I don't say that ourn is lambs,
be-cause they ain't, when you come right down to the cold facts; but they
ain't noth-ing to _that_ old ram, any-way.  All I say is, kings is kings,
and you got to make al-low-ances.  Take them all around, they're a mighty
ornery lot. It's the way they're raised.”

“But dis one do _s-mell_ so like de na-tion, Huck.”

“Well, they all do, Jim.  We can't help the way a king smells; his-tory
don't tell no way.”

“Now de duke, he's a tol-erble likely man in some ways.”

“Yes, a duke's dif-fer-ent.  But not very dif-fer-ent.  This one's
a mid-dling hard lot for a duke.  When he's drunk there ain't no
near-sighted man could tell him from a king.”

“Well, any-ways, I doan' hanker for no mo' un um, Huck.  Dese is all I
kin stan'.”

“It's the way I feel, too, Jim.  But we've got them on our hands, and we
got to re-mem-ber what they are, and make al-low-ances.  So-me-times I wish we
could hear of a coun-try that's out of kings.”

What was the use to tell Jim these warn't real kings and dukes?  It
wouldn't a done no good; and, be-sides, it was just as I said:  you
couldn't tell them from the real kind.

I went to sleep, and Jim didn't call me when it was my turn.  He of-ten
done that.  When I waked up just at day-break he was sit-ting there with
his head down betwixt his knees, moan-ing and mourn-ing to him-self.  I
didn't take no-tice nor let on.  I knowed what it was about.  He was
think-ing about his wife and his chil-dren, away up yon-der, and he was low
and home-sick; be-cause he hadn't ever been away from home be-fore in his
life; and I do be-lieve he cared just as much for his people as white
folks does for their'n.  It don't seem nat-ural, but I reckon it's so.
 He was of-ten moan-ing and mourn-ing that way nights, when he judged I
was asleep, and say-ing, “Po' little 'Liza-beth! po' little Johnny! it's
mighty hard; I spec' I ain't ever gwyne to see you no mo', no mo'!”  He
was a mighty good nig-ger, Jim was.

But this time I some-how got to talk-ing to him about his wife and young
ones; and by and by he says:

“What makes me feel so bad dis time 'uz bekase I hear sumpn over yon-der
on de bank like a whack, er a slam, while ago, en it mine me er de time
I treat my little 'Liza-beth so ornery.  She warn't on'y 'bout fo' year
ole, en she tuck de sk'yar-let fever, en had a pow-ful rough spell; but
she got well, en one day she was a-stan-nin' aroun', en I says to her, I
says:

“'Shet de do'.'

“She never done it; jis' stood dah, kiner smilin' up at me.  It make me
mad; en I says agin, mighty loud, I says:

“'Doan' you hear me?  Shet de do'!'

“She jis stood de same way, kiner smilin' up.  I was a-bilin'!  I says:

“'I lay I _make_ you mine!'

“En wid dat I fetch' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin'.
Den I went into de yuther room, en 'uz gone 'bout ten minutes; en when
I come back dah was dat do' a-stan-nin' open _y-it_, en dat chile stan-nin'
mos' right in it, a-lookin' down and mournin', en de tears run-nin' down.
 My, but I _wuz_ mad!  I was a-gwyne for de chile, but jis' den--it was a
do' dat open in-nerds--jis' den, 'long come de wind en slam it to, be-hine
de chile, ker-BLAM!--en my lan', de chile never move'!  My breff mos'
hop outer me; en I feel so--so--I doan' know HOW I feel.  I crope out,
all a-trem-blin', en crope aroun' en open de do' easy en slow, en poke my
head in be-hine de chile, sof' en still, en all uv a sud-den I says POW!
jis' as loud as I could yell.  _She never budge!_  Oh, Huck, I bust out
a-cryin' en grab her up in my arms, en say, 'Oh, de po' little thing!
 De Lord God Amighty fo-give po' ole Jim, kaze he never gwyne to fo-give
his-self as long's he live!'  Oh, she was plumb deef en dumb, Huck, plumb
deef en dumb--en I'd ben a-treat'n her so!”




CHAPTER XXIV.

NEXT day, to-wards night, we laid up un-der a little wil-low tow-head out in
the middle, where there was a vil-lage on each side of the river, and the
duke and the king be-gun to lay out a plan for work-ing them towns.  Jim
he spoke to the duke, and said he hoped it wouldn't take but a few
hours, be-cause it got mighty heavy and tire-some to him when he had to
lay all day in the wig-wam tied with the rope.  You see, when we left him
all alone we had to tie him, be-cause if any-body happened on to him all
by him-self and not tied it wouldn't look much like he was a run-away
nig-ger, you know. So the duke said it _was_ kind of hard to have to lay
roped all day, and he'd cipher out some way to get around it.

He was un-com-mon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck it.  He dressed
Jim up in King Lear's out-fit--it was a long cur-tain-calico gown, and a
white horse-hair wig and whiskers; and then he took his theater paint
and painted Jim's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead,
dull, solid blue, like a man that's been drown-ded nine days.  Blamed if
he warn't the hor-riblest look-ing out-rage I ever see.  Then the duke took
and wrote out a sign on a shingle so:

Sick Arab--but harm-less when not out of his head.

And he nailed that shingle to a lath, and stood the lath up four or five
foot in front of the wig-wam.  Jim was sat-is-fied.  He said it was a sight
bet-ter than ly-ing tied a couple of years every day, and trem-bling all
over every time there was a sound.  The duke told him to make him-self
free and easy, and if any-body ever come med-dling around, he must hop
out of the wig-wam, and carry on a little, and fetch a howl or two like
a wild beast, and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone.
 Which was sound enough judg-ment; but you take the av-er-age man, and he
wouldn't wait for him to howl.  Why, he didn't only look like he was
dead, he looked con-sid-er-able more than that.

These rapscal-lions wanted to try the None-such again, be-cause there was
so much money in it, but they judged it wouldn't be safe, be-cause maybe
the news might a worked along down by this time.  They couldn't hit no
pro-ject that suited ex-actly; so at last the duke said he reckoned he'd
lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he couldn't put up
some-thing on the Arkansaw vil-lage; and the king he al-lowed he would drop
over to t'other vil-lage without any plan, but just trust in Provid-ence
to lead him the prof-it-able way--mean-ing the devil, I reckon.  We had all
bought store clothes where we stopped last; and now the king put his'n
on, and he told me to put mine on.  I done it, of course.  The king's
duds was all black, and he did look real swell and starchy.  I never
knowed how clothes could change a body be-fore.  Why, be-fore, he looked
like the orneri-est old rip that ever was; but now, when he'd take off
his new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile, he looked that grand
and good and pi-ous that you'd say he had walked right out of the ark,
and maybe was old Levit-i-cus him-self.  Jim cleaned up the ca-noe, and I
got my paddle ready.  There was a big steam-boat lay-ing at the shore away
up un-der the point, about three mile above the town--been there a couple
of hours, tak-ing on freight.  Says the king:

“Seein' how I'm dressed, I reckon maybe I bet-ter ar-rive down from St.
Louis or Cin-cin-nati, or some other big place.  Go for the steam-boat,
Huckle-berry; we'll come down to the vil-lage on her.”

I didn't have to be ordered twice to go and take a steam-boat ride.
 I fetched the shore a half a mile above the vil-lage, and then went
scoot-ing along the bluff bank in the easy wa-ter.  Pretty soon we come to
a nice in-no-cent-look-ing young coun-try jake set-ting on a log swab-bing the
sweat off of his face, for it was power-ful warm weather; and he had a
couple of big car-pet-bags by him.

“Run her nose in shore,” says the king.  I done it.  “Wher' you bound
for, young man?”

“For the steam-boat; go-ing to Or-leans.”

“Git aboard,” says the king.  “Hold on a minute, my ser-vant 'll he'p you
with them bags.  Jump out and he'p the gen-tle-man, Adol-phus”--mean-ing me,
I see.

I done so, and then we all three star-ted on again.  The young chap was
mighty thank-ful; said it was tough work tot-ing his bag-gage such weather.
He asked the king where he was go-ing, and the king told him he'd come
down the river and landed at the other vil-lage this morn-ing, and now he
was go-ing up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up there.  The
young fel-low says:

“When I first see you I says to my-self, 'It's Mr. Wilks, sure, and he
come mighty near get-ting here in time.'  But then I says again, 'No, I
reckon it ain't him, or else he wouldn't be pad-dling up the river.'  You
_ain't_ him, are you?”

“No, my name's Blod-gett--El-ex-an-der Blod-gett--_Rev-er-end_ El-ex-an-der
Blod-gett, I s'pose I must say, as I'm one o' the Lord's poor ser-vants.
 But still I'm jist as able to be sorry for Mr. Wilks for not ar-riv-ing
in time, all the same, if he's missed any-thing by it--which I hope he
hasn't.”

“Well, he don't miss any prop-erty by it, be-cause he'll get that all
right; but he's missed see-ing his brother Peter die--which he mayn't
mind, nobody can tell as to that--but his brother would a give any-thing
in this world to see _him_ be-fore he died; never talked about noth-ing
else all these three weeks; hadn't seen him since they was boys
to-gether--and hadn't ever seen his brother Wil-liam at all--that's the deef
and dumb one--Wil-liam ain't more than thirty or thirty-five.  Peter and
Ge-orge were the only ones that come out here; Ge-orge was the mar-ried
brother; him and his wife both died last year.  Har-vey and Wil-liam's the
only ones that's left now; and, as I was say-ing, they haven't got here
in time.”

“Did any-body send 'em word?”

“Oh, yes; a month or two ago, when Peter was first took; be-cause Peter
said then that he sorter felt like he warn't go-ing to get well this
time. You see, he was pretty old, and Ge-orge's g'yirls was too young to
be much com-pany for him, ex-cept Mary Jane, the red-headed one; and so he
was kinder lone-some after Ge-orge and his wife died, and didn't seem
to care much to live.  He most des-per-ately wanted to see Har-vey--and
Wil-liam, too, for that mat-ter--be-cause he was one of them kind that can't
bear to make a will.  He left a let-ter be-hind for Har-vey, and said he'd
told in it where his money was hid, and how he wanted the rest of the
prop-erty di-vided up so Ge-orge's g'yirls would be all right--for Ge-orge
didn't leave noth-ing.  And that let-ter was all they could get him to put
a pen to.”

“Why do you reckon Har-vey don't come?  Wher' does he live?”

“Oh, he lives in Eng-land--Shef-field--preaches there--hasn't ever been in
this coun-try.  He hasn't had any too much time--and be-sides he mightn't a
got the let-ter at all, you know.”

“Too bad, too bad he couldn't a lived to see his broth-ers, poor soul.
You go-ing to Or-leans, you say?”

“Yes, but that ain't only a part of it.  I'm go-ing in a ship, next
Wed-nes-day, for Ryo Jan-eero, where my uncle lives.”

“It's a pretty long jour-ney.  But it'll be lovely; wisht I was a-go-ing.
Is Mary Jane the old-est?  How old is the oth-ers?”

“Mary Jane's nine-teen, Susan's fif-teen, and Joanna's about
four-teen--that's the one that gives her-self to good works and has a
hare-lip.”

“Poor things! to be left alone in the cold world so.”

“Well, they could be worse off.  Old Peter had friends, and they
ain't go-ing to let them come to no harm.  There's Hob-son, the Babtis'
preacher; and Deacon Lot Hovey, and Ben Rucker, and Ab-ner Shackle-ford,
and Levi Bell, the law-yer; and Dr. Robin-son, and their wives, and the
widow Bartley, and--well, there's a lot of them; but these are the ones
that Peter was thick-est with, and used to write about some-times, when
he wrote home; so Har-vey 'll know where to look for friends when he gets
here.”

Well, the old man went on ask-ing ques-tions till he just fairly emp-tied
that young fel-low.  Blamed if he didn't in-quire about every-body and
everything in that blessed town, and all about the Wilkses; and about
Peter's busi-ness--which was a tan-ner; and about Ge-orge's--which was a
car-penter; and about Har-vey's--which was a dis-sen-t-er-ing min-is-ter; and so
on, and so on.  Then he says:

“What did you want to walk all the way up to the steam-boat for?”

“Be-cause she's a big Or-leans boat, and I was afeard she mightn't stop
there.  When they're deep they won't stop for a hail.  A Cin-cin-nati boat
will, but this is a St. Louis one.”

“Was Peter Wilks well off?”

“Oh, yes, pretty well off.  He had houses and land, and it's reckoned he
left three or four thou-sand in cash hid up som'ers.”

“When did you say he died?”

“I didn't say, but it was last night.”

“Fu-neral to-mor-row, likely?”

“Yes, 'bout the middle of the day.”

“Well, it's all ter-rible sad; but we've all got to go, one time or
an-other. So what we want to do is to be pre-pared; then we're all right.”

“Yes, sir, it's the best way.  Ma used to al-ways say that.”

When we struck the boat she was about done load-ing, and pretty soon she
got off.  The king never said noth-ing about go-ing aboard, so I lost
my ride, after all.  When the boat was gone the king made me paddle up
an-other mile to a lone-some place, and then he got ashore and says:

“Now hustle back, right off, and fetch the duke up here, and the new
car-pet-bags.  And if he's gone over to t'other side, go over there and
git him.  And tell him to git him-self up re-gard-less.  Shove along, now.”

I see what _he_ was up to; but I never said noth-ing, of course.  When
I got back with the duke we hid the ca-noe, and then they set down on a
log, and the king told him everything, just like the young fel-low had
said it--every last word of it.  And all the time he was a-do-ing it he
tried to talk like an Eng-lish-man; and he done it pretty well, too, for
a slouch. I can't im-it-ate him, and so I ain't a-go-ing to try to; but he
really done it pretty good.  Then he says:

“How are you on the deef and dumb, Bil-ge-wa-ter?”

The duke said, leave him alone for that; said he had played a deef
and dumb per-son on the his-tronic boards.  So then they waited for a
steam-boat.

About the middle of the af-ter-noon a couple of little boats come along,
but they didn't come from high enough up the river; but at last there
was a big one, and they hailed her.  She sent out her yawl, and we went
aboard, and she was from Cin-cin-nati; and when they found we only wanted
to go four or five mile they was boom-ing mad, and gave us a cuss-ing, and
said they wouldn't land us.  But the king was ca'm.  He says:

“If gen-tle-men kin af-ford to pay a dol-lar a mile apiece to be took on and
put off in a yawl, a steam-boat kin af-ford to carry 'em, can't it?”

So they softened down and said it was all right; and when we got to the
vil-lage they yawled us ashore.  About two dozen men flocked down when
they see the yawl a-com-ing, and when the king says:

“Kin any of you gen-tle-men tell me wher' Mr. Peter Wilks lives?” they
give a glance at one an-other, and nod-ded their heads, as much as to say,
“What d' I tell you?”  Then one of them says, kind of soft and gentle:

“I'm sorry sir, but the best we can do is to tell you where he _did_
live yes-ter-day even-ing.”

Sud-den as wink-ing the ornery old cre-tur went an to smash, and fell up
against the man, and put his chin on his shoulder, and cried down his
back, and says:

“Alas, alas, our poor brother--gone, and we never got to see him; oh,
it's too, too hard!”

Then he turns around, blub-ber-ing, and makes a lot of idi-otic signs to
the duke on his hands, and blamed if he didn't drop a car-pet-bag and
bust out a-cry-ing.  If they warn't the beaten-est lot, them two frauds,
that ever I struck.

Well, the men gathered around and sym-path-ized with them, and said all
sorts of kind things to them, and car-ried their car-pet-bags up the hill
for them, and let them lean on them and cry, and told the king all about
his brother's last mo-ments, and the king he told it all over again on
his hands to the duke, and both of them took on about that dead tan-ner
like they'd lost the twelve dis-ciples.  Well, if ever I struck any-thing
like it, I'm a nig-ger. It was enough to make a body ashamed of the hu-man
race.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE news was all over town in two minutes, and you could see the people
tear-ing down on the run from every which way, some of them put-ting on
their coats as they come.  Pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd,
and the noise of the tramp-ing was like a sol-dier march.  The win-dows and
door-yards was full; and every minute some-body would say, over a fence:

“Is it _them_?”

And some-body trot-ting along with the gang would an-swer back and say:

“You bet it is.”

When we got to the house the street in front of it was packed, and the
three girls was stand-ing in the door.  Mary Jane _was_ red-headed, but
that don't make no dif-fer-ence, she was most aw-ful beau-ti-ful, and her
face and her eyes was all lit up like glory, she was so glad her uncles
was come. The king he spread his arms, and Mary Jane she jumped for
them, and the hare-lip jumped for the duke, and there they had it!
 Every-body most, least-ways wo-men, cried for joy to see them meet again
at last and have such good times.

Then the king he hunched the duke private--I see him do it--and then he
looked around and see the coffin, over in the corner on two chairs; so
then him and the duke, with a hand across each other's shoulder, and
t'other hand to their eyes, walked slow and sol-emn over there, every-body
drop-ping back to give them room, and all the talk and noise stop-ping,
people say-ing “Sh!” and all the men tak-ing their hats off and droop-ing
their heads, so you could a heard a pin fall.  And when they got there
they bent over and looked in the coffin, and took one sight, and then
they bust out a-cry-ing so you could a heard them to Or-leans, most; and
then they put their arms around each other's necks, and hung their chins
over each other's shoulders; and then for three minutes, or maybe four,
I never see two men leak the way they done.  And, mind you, every-body
was do-ing the same; and the place was that damp I never see any-thing
like it. Then one of them got on one side of the coffin, and t'other on
t'other side, and they kneeled down and res-ted their fore-heads on the
coffin, and let on to pray all to them-selves.  Well, when it come
to that it worked the crowd like you never see any-thing like it, and
every-body broke down and went to sob-bing right out loud--the poor girls,
too; and every wo-man, nearly, went up to the girls, without say-ing a
word, and kissed them, sol-emn, on the fore-head, and then put their hand
on their head, and looked up to-wards the sky, with the tears run-ning
down, and then bus-ted out and went off sob-bing and swab-bing, and give
the next wo-man a show.  I never see any-thing so dis-gust-ing.

Well, by and by the king he gets up and comes for-ward a little, and
works him-self up and slob-bers out a speech, all full of tears and
flap-doodle about its be-ing a sore trial for him and his poor brother
to lose the dis-eased, and to miss see-ing dis-eased alive after the long
jour-ney of four thou-sand mile, but it's a trial that's sweetened and
sanc-ti-fied to us by this dear sym-pathy and these holy tears, and so he
thanks them out of his heart and out of his brother's heart, be-cause out
of their mouths they can't, words be-ing too weak and cold, and all that
kind of rot and slush, till it was just sick-en-ing; and then he blub-bers
out a pi-ous goody-goody Amen, and turns him-self loose and goes to cry-ing
fit to bust.

And the minute the words were out of his mouth some-body over in the
crowd struck up the dox-o-lo-jer, and every-body joined in with all their
might, and it just warmed you up and made you feel as good as church
let-ting out. Music is a good thing; and after all that soul-but-ter and
hog-wash I never see it freshen up things so, and sound so hon-est and
bully.

Then the king be-gins to work his jaw again, and says how him and his
nieces would be glad if a few of the main prin-cipal friends of the
fam-ily would take sup-per here with them this even-ing, and help set up
with the ashes of the dis-eased; and says if his poor brother lay-ing
yon-der could speak he knows who he would name, for they was names that
was very dear to him, and men-tioned of-ten in his let-ters; and so he will
name the same, to wit, as fol-lows, vizz.:--Rev. Mr. Hob-son, and Deacon
Lot Hovey, and Mr. Ben Rucker, and Ab-ner Shackle-ford, and Levi Bell, and
Dr. Robin-son, and their wives, and the widow Bartley.

Rev. Hob-son and Dr. Robin-son was down to the end of the town a-hunt-ing
to-gether--that is, I mean the doc-tor was ship-ping a sick man to t'other
world, and the preacher was pint-ing him right.  Law-yer Bell was away up
to Louis-ville on busi-ness.  But the rest was on hand, and so they all
come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him;
and then they shook hands with the duke and didn't say noth-ing, but just
kept a-smil-ing and bob-bing their heads like a pas-sel of sap-heads whilst
he made all sorts of signs with his hands and said “Goo-goo--goo-goo-goo”
 all the time, like a baby that can't talk.

So the king he blattered along, and man-aged to in-quire about pretty
much every-body and dog in town, by his name, and men-tioned all sorts
of little things that happened one time or an-other in the town, or to
Ge-orge's fam-ily, or to Peter.  And he al-ways let on that Peter wrote him
the things; but that was a lie:  he got every blessed one of them out of
that young flat-head that we ca-noed up to the steam-boat.

Then Mary Jane she fetched the let-ter her father left be-hind, and the
king he read it out loud and cried over it.  It give the dwell-ing-house
and three thou-sand dol-lars, gold, to the girls; and it give the tan-yard
(which was do-ing a good busi-ness), along with some other houses and
land (worth about seven thou-sand), and three thou-sand dol-lars in gold
to Har-vey and Wil-liam, and told where the six thou-sand cash was hid down
cel-lar.  So these two frauds said they'd go and fetch it up, and have
everything square and above-board; and told me to come with a candle.
 We shut the cel-lar door be-hind us, and when they found the bag
they spilt it out on the floor, and it was a lovely sight, all them
yaller-boys.  My, the way the king's eyes did shine!  He slaps the duke
on the shoulder and says:

“Oh, _this_ ain't bully nor noth'n!  Oh, no, I reckon not!  Why,
_bully_, it beats the None-such, _don't_ it?”

The duke al-lowed it did.  They pawed the yaller-boys, and sifted them
through their fin-gers and let them jingle down on the floor; and the
king says:

“It ain't no use talkin'; bein' broth-ers to a rich dead man and
rep-res-ent-at-ives of fur-rin heirs that's got left is the line for you and
me, Bilge.  Thish yer comes of trust'n to Provid-ence.  It's the best
way, in the long run.  I've tried 'em all, and ther' ain't no bet-ter
way.”

Most every-body would a been sat-is-fied with the pile, and took it on
trust; but no, they must count it.  So they counts it, and it comes out
four hun-dred and fif-teen dol-lars short.  Says the king:

“Dern him, I won-der what he done with that four hun-dred and fif-teen
dol-lars?”

They wor-ried over that awhile, and ran-sacked all around for it.  Then
the duke says:

“Well, he was a pretty sick man, and likely he made a mis-take--I reckon
that's the way of it.  The best way's to let it go, and keep still about
it.  We can spare it.”

“Oh, shucks, yes, we can _s-pare_ it.  I don't k'yer noth'n 'bout
that--it's the _count_ I'm thinkin' about.  We want to be aw-ful square
and open and above-board here, you know.  We want to lug this h-yer
money up stairs and count it be-fore every-body--then ther' ain't noth'n
sus-pi-cious.  But when the dead man says ther's six thous'n dol-lars, you
know, we don't want to--”

“Hold on,” says the duke.  “Le's make up the deff-isit,” and he be-gun to
haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket.

“It's a most amaz'n' good idea, duke--you _have_ got a rat-tlin' clever
head on you,” says the king.  “Blest if the old None-such ain't a hep-pin'
us out agin,” and _he_ be-gun to haul out yaller-jack-ets and stack them
up.

It most bus-ted them, but they made up the six thou-sand clean and clear.

“Say,” says the duke, “I got an-other idea.  Le's go up stairs and count
this money, and then take and _give it to the girls_.”

“Good land, duke, lemme hug you!  It's the most dazzling idea 'at ever a
man struck.  You have cert'nly got the most as-ton-ishin' head I ever see.
Oh, this is the boss dodge, ther' ain't no mis-take 'bout it.  Let 'em
fetch along their sus-pi-cions now if they want to--this 'll lay 'em out.”

When we got up-stairs every-body gethered around the table, and the king
he coun-ted it and stacked it up, three hun-dred dol-lars in a pile--twenty
el-eg-ant little piles.  Every-body looked hungry at it, and licked their
chops.  Then they raked it into the bag again, and I see the king be-gin
to swell him-self up for an-other speech.  He says:

“Friends all, my poor brother that lays yon-der has done gen-er-ous by
them that's left be-hind in the vale of sor-rers.  He has done gen-er-ous by
these yer poor little lambs that he loved and sheltered, and that's left
fath-er-less and moth-er-less.  Yes, and we that knowed him knows that he
would a done _more_ gen-er-ous by 'em if he hadn't ben afeard o' woundin'
his dear Wil-liam and me.  Now, _wouldn't_ he?  Ther' ain't no ques-tion
'bout it in _my_ mind.  Well, then, what kind o' broth-ers would it be
that 'd stand in his way at sech a time?  And what kind o' uncles would
it be that 'd rob--yes, _rob_--sech poor sweet lambs as these 'at he loved
so at sech a time?  If I know Wil-liam--and I _think_ I do--he--well, I'll
jest ask him.” He turns around and be-gins to make a lot of signs to
the duke with his hands, and the duke he looks at him stu-pid and
leather-headed a while; then all of a sud-den he seems to catch his
mean-ing, and jumps for the king, goo-goo-ing with all his might for joy,
and hugs him about fif-teen times be-fore he lets up.  Then the king says,
“I knowed it; I reckon _that 'll_ con-vince any-body the way _he_ feels
about it.  Here, Mary Jane, Susan, Joan-ner, take the money--take it
_all_.  It's the gift of him that lays yon-der, cold but joy-ful.”

Mary Jane she went for him, Susan and the hare-lip went for the
duke, and then such an-other hug-ging and kiss-ing I never see yet.  And
every-body crowded up with the tears in their eyes, and most shook the
hands off of them frauds, say-ing all the time:

“You _dear_ good souls!--how _lovely_!--how _could_ you!”

Well, then, pretty soon all hands got to talk-ing about the dis-eased
again, and how good he was, and what a loss he was, and all that; and
be-fore long a big iron-jawed man worked him-self in there from out-side,
and stood a-listen-ing and look-ing, and not say-ing any-thing; and nobody
say-ing any-thing to him either, be-cause the king was talk-ing and they was
all busy listen-ing.  The king was say-ing--in the middle of some-thing he'd
star-ted in on--

“--they bein' par-tick-ler friends o' the dis-eased.  That's why they're
in-vited here this evenin'; but to-mor-row we want _all_ to come--every-body;
for he re-spec-ted every-body, he liked every-body, and so it's fit-ten that
his fu-neral or-gies sh'd be pub-lic.”

And so he went a-moon-ing on and on, lik-ing to hear him-self talk, and
every little while he fetched in his fu-neral or-gies again, till the duke
he couldn't stand it no more; so he writes on a little scrap of pa-per,
“_Ob-sequies_, you old fool,” and folds it up, and goes to goo-goo-ing and
reach-ing it over people's heads to him.  The king he reads it and puts
it in his pocket, and says:

“Poor Wil-liam, af-flic-ted as he is, his _heart's_ aluz right.  Asks me
to in-vite every-body to come to the fu-neral--wants me to make 'em all
wel-come.  But he needn't a wor-ried--it was jest what I was at.”

Then he weaves along again, per-fectly ca'm, and goes to drop-ping in his
fu-neral or-gies again every now and then, just like he done be-fore.  And
when he done it the third time he says:

“I say or-gies, not be-cause it's the com-mon term, be-cause it
ain't--ob-sequies bein' the com-mon term--but be-cause or-gies is the right
term. Ob-sequies ain't used in Eng-land no more now--it's gone out.  We
say or-gies now in Eng-land.  Or-gies is bet-ter, be-cause it means the thing
you're after more ex-act.  It's a word that's made up out'n the Greek
_or-go_, out-side, open, abroad; and the Hebrew _jee-sum_, to plant, cover
up; hence in-_ter._  So, you see, fu-neral or-gies is an open er pub-lic
fu-neral.”

He was the _wor-st_ I ever struck.  Well, the iron-jawed man he laughed
right in his face.  Every-body was shocked.  Every-body says, “Why,
_doc-tor_!” and Ab-ner Shackle-ford says:

“Why, Robin-son, hain't you heard the news?  This is Har-vey Wilks.”

The king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flap-per, and says:

“Is it my poor brother's dear good friend and phys-i-cian?  I--”

“Keep your hands off of me!” says the doc-tor.  “_You_ talk like an
Eng-lish-man, _don't_ you?  It's the worst im-it-a-tion I ever heard.  _You_
Peter Wilks's brother!  You're a fraud, that's what you are!”

Well, how they all took on!  They crowded around the doc-tor and tried to
quiet him down, and tried to ex-plain to him and tell him how Har-vey 'd
showed in forty ways that he _was_ Har-vey, and knowed every-body by name,
and the names of the very dogs, and begged and _begged_ him not to hurt
Har-vey's feel-ings and the poor girl's feel-ings, and all that.  But it
warn't no use; he stormed right along, and said any man that pre-ten-ded
to be an Eng-lish-man and couldn't im-it-ate the lingo no bet-ter than what
he did was a fraud and a liar.  The poor girls was hanging to the king
and cry-ing; and all of a sud-den the doc-tor ups and turns on _them_.  He
says:

“I was your father's friend, and I'm your friend; and I warn you as a
friend, and an hon-est one that wants to pro-tect you and keep you out of
harm and trouble, to turn your backs on that scoun-drel and have noth-ing
to do with him, the ig-nor-ant tramp, with his idi-otic Greek and Hebrew,
as he calls it.  He is the thin-nest kind of an im-postor--has come here
with a lot of empty names and facts which he picked up some-wheres, and
you take them for _proofs_, and are helped to fool yourselves by these
fool-ish friends here, who ought to know bet-ter.  Mary Jane Wilks, you
know me for your friend, and for your un-selfish friend, too.  Now listen
to me; turn this pi-ti-ful ras-cal out--I _beg_ you to do it.  Will you?”

Mary Jane straightened her-self up, and my, but she was hand-some!  She
says:

“_Here_ is my an-swer.”  She hove up the bag of money and put it in the
king's hands, and says, “Take this six thou-sand dol-lars, and in-vest for
me and my sis-ters any way you want to, and don't give us no re-ceipt for
it.”

Then she put her arm around the king on one side, and Susan and the
hare-lip done the same on the other.  Every-body clapped their hands and
stomped on the floor like a per-fect storm, whilst the king held up his
head and smiled proud.  The doc-tor says:

“All right; I wash _my_ hands of the mat-ter.  But I warn you all that a
time 's com-ing when you're go-ing to feel sick whenever you think of this
day.” And away he went.

“All right, doc-tor,” says the king, kinder mock-ing him; “we'll try and
get 'em to send for you;” which made them all laugh, and they said it
was a prime good hit.




CHAPTER XXVI.

WELL, when they was all gone the king he asks Mary Jane how they was off
for spare rooms, and she said she had one spare room, which would do for
Uncle Wil-liam, and she'd give her own room to Uncle Har-vey, which was
a little big-ger, and she would turn into the room with her sis-ters and
sleep on a cot; and up gar-ret was a little cubby, with a pal-let in it.
The king said the cubby would do for his val-ley--mean-ing me.

So Mary Jane took us up, and she showed them their rooms, which was
plain but nice.  She said she'd have her frocks and a lot of other traps
took out of her room if they was in Uncle Har-vey's way, but he said
they warn't.  The frocks was hung along the wall, and be-fore them was
a cur-tain made out of calico that hung down to the floor.  There was an
old hair trunk in one corner, and a gui-tar-box in an-other, and all sorts
of little knick-knacks and jim-cracks around, like girls brisken up a room
with.  The king said it was all the more homely and more pleas-anter for
these fix-ings, and so don't dis-turb them.  The duke's room was pretty
small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby.

That night they had a big sup-per, and all them men and wo-men was there,
and I stood be-hind the king and the duke's chairs and waited on them,
and the nig-gers waited on the rest.  Mary Jane she set at the head of
the table, with Susan along-side of her, and said how bad the bis-cuits
was, and how mean the pre-serves was, and how ornery and tough the fried
chick-ens was--and all that kind of rot, the way wo-men al-ways do for to
force out com-pli-ments; and the people all knowed everything was tiptop,
and said so--said “How _do_ you get bis-cuits to brown so nice?” and
“Where, for the land's sake, _did_ you get these amaz'n pickles?” and
all that kind of hum-bug talky-talk, just the way people al-ways does at a
sup-per, you know.

And when it was all done me and the hare-lip had sup-per in the kit-chen
off of the leav-ings, whilst the oth-ers was help-ing the nig-gers clean up
the things.  The hare-lip she got to pump-ing me about Eng-land, and blest
if I didn't think the ice was get-ting mighty thin some-times.  She says:

“Did you ever see the king?”

“Who?  Wil-liam Fourth?  Well, I bet I have--he goes to our church.”  I
knowed he was dead years ago, but I never let on.  So when I says he
goes to our church, she says:

“What--reg-u-lar?”

“Yes--reg-u-lar.  His pew's right over op-pos-ite ourn--on t'other side the
pul-pit.”

“I thought he lived in Lon-don?”

“Well, he does.  Where _would_ he live?”

“But I thought _y-ou_ lived in Shef-field?”

I see I was up a stump.  I had to let on to get choked with a chicken
bone, so as to get time to think how to get down again.  Then I says:

“I mean he goes to our church reg-u-lar when he's in Shef-field.  That's
only in the sum-mer time, when he comes there to take the sea baths.”

“Why, how you talk--Shef-field ain't on the sea.”

“Well, who said it was?”

“Why, you did.”

“I _didn't_ nuther.”

“You did!”

“I didn't.”

“You did.”

“I never said noth-ing of the kind.”

“Well, what _did_ you say, then?”

“Said he come to take the sea _baths_--that's what I said.”

“Well, then, how's he go-ing to take the sea baths if it ain't on the
sea?”

“Looky here,” I says; “did you ever see any Con-gress-wa-ter?”

“Yes.”

“Well, did you have to go to Con-gress to get it?”

“Why, no.”

“Well, neither does Wil-liam Fourth have to go to the sea to get a sea
bath.”

“How does he get it, then?”

“Gets it the way people down here gets Con-gress-wa-ter--in bar-rels.  There
in the palace at Shef-field they've got fur-naces, and he wants his wa-ter
hot.  They can't bile that amount of wa-ter away off there at the sea.
They haven't got no con-veni-ences for it.”

“Oh, I see, now.  You might a said that in the first place and saved
time.”

When she said that I see I was out of the woods again, and so I was
com-fort-able and glad.  Next, she says:

“Do you go to church, too?”

“Yes--reg-u-lar.”

“Where do you set?”

“Why, in our pew.”

“_Whose_ pew?”

“Why, _ourn_--your Uncle Har-vey's.”

“His'n?  What does _he_ want with a pew?”

“Wants it to set in.  What did you _reck-on_ he wanted with it?”

“Why, I thought he'd be in the pul-pit.”

Rot him, I for-got he was a preacher.  I see I was up a stump again, so I
played an-other chicken bone and got an-other think.  Then I says:

“Blame it, do you sup-pose there ain't but one preacher to a church?”

“Why, what do they want with more?”

“What!--to preach be-fore a king?  I never did see such a girl as you.
They don't have no less than sev-en-teen.”

“Seven-teen!  My land!  Why, I wouldn't set out such a string as that,
not if I _nev-er_ got to glory.  It must take 'em a week.”

“Shucks, they don't _all_ of 'em preach the same day--only _one_ of 'em.”

“Well, then, what does the rest of 'em do?”

“Oh, noth-ing much.  Loll around, pass the plate--and one thing or
an-other.  But mainly they don't do noth-ing.”

“Well, then, what are they _for_?”

“Why, they're for _style_.  Don't you know noth-ing?”

“Well, I don't _want_ to know no such fool-ish-ness as that.  How is
ser-vants treated in Eng-land?  Do they treat 'em bet-ter 'n we treat our
nig-gers?”

“_No_!  A ser-vant ain't nobody there.  They treat them worse than dogs.”

“Don't they give 'em hol-i-days, the way we do, Christ-mas and New Year's
week, and Fourth of July?”

“Oh, just listen!  A body could tell _y-ou_ hain't ever been to Eng-land
by that.  Why, Hare-l--why, Joanna, they never see a hol-i-day from year's
end to year's end; never go to the cir-cus, nor theater, nor nig-ger
shows, nor nowheres.”

“Nor church?”

“Nor church.”

“But _y-ou_ al-ways went to church.”

Well, I was gone up again.  I for-got I was the old man's ser-vant.  But
next minute I whirled in on a kind of an ex-plan-a-tion how a val-ley was
dif-fer-ent from a com-mon ser-vant and _had_ to go to church whether he
wanted to or not, and set with the fam-ily, on ac-count of its be-ing the
law.  But I didn't do it pretty good, and when I got done I see she
warn't sat-is-fied.  She says:

“Hon-est in-jun, now, hain't you been telling me a lot of lies?”

“Hon-est in-jun,” says I.

“None of it at all?”

“None of it at all.  Not a lie in it,” says I.

“Lay your hand on this book and say it.”

I see it warn't noth-ing but a dic-tion-ary, so I laid my hand on it and
said it.  So then she looked a little bet-ter sat-is-fied, and says:

“Well, then, I'll be-lieve some of it; but I hope to gra-cious if I'll
be-lieve the rest.”

“What is it you won't be-lieve, Joe?” says Mary Jane, step-ping in with
Susan be-hind her.  “It ain't right nor kind for you to talk so to him,
and him a stranger and so far from his people.  How would you like to be
treated so?”

“That's al-ways your way, Maim--al-ways sail-ing in to help some-body be-fore
they're hurt.  I hain't done noth-ing to him.  He's told some stretch-ers,
I reckon, and I said I wouldn't swal-low it all; and that's every bit
and grain I _did_ say.  I reckon he can stand a little thing like that,
can't he?”

“I don't care whether 'twas little or whether 'twas big; he's here in
our house and a stranger, and it wasn't good of you to say it.  If you
was in his place it would make you feel ashamed; and so you oughtn't to
say a thing to an-other per-son that will make _them_ feel ashamed.”

“Why, Mam, he said--”

“It don't make no dif-fer-ence what he _said_--that ain't the thing.  The
thing is for you to treat him _kind_, and not be say-ing things to make
him re-mem-ber he ain't in his own coun-try and amongst his own folks.”

I says to my-self, _this_ is a girl that I'm let-ting that old rep-tile rob
her of her money!

Then Susan _she_ waltzed in; and if you'll be-lieve me, she did give
Hare-lip hark from the tomb!

Says I to my-self, and this is _an-other_ one that I'm let-ting him rob her
of her money!

Then Mary Jane she took an-other in-ning, and went in sweet and lovely
again--which was her way; but when she got done there warn't hardly
any-thing left o' poor Hare-lip.  So she hollered.

“All right, then,” says the other girls; “you just ask his par-don.”

She done it, too; and she done it beau-ti-ful.  She done it so beau-ti-ful
it was good to hear; and I wished I could tell her a thou-sand lies, so
she could do it again.

I says to my-self, this is _an-other_ one that I'm let-ting him rob her of
her money.  And when she got through they all jest laid theirselves
out to make me feel at home and know I was amongst friends.  I felt so
ornery and low down and mean that I says to my-self, my mind's made up;
I'll hive that money for them or bust.

So then I lit out--for bed, I said, mean-ing some time or an-other.  When
I got by my-self I went to think-ing the thing over.  I says to my-self,
shall I go to that doc-tor, private, and blow on these frauds?  No--that
won't do. He might tell who told him; then the king and the duke would
make it warm for me.  Shall I go, private, and tell Mary Jane?  No--I
dasn't do it. Her face would give them a hint, sure; they've got the
money, and they'd slide right out and get away with it.  If she was to
fetch in help I'd get mixed up in the busi-ness be-fore it was done with,
I judge.  No; there ain't no good way but one.  I got to steal that
money, some-how; and I got to steal it some way that they won't sus-pi-cion
that I done it. They've got a good thing here, and they ain't a-go-ing
to leave till they've played this fam-ily and this town for all they're
worth, so I'll find a chance time enough. I'll steal it and hide it; and
by and by, when I'm away down the river, I'll write a let-ter and tell
Mary Jane where it's hid.  But I bet-ter hive it to-night if I can,
be-cause the doc-tor maybe hasn't let up as much as he lets on he has; he
might scare them out of here yet.

So, thinks I, I'll go and search them rooms.  Up-stairs the hall was
dark, but I found the duke's room, and star-ted to paw around it with
my hands; but I re-col-lec-ted it wouldn't be much like the king to let
any-body else take care of that money but his own self; so then I went to
his room and be-gun to paw around there.  But I see I couldn't do noth-ing
without a candle, and I dasn't light one, of course.  So I judged I'd
got to do the other thing--lay for them and eaves-drop.  About that time
I hears their foot-steps com-ing, and was go-ing to skip un-der the bed; I
reached for it, but it wasn't where I thought it would be; but I touched
the cur-tain that hid Mary Jane's frocks, so I jumped in be-hind that and
snuggled in amongst the gowns, and stood there per-fectly still.

They come in and shut the door; and the first thing the duke done was to
get down and look un-der the bed.  Then I was glad I hadn't found the bed
when I wanted it.  And yet, you know, it's kind of nat-ural to hide un-der
the bed when you are up to any-thing private.  They sets down then, and
the king says:

“Well, what is it?  And cut it mid-dlin' short, be-cause it's bet-ter for
us to be down there a-whoopin' up the mournin' than up here givin' 'em a
chance to talk us over.”

“Well, this is it, Ca-pet.  I ain't easy; I ain't com-fort-able.  That
doc-tor lays on my mind.  I wanted to know your plans.  I've got a
no-tion, and I think it's a sound one.”

“What is it, duke?”

“That we bet-ter glide out of this be-fore three in the morn-ing, and clip
it down the river with what we've got.  Spe-cially, see-ing we got it so
easy--_given_ back to us, flung at our heads, as you may say, when of
course we al-lowed to have to steal it back.  I'm for knock-ing off and
light-ing out.”

That made me feel pretty bad.  About an hour or two ago it would a been
a little dif-fer-ent, but now it made me feel bad and dis-ap-poin-ted, The
king rips out and says:

“What!  And not sell out the rest o' the prop-erty?  March off like
a pas-sel of fools and leave eight or nine thous'n' dol-lars' worth o'
prop-erty layin' around jest suf-ferin' to be scooped in?--and all good,
sal-able stuff, too.”

The duke he grumbled; said the bag of gold was enough, and he didn't
want to go no deeper--didn't want to rob a lot of orphans of _everything_
they had.

“Why, how you talk!” says the king.  “We sha'n't rob 'em of noth-ing at
all but jest this money.  The people that _buys_ the prop-erty is the
suff'rers; be-cause as soon 's it's found out 'at we didn't own it--which
won't be long after we've slid--the sale won't be valid, and it 'll all
go back to the es-tate.  These yer orphans 'll git their house back agin,
and that's enough for _them_; they're young and spry, and k'n easy
earn a livin'.  _they_ ain't a-goin to suf-fer.  Why, jest think--there's
thous'n's and thous'n's that ain't nigh so well off.  Bless you, _they_
ain't got noth'n' to com-plain of.”

Well, the king he talked him blind; so at last he give in, and said all
right, but said he be-lieved it was blamed fool-ish-ness to stay, and that
doc-tor hanging over them.  But the king says:

“Cuss the doc-tor!  What do we k'yer for _him_?  Hain't we got all the
fools in town on our side?  And ain't that a big enough ma-jor-ity in any
town?”

So they got ready to go down stairs again.  The duke says:

“I don't think we put that money in a good place.”

That cheered me up.  I'd be-gun to think I warn't go-ing to get a hint of
no kind to help me.  The king says:

“Why?”

“Be-cause Mary Jane 'll be in mourn-ing from this out; and first you know
the nig-ger that does up the rooms will get an or-der to box these duds
up and put 'em away; and do you reckon a nig-ger can run across money and
not bor-row some of it?”

“Your head's level agin, duke,” says the king; and he comes a-fum-bling
un-der the cur-tain two or three foot from where I was.  I stuck tight to
the wall and kept mighty still, though quivery; and I wondered what them
fel-lows would say to me if they catched me; and I tried to think what
I'd bet-ter do if they did catch me.  But the king he got the bag be-fore
I could think more than about a half a thought, and he never sus-pi-cioned
I was around.  They took and shoved the bag through a rip in the straw
tick that was un-der the feather-bed, and crammed it in a foot or two
amongst the straw and said it was all right now, be-cause a nig-ger only
makes up the feather-bed, and don't turn over the straw tick only about
twice a year, and so it warn't in no danger of get-ting stole now.

But I knowed bet-ter.  I had it out of there be-fore they was half-way
down stairs.  I groped along up to my cubby, and hid it there till I
could get a chance to do bet-ter.  I judged I bet-ter hide it out-side
of the house some-wheres, be-cause if they missed it they would give the
house a good ran-sack-ing:  I knowed that very well.  Then I turned in,
with my clothes all on; but I couldn't a gone to sleep if I'd a wanted
to, I was in such a sweat to get through with the busi-ness.  By and by I
heard the king and the duke come up; so I rolled off my pal-let and laid
with my chin at the top of my lad-der, and waited to see if any-thing was
go-ing to hap-pen.  But noth-ing did.

So I held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early ones hadn't
be-gun yet; and then I slipped down the lad-der.




CHAPTER XXVII.

I crept to their doors and listened; they was snor-ing.  So I tip-toed
along, and got down stairs all right.  There warn't a sound any-wheres.
 I peeped through a crack of the din-ing-room door, and see the men that
was watch-ing the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs.  The door
was open into the par-lor, where the corpse was lay-ing, and there was a
candle in both rooms. I passed along, and the par-lor door was open; but
I see there warn't nobody in there but the re-main-ders of Peter; so I
shoved on by; but the front door was locked, and the key wasn't there.
 Just then I heard some-body com-ing down the stairs, back be-hind me.  I
run in the par-lor and took a swift look around, and the only place I
see to hide the bag was in the coffin.  The lid was shoved along about
a foot, show-ing the dead man's face down in there, with a wet cloth over
it, and his shroud on.  I tucked the money-bag in un-der the lid, just
down bey-ond where his hands was crossed, which made me creep, they was
so cold, and then I run back across the room and in be-hind the door.

The per-son com-ing was Mary Jane.  She went to the coffin, very soft, and
kneeled down and looked in; then she put up her handker-chief, and I see
she be-gun to cry, though I couldn't hear her, and her back was to me.  I
slid out, and as I passed the din-ing-room I thought I'd make sure them
watch-ers hadn't seen me; so I looked through the crack, and everything
was all right.  They hadn't stirred.

I slipped up to bed, feel-ing ruther blue, on ac-counts of the thing
play-ing out that way after I had took so much trouble and run so much
resk about it.  Says I, if it could stay where it is, all right; be-cause
when we get down the river a hun-dred mile or two I could write back to
Mary Jane, and she could dig him up again and get it; but that ain't the
thing that's go-ing to hap-pen; the thing that's go-ing to hap-pen is, the
money 'll be found when they come to screw on the lid.  Then the king
'll get it again, and it 'll be a long day be-fore he gives any-body
an-other chance to smouch it from him. Of course I _wanted_ to slide
down and get it out of there, but I dasn't try it.  Every minute it was
get-ting earlier now, and pretty soon some of them watch-ers would be-gin
to stir, and I might get catched--catched with six thou-sand dol-lars in my
hands that nobody hadn't hired me to take care of.  I don't wish to be
mixed up in no such busi-ness as that, I says to my-self.

When I got down stairs in the morn-ing the par-lor was shut up, and the
watch-ers was gone.  There warn't nobody around but the fam-ily and the
widow Bartley and our tribe.  I watched their faces to see if any-thing
had been hap-pen-ing, but I couldn't tell.

Towards the middle of the day the un-der-taker come with his man, and they
set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs, and then
set all our chairs in rows, and bor-rowed more from the neigh-bors till
the hall and the par-lor and the din-ing-room was full.  I see the coffin
lid was the way it was be-fore, but I dasn't go to look in un-der it, with
folks around.

Then the people be-gun to flock in, and the beats and the girls took
seats in the front row at the head of the coffin, and for a half an hour
the people filed around slow, in single rank, and looked down at the
dead man's face a minute, and some dropped in a tear, and it was
all very still and sol-emn, only the girls and the beats hold-ing
handker-chiefs to their eyes and keep-ing their heads bent, and sob-bing a
little.  There warn't no other sound but the scrap-ing of the feet on
the floor and blow-ing noses--be-cause people al-ways blows them more at a
fu-neral than they do at other places ex-cept church.

When the place was packed full the un-der-taker he slid around in his
black gloves with his softy sooth-er-ing ways, put-ting on the last
touches, and get-ting people and things all ship-shape and com-fort-able,
and mak-ing no more sound than a cat.  He never spoke; he moved people
around, he squeezed in late ones, he opened up pas-sage-ways, and done
it with nods, and signs with his hands.  Then he took his place over
against the wall. He was the soft-est, glidingest, stealth-i-est man I ever
see; and there warn't no more smile to him than there is to a ham.

They had bor-rowed a melodeum--a sick one; and when everything was ready
a young wo-man set down and worked it, and it was pretty skreeky and
col-icky, and every-body joined in and sung, and Peter was the only one
that had a good thing, ac-cord-ing to my no-tion.  Then the Rev-er-end Hob-son
opened up, slow and sol-emn, and be-gun to talk; and straight off the most
out-rageous row bus-ted out in the cel-lar a body ever heard; it was only
one dog, but he made a most power-ful racket, and he kept it up right
along; the par-son he had to stand there, over the coffin, and wait--you
couldn't hear your-self think.  It was right down awk-ward, and nobody
didn't seem to know what to do.  But pretty soon they see that
long-legged un-der-taker make a sign to the preacher as much as to say,
“Don't you worry--just de-pend on me.”  Then he stooped down and be-gun
to glide along the wall, just his shoulders show-ing over the people's
heads.  So he glided along, and the pow-wow and racket get-ting more and
more out-rageous all the time; and at last, when he had gone around two
sides of the room, he dis-ap-pears down cel-lar.  Then in about two seconds
we heard a whack, and the dog he fin-ished up with a most amaz-ing howl or
two, and then everything was dead still, and the par-son be-gun his sol-emn
talk where he left off.  In a minute or two here comes this un-der-taker's
back and shoulders glid-ing along the wall again; and so he glided and
glided around three sides of the room, and then rose up, and shaded his
mouth with his hands, and stretched his neck out to-wards the preacher,
over the people's heads, and says, in a kind of a coarse whis-per, “_He
had a rat_!”  Then he drooped down and glided along the wall again to
his place.  You could see it was a great sat-is-fac-tion to the people,
be-cause nat-ur-ally they wanted to know.  A little thing like that don't
cost noth-ing, and it's just the little things that makes a man to be
looked up to and liked.  There warn't no more pop-u-lar man in town than
what that un-der-taker was.

Well, the fu-neral ser-mon was very good, but pison long and tire-some; and
then the king he shoved in and got off some of his usual rub-bage, and
at last the job was through, and the un-der-taker be-gun to sneak up on the
coffin with his screw-driver.  I was in a sweat then, and watched him
pretty keen. But he never meddled at all; just slid the lid along as
soft as mush, and screwed it down tight and fast.  So there I was!  I
didn't know whether the money was in there or not.  So, says I, s'pose
some-body has hogged that bag on the sly?--now how do I know whether
to write to Mary Jane or not? S'pose she dug him up and didn't find
noth-ing, what would she think of me? Blame it, I says, I might get
hunted up and jailed; I'd bet-ter lay low and keep dark, and not write at
all; the thing's aw-ful mixed now; try-ing to bet-ter it, I've worsened it
a hun-dred times, and I wish to good-ness I'd just let it alone, dad fetch
the whole busi-ness!

They bur-ied him, and we come back home, and I went to watch-ing faces
again--I couldn't help it, and I couldn't rest easy.  But noth-ing come of
it; the faces didn't tell me noth-ing.

The king he vis-ited around in the even-ing, and sweetened every-body up,
and made him-self ever so friendly; and he give out the idea that his
con-greg-a-tion over in Eng-land would be in a sweat about him, so he must
hurry and settle up the es-tate right away and leave for home.  He was
very sorry he was so pushed, and so was every-body; they wished he could
stay longer, but they said they could see it couldn't be done.  And he
said of course him and Wil-liam would take the girls home with them; and
that pleased every-body too, be-cause then the girls would be well fixed
and amongst their own re-la-tions; and it pleased the girls, too--tickled
them so they clean for-got they ever had a trouble in the world; and told
him to sell out as quick as he wanted to, they would be ready.  Them
poor things was that glad and happy it made my heart ache to see them
get-ting fooled and lied to so, but I didn't see no safe way for me to
chip in and change the gen-eral tune.

Well, blamed if the king didn't bill the house and the nig-gers and all
the prop-erty for auc-tion straight off--sale two days after the fu-neral;
but any-body could buy private be-fore-hand if they wanted to.

So the next day after the fu-neral, along about noon-time, the girls' joy
got the first jolt.  A couple of nig-ger traders come along, and the king
sold them the nig-gers reas-on-able, for three-day drafts as they called
it, and away they went, the two sons up the river to Mem-phis, and their
mother down the river to Or-leans.  I thought them poor girls and them
nig-gers would break their hearts for grief; they cried around each
other, and took on so it most made me down sick to see it.  The girls
said they hadn't ever dreamed of see-ing the fam-ily sep-ar-ated or sold
away from the town.  I can't ever get it out of my memory, the sight of
them poor miser-able girls and nig-gers hanging around each other's necks
and cry-ing; and I reckon I couldn't a stood it all, but would a had
to bust out and tell on our gang if I hadn't knowed the sale warn't no
ac-count and the nig-gers would be back home in a week or two.

The thing made a big stir in the town, too, and a good many come out
flat-footed and said it was scan-dal-ous to sep-ar-ate the mother and the
chil-dren that way.  It in-jured the frauds some; but the old fool he
bulled right along, spite of all the duke could say or do, and I tell
you the duke was power-ful un-easy.

Next day was auc-tion day.  About broad day in the morn-ing the king and
the duke come up in the gar-ret and woke me up, and I see by their look
that there was trouble.  The king says:

“Was you in my room night be-fore last?”

“No, your majesty”--which was the way I al-ways called him when nobody but
our gang warn't around.

“Was you in there yis-ter-day er last night?”

“No, your majesty.”

“Honor bright, now--no lies.”

“Honor bright, your majesty, I'm telling you the truth.  I hain't been
a-near your room since Miss Mary Jane took you and the duke and showed
it to you.”

The duke says:

“Have you seen any-body else go in there?”

“No, your grace, not as I re-mem-ber, I be-lieve.”

“Stop and think.”

I stud-ied awhile and see my chance; then I says:

“Well, I see the nig-gers go in there sev-eral times.”

Both of them gave a little jump, and looked like they hadn't ever
ex-pec-ted it, and then like they _had_.  Then the duke says:

“What, all of them?”

“No--least-ways, not all at once--that is, I don't think I ever see them
all come _out_ at once but just one time.”

“Hello!  When was that?”

“It was the day we had the fu-neral.  In the morn-ing.  It warn't early,
be-cause I over-slept.  I was just start-ing down the lad-der, and I see
them.”

“Well, go on, _go_ on!  What did they do?  How'd they act?”

“They didn't do noth-ing.  And they didn't act any-way much, as fur as I
see. They tip-toed away; so I seen, easy enough, that they'd shoved in
there to do up your majesty's room, or some-thing, s'pos-ing you was up;
and found you _warn't_ up, and so they was hop-ing to slide out of the
way of trouble without wak-ing you up, if they hadn't already waked you
up.”

“Great guns, _this_ is a go!” says the king; and both of them looked
pretty sick and tol-er-able silly.  They stood there a-think-ing and
scratch-ing their heads a minute, and the duke he bust into a kind of a
little raspy chuckle, and says:

“It does beat all how neat the nig-gers played their hand.  They let on
to be _sorry_ they was go-ing out of this re-gion!  And I be-lieved they
_was_ sorry, and so did you, and so did every-body.  Don't ever tell _me_
any more that a nig-ger ain't got any his-tri-onic tal-ent.  Why, the way
they played that thing it would fool _anybody_.  In my opin-ion, there's
a for-tune in 'em.  If I had cap-ital and a theater, I wouldn't want a
bet-ter lay-out than that--and here we've gone and sold 'em for a song.
 Yes, and ain't priv-ileged to sing the song yet.  Say, where _is_ that
song--that draft?”

“In the bank for to be col-lec-ted.  Where _would_ it be?”

“Well, _that's_ all right then, thank good-ness.”

Says I, kind of timid-like:

“Is some-thing gone wrong?”

The king whirls on me and rips out:

“None o' your busi-ness!  You keep your head shet, and mind y'r own
af-fairs--if you got any.  Long as you're in this town don't you for-git
_that_--you hear?”  Then he says to the duke, “We got to jest swaller it
and say noth'n':  mum's the word for _us_.”

As they was start-ing down the lad-der the duke he chuckles again, and
says:

“Quick sales _and_ small profits!  It's a good busi-ness--yes.”

The king snarls around on him and says:

“I was try-ing to do for the best in sel-lin' 'em out so quick.  If the
profits has turned out to be none, lackin' con-sid-able, and none to
carry, is it my fault any more'n it's yourn?”

“Well, _they'd_ be in this house yet and we _wouldn't_ if I could a got
my ad-vice listened to.”

The king sas-sed back as much as was safe for him, and then swapped
around and lit into _me_ again.  He give me down the banks for not
com-ing and _telling_ him I see the nig-gers come out of his room act-ing
that way--said any fool would a _knowed_ some-thing was up.  And then
waltzed in and cussed _him-self_ awhile, and said it all come of him not
lay-ing late and tak-ing his nat-ural rest that morn-ing, and he'd be
blamed if he'd ever do it again.  So they went off a-jaw-ing; and I felt
dread-ful glad I'd worked it all off on to the nig-gers, and yet hadn't
done the nig-gers no harm by it.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

BY and by it was get-ting-up time.  So I come down the lad-der and star-ted
for down-stairs; but as I come to the girls' room the door was open, and
I see Mary Jane set-ting by her old hair trunk, which was open and she'd
been pack-ing things in it--get-ting ready to go to Eng-land.  But she
had stopped now with a fol-ded gown in her lap, and had her face in her
hands, cry-ing.  I felt aw-ful bad to see it; of course any-body would.  I
went in there and says:

“Miss Mary Jane, you can't a-bear to see people in trouble, and I
can't--most al-ways.  Tell me about it.”

So she done it.  And it was the nig-gers--I just ex-pec-ted it.  She said
the beau-ti-ful trip to Eng-land was most about spoiled for her; she didn't
know _how_ she was ever go-ing to be happy there, know-ing the mother and
the chil-dren warn't ever go-ing to see each other no more--and then bus-ted
out bit-terer than ever, and flung up her hands, and says:

“Oh, dear, dear, to think they ain't _ever_ go-ing to see each other any
more!”

“But they _will_--and in-side of two weeks--and I _know_ it!” says I.

Laws, it was out be-fore I could think!  And be-fore I could budge she
throws her arms around my neck and told me to say it _a-gain_, say it
_a-gain_, say it _a-gain_!

I see I had spoke too sud-den and said too much, and was in a close
place. I asked her to let me think a minute; and she set there, very
im-pa-tient and ex-cited and hand-some, but look-ing kind of happy and
eased-up, like a per-son that's had a tooth pulled out.  So I went to
study-ing it out.  I says to my-self, I reckon a body that ups and tells
the truth when he is in a tight place is tak-ing con-sid-er-able many resks,
though I ain't had no ex-per-i-ence, and can't say for cer-tain; but it
looks so to me, any-way; and yet here's a case where I'm blest if it
don't look to me like the truth is bet-ter and ac-tuly _safer_ than a lie.
 I must lay it by in my mind, and think it over some time or other, it's
so kind of strange and un-reg-u-lar. I never see noth-ing like it.  Well, I
says to my-self at last, I'm a-go-ing to chance it; I'll up and tell the
truth this time, though it does seem most like set-ting down on a kag of
powder and touch-ing it off just to see where you'll go to. Then I says:

“Miss Mary Jane, is there any place out of town a little ways where you
could go and stay three or four days?”

“Yes; Mr. Lo-throp's.  Why?”

“Never mind why yet.  If I'll tell you how I know the nig-gers will see
each other again in-side of two weeks--here in this house--and _prove_ how
I know it--will you go to Mr. Lo-throp's and stay four days?”

“Four days!” she says; “I'll stay a year!”

“All right,” I says, “I don't want noth-ing more out of _y-ou_ than just
your word--I druther have it than an-other man's kiss-the-Bible.”  She
smiled and reddened up very sweet, and I says, “If you don't mind it,
I'll shut the door--and bolt it.”

Then I come back and set down again, and says:

“Don't you holler.  Just set still and take it like a man.  I got to
tell the truth, and you want to brace up, Miss Mary, be-cause it's a
bad kind, and go-ing to be hard to take, but there ain't no help for
it.  These uncles of yourn ain't no uncles at all; they're a couple of
frauds--reg-u-lar dead-beats.  There, now we're over the worst of it, you
can stand the rest mid-dling easy.”

It jol-ted her up like everything, of course; but I was over the shoal
wa-ter now, so I went right along, her eyes a-blaz-ing higher and higher
all the time, and told her every blame thing, from where we first struck
that young fool go-ing up to the steam-boat, clear through to where she
flung her-self on to the king's breast at the front door and he kissed
her six-teen or sev-en-teen times--and then up she jumps, with her face
afire like sun-set, and says:

“The brute!  Come, don't waste a minute--not a _second_--we'll have them
tarred and feathered, and flung in the river!”

Says I:

“Cert'nly.  But do you mean _be-fore_ you go to Mr. Lo-throp's, or--”

“Oh,” she says, “what am I _think-ing_ about!” she says, and set right
down again.  “Don't mind what I said--please don't--you _won't,_ now,
_will_ you?” Lay-ing her silky hand on mine in that kind of a way that
I said I would die first.  “I never thought, I was so stirred up,” she
says; “now go on, and I won't do so any more.  You tell me what to do,
and whatever you say I'll do it.”

“Well,” I says, “it's a rough gang, them two frauds, and I'm fixed so
I got to travel with them a while longer, whether I want to or not--I
druther not tell you why; and if you was to blow on them this town would
get me out of their claws, and I'd be all right; but there'd be an-other
per-son that you don't know about who'd be in big trouble.  Well, we
got to save _him_, hain't we?  Of course.  Well, then, we won't blow on
them.”

Say-ing them words put a good idea in my head.  I see how maybe I could
get me and Jim rid of the frauds; get them jailed here, and then leave.
But I didn't want to run the raft in the day-time without any-body aboard
to an-swer ques-tions but me; so I didn't want the plan to be-gin work-ing
till pretty late to-night.  I says:

“Miss Mary Jane, I'll tell you what we'll do, and you won't have to stay
at Mr. Lo-throp's so long, nuther.  How fur is it?”

“A little short of four miles--right out in the coun-try, back here.”

“Well, that 'll an-swer.  Now you go along out there, and lay low
till nine or half-past to-night, and then get them to fetch you home
again--tell them you've thought of some-thing.  If you get here be-fore
el-even put a candle in this win-dow, and if I don't turn up wait _till_
el-even, and _then_ if I don't turn up it means I'm gone, and out of the
way, and safe. Then you come out and spread the news around, and get
these beats jailed.”

“Good,” she says, “I'll do it.”

“And if it just hap-pens so that I don't get away, but get took up along
with them, you must up and say I told you the whole thing be-fore-hand,
and you must stand by me all you can.”

“Stand by you! in-deed I will.  They sha'n't touch a hair of your head!”
 she says, and I see her nos-trils spread and her eyes snap when she said
it, too.

“If I get away I sha'n't be here,” I says, “to prove these rapscal-lions
ain't your uncles, and I couldn't do it if I _was_ here.  I could swear
they was beats and bum-mers, that's all, though that's worth some-thing.
Well, there's oth-ers can do that bet-ter than what I can, and they're
people that ain't go-ing to be doubted as quick as I'd be.  I'll tell you
how to find them.  Gimme a pen-cil and a piece of pa-per.  There--'Royal
None-such, Bricks-ville.'  Put it away, and don't lose it.  When the
court wants to find out some-thing about these two, let them send up to
Bricks-ville and say they've got the men that played the Royal None-such,
and ask for some wit-nesses--why, you'll have that en-tire town down here
be-fore you can hardly wink, Miss Mary.  And they'll come a-bil-ing, too.”

I judged we had got everything fixed about right now.  So I says:

“Just let the auc-tion go right along, and don't worry.  Nobody don't
have to pay for the things they buy till a whole day after the auc-tion
on ac-counts of the short no-tice, and they ain't go-ing out of this till
they get that money; and the way we've fixed it the sale ain't go-ing to
count, and they ain't go-ing to get no money.  It's just like the way
it was with the nig-gers--it warn't no sale, and the nig-gers will be
back be-fore long.  Why, they can't col-lect the money for the _nig-gers_
yet--they're in the worst kind of a fix, Miss Mary.”

“Well,” she says, “I'll run down to break-fast now, and then I'll start
straight for Mr. Lo-throp's.”

“'Deed, _that_ ain't the ticket, Miss Mary Jane,” I says, “by no man-ner
of means; go _be-fore_ break-fast.”

“Why?”

“What did you reckon I wanted you to go at all for, Miss Mary?”

“Well, I never thought--and come to think, I don't know.  What was it?”

“Why, it's be-cause you ain't one of these leather-face people.  I don't
want no bet-ter book than what your face is.  A body can set down and
read it off like coarse print.  Do you reckon you can go and face your
uncles when they come to kiss you good-morn-ing, and never--”

“There, there, don't!  Yes, I'll go be-fore break-fast--I'll be glad to.
And leave my sis-ters with them?”

“Yes; never mind about them.  They've got to stand it yet a while.  They
might sus-pi-cion some-thing if all of you was to go.  I don't want you to
see them, nor your sis-ters, nor nobody in this town; if a neigh-bor was
to ask how is your uncles this morn-ing your face would tell some-thing.
 No, you go right along, Miss Mary Jane, and I'll fix it with all of
them. I'll tell Miss Susan to give your love to your uncles and say
you've went away for a few hours for to get a little rest and change, or
to see a friend, and you'll be back to-night or early in the morn-ing.”

“Gone to see a friend is all right, but I won't have my love given to
them.”

“Well, then, it sha'n't be.”  It was well enough to tell _her_ so--no
harm in it.  It was only a little thing to do, and no trouble; and it's
the little things that smooths people's roads the most, down here be-low;
it would make Mary Jane com-fort-able, and it wouldn't cost noth-ing.  Then
I says:  “There's one more thing--that bag of money.”

“Well, they've got that; and it makes me feel pretty silly to think
_how_ they got it.”

“No, you're out, there.  They hain't got it.”

“Why, who's got it?”

“I wish I knowed, but I don't.  I _had_ it, be-cause I stole it from
them; and I stole it to give to you; and I know where I hid it, but I'm
afraid it ain't there no more.  I'm aw-ful sorry, Miss Mary Jane, I'm
just as sorry as I can be; but I done the best I could; I did hon-est.  I
come nigh get-ting caught, and I had to shove it into the first place I
come to, and run--and it warn't a good place.”

“Oh, stop blam-ing your-self--it's too bad to do it, and I won't al-low
it--you couldn't help it; it wasn't your fault.  Where did you hide it?”

I didn't want to set her to think-ing about her troubles again; and I
couldn't seem to get my mouth to tell her what would make her see that
corpse lay-ing in the coffin with that bag of money on his stom-ach.  So
for a minute I didn't say noth-ing; then I says:

“I'd ruther not _tell_ you where I put it, Miss Mary Jane, if you don't
mind let-ting me off; but I'll write it for you on a piece of pa-per, and
you can read it along the road to Mr. Lo-throp's, if you want to.  Do you
reckon that 'll do?”

“Oh, yes.”

So I wrote:  “I put it in the coffin.  It was in there when you was
cry-ing there, away in the night.  I was be-hind the door, and I was
mighty sorry for you, Miss Mary Jane.”

It made my eyes wa-ter a little to re-mem-ber her cry-ing there all by
her-self in the night, and them dev-ils lay-ing there right un-der her own
roof, sham-ing her and rob-bing her; and when I fol-ded it up and give it
to her I see the wa-ter come into her eyes, too; and she shook me by the
hand, hard, and says:

“_Good_-bye.  I'm go-ing to do everything just as you've told me; and if
I don't ever see you again, I sha'n't ever for-get you and I'll think of
you a many and a many a time, and I'll _pray_ for you, too!”--and she was
gone.

Pray for me!  I reckoned if she knowed me she'd take a job that was more
nearer her size.  But I bet she done it, just the same--she was just that
kind.  She had the grit to pray for Ju-dus if she took the no-tion--there
warn't no back-down to her, I judge.  You may say what you want to, but
in my opin-ion she had more sand in her than any girl I ever see; in
my opin-ion she was just full of sand.  It sounds like flat-tery, but it
ain't no flat-tery.  And when it comes to beauty--and good-ness, too--she
lays over them all.  I hain't ever seen her since that time that I see
her go out of that door; no, I hain't ever seen her since, but I reckon
I've thought of her a many and a many a mil-lion times, and of her say-ing
she would pray for me; and if ever I'd a thought it would do any good
for me to pray for _her_, blamed if I wouldn't a done it or bust.

Well, Mary Jane she lit out the back way, I reckon; be-cause nobody see
her go.  When I struck Susan and the hare-lip, I says:

“What's the name of them people over on t'other side of the river that
you all goes to see some-times?”

They says:

“There's sev-eral; but it's the Proc-tors, mainly.”

“That's the name,” I says; “I most for-got it.  Well, Miss Mary Jane she
told me to tell you she's gone over there in a dread-ful hurry--one of
them's sick.”

“Which one?”

“I don't know; least-ways, I kinder for-get; but I thinks it's--”

“Sakes alive, I hope it ain't _Han-ner_?”

“I'm sorry to say it,” I says, “but Han-ner's the very one.”

“My good-ness, and she so well only last week!  Is she took bad?”

“It ain't no name for it.  They set up with her all night, Miss Mary
Jane said, and they don't think she'll last many hours.”

“Only think of that, now!  What's the mat-ter with her?”

I couldn't think of any-thing reas-on-able, right off that way, so I says:

“Mumps.”

“Mumps your granny!  They don't set up with people that's got the
mumps.”

“They don't, don't they?  You bet-ter bet they do with _these_ mumps.
 These mumps is dif-fer-ent.  It's a new kind, Miss Mary Jane said.”

“How's it a new kind?”

“Be-cause it's mixed up with other things.”

“What other things?”

“Well, measles, and whoop-ing-cough, and ery-si-plas, and con-sump-tion, and
yaller janders, and brain-fever, and I don't know what all.”

“My land!  And they call it the _mumps_?”

“That's what Miss Mary Jane said.”

“Well, what in the na-tion do they call it the _mumps_ for?”

“Why, be-cause it _is_ the mumps.  That's what it starts with.”

“Well, ther' ain't no sense in it.  A body might stump his toe, and take
pison, and fall down the well, and break his neck, and bust his brains
out, and some-body come along and ask what killed him, and some num-skull
up and say, 'Why, he stumped his _toe_.'  Would ther' be any sense
in that? _No_.  And ther' ain't no sense in _this_, nuther.  Is it
ketch-ing?”

“Is it _ketch-ing_?  Why, how you talk.  Is a _har-row_ catch-ing--in the
dark? If you don't hitch on to one tooth, you're bound to on an-other,
ain't you? And you can't get away with that tooth without fetch-ing the
whole har-row along, can you?  Well, these kind of mumps is a kind of a
har-row, as you may say--and it ain't no slouch of a har-row, nuther, you
come to get it hitched on good.”

“Well, it's aw-ful, I think,” says the hare-lip.  “I'll go to Uncle
Har-vey and--”

“Oh, yes,” I says, “I _would_.  Of _course_ I would.  I wouldn't lose no
time.”

“Well, why wouldn't you?”

“Just look at it a minute, and maybe you can see.  Hain't your uncles
ob-leegd to get along home to Eng-land as fast as they can?  And do you
reckon they'd be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that
jour-ney by yourselves?  _y-ou_ know they'll wait for you.  So fur, so
good. Your uncle Har-vey's a preacher, ain't he?  Very well, then; is a
_preach-er_ go-ing to de-ceive a steam-boat clerk? is he go-ing to de-ceive
a _ship clerk?_--so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard?  Now
_y-ou_ know he ain't.  What _will_ he do, then?  Why, he'll say, 'It's a
great pity, but my church mat-ters has got to get along the best way they
can; for my niece has been ex-posed to the dread-ful pluribus-unum mumps,
and so it's my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three months
it takes to show on her if she's got it.'  But never mind, if you think
it's best to tell your uncle Har-vey--”

“Shucks, and stay fool-ing around here when we could all be hav-ing good
times in Eng-land whilst we was wait-ing to find out whether Mary Jane's
got it or not?  Why, you talk like a mug-gins.”

“Well, any-way, maybe you'd bet-ter tell some of the neigh-bors.”

“Listen at that, now.  You do beat all for nat-ural stu-pid-ness.  Can't
you _see_ that _they'd_ go and tell?  Ther' ain't no way but just to not
tell any-body at _all_.”

“Well, maybe you're right--yes, I judge you _are_ right.”

“But I reckon we ought to tell Uncle Har-vey she's gone out a while,
any-way, so he won't be un-easy about her?”

“Yes, Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that.  She says, 'Tell them to
give Uncle Har-vey and Wil-liam my love and a kiss, and say I've run over
the river to see Mr.'--Mr.--what _is_ the name of that rich fam-ily your
uncle Peter used to think so much of?--I mean the one that--”

“Why, you must mean the Apthorps, ain't it?”

“Of course; bother them kind of names, a body can't ever seem to
re-mem-ber them, half the time, some-how.  Yes, she said, say she has run
over for to ask the Apthorps to be sure and come to the auc-tion and buy
this house, be-cause she al-lowed her uncle Peter would ruther they had
it than any-body else; and she's go-ing to stick to them till they say
they'll come, and then, if she ain't too tired, she's com-ing home; and
if she is, she'll be home in the morn-ing any-way.  She said, don't say
noth-ing about the Proc-tors, but only about the Apthorps--which 'll be
per-fectly true, be-cause she is go-ing there to speak about their buy-ing
the house; I know it, be-cause she told me so her-self.”

“All right,” they said, and cleared out to lay for their uncles, and
give them the love and the kisses, and tell them the mes-sage.

Everything was all right now.  The girls wouldn't say noth-ing be-cause
they wanted to go to Eng-land; and the king and the duke would ruther
Mary Jane was off work-ing for the auc-tion than around in reach of
Doc-tor Robin-son.  I felt very good; I judged I had done it pretty neat--I
reckoned Tom Saw-yer couldn't a done it no neater him-self.  Of course he
would a throwed more style into it, but I can't do that very handy, not
be-ing brung up to it.

Well, they held the auc-tion in the pub-lic square, along to-wards the end
of the af-ter-noon, and it strung along, and strung along, and the old man
he was on hand and look-ing his level pison-est, up there long-side of the
auc-tion-eer, and chip-ping in a little Scrip-ture now and then, or a little
goody-goody say-ing of some kind, and the duke he was around goo-goo-ing
for sym-pathy all he knowed how, and just spread-ing him-self gen-erly.

But by and by the thing dragged through, and everything was
sold--everything but a little old tri-fling lot in the grave-yard.  So
they'd got to work that off--I never see such a gir-afft as the king was
for want-ing to swal-low _everything_.  Well, whilst they was at it a
steam-boat landed, and in about two minutes up comes a crowd a-whoop-ing
and yelling and laugh-ing and car-ry-ing on, and singing out:

“_Here's_ your op-pos-i-tion line! here's your two sets o' heirs to old
Peter Wilks--and you pays your money and you takes your choice!”




CHAPTER XXIX.

THEY was fetch-ing a very nice-look-ing old gen-tle-man along, and a
nice-look-ing younger one, with his right arm in a sling.  And, my souls,
how the people yelled and laughed, and kept it up.  But I didn't see no
joke about it, and I judged it would strain the duke and the king some
to see any.  I reckoned they'd turn pale.  But no, nary a pale did
_they_ turn. The duke he never let on he sus-pi-cioned what was up, but
just went a goo-goo-ing around, happy and sat-is-fied, like a jug that's
googling out but-ter-milk; and as for the king, he just gazed and gazed
down sor-row-ful on them new-comers like it give him the stom-ach-ache in
his very heart to think there could be such frauds and ras-cals in the
world.  Oh, he done it ad-mir-able.  Lots of the prin-cipal people
gethered around the king, to let him see they was on his side.  That old
gen-tle-man that had just come looked all puzzled to death.  Pretty
soon he be-gun to speak, and I see straight off he pro-nounced _like_ an
Eng-lish-man--not the king's way, though the king's _was_ pretty good for
an im-it-a-tion.  I can't give the old gent's words, nor I can't im-it-ate
him; but he turned around to the crowd, and says, about like this:

“This is a sur-prise to me which I wasn't look-ing for; and I'll
ac-know-ledge, can-did and frank, I ain't very well fixed to meet it and
an-swer it; for my brother and me has had mis-for-tunes; he's broke his
arm, and our bag-gage got put off at a town above here last night in the
night by a mis-take.  I am Peter Wilks' brother Har-vey, and this is his
brother Wil-liam, which can't hear nor speak--and can't even make signs to
amount to much, now't he's only got one hand to work them with.  We are
who we say we are; and in a day or two, when I get the bag-gage, I can
prove it. But up till then I won't say noth-ing more, but go to the hotel
and wait.”

So him and the new dummy star-ted off; and the king he laughs, and
bleth-ers out:

“Broke his arm--_very_ likely, _ain't_ it?--and very con-veni-ent, too,
for a fraud that's got to make signs, and ain't learnt how.  Lost
their bag-gage! That's _mighty_ good!--and mighty in-geni-ous--un-der the
_cir-cum-stances_!”

So he laughed again; and so did every-body else, ex-cept three or four,
or maybe half a dozen.  One of these was that doc-tor; an-other one was
a sharp-look-ing gen-tle-man, with a car-pet-bag of the old-fash-ioned kind
made out of car-pet-stuff, that had just come off of the steam-boat and
was talk-ing to him in a low voice, and glan-cing to-wards the king now and
then and nod-ding their heads--it was Levi Bell, the law-yer that was gone
up to Louis-ville; and an-other one was a big rough husky that come along
and listened to all the old gen-tle-man said, and was listen-ing to the
king now. And when the king got done this husky up and says:

“Say, looky here; if you are Har-vey Wilks, when'd you come to this
town?”

“The day be-fore the fu-neral, friend,” says the king.

“But what time o' day?”

“In the evenin'--'bout an hour er two be-fore sun-down.”

“_How'd_ you come?”

“I come down on the Susan Pow-ell from Cin-cin-nati.”

“Well, then, how'd you come to be up at the Pint in the _morn-in_'--in a
ca-noe?”

“I warn't up at the Pint in the mornin'.”

“It's a lie.”

Several of them jumped for him and begged him not to talk that way to an
old man and a preacher.

“Preacher be hanged, he's a fraud and a liar.  He was up at the Pint
that mornin'.  I live up there, don't I?  Well, I was up there, and
he was up there.  I see him there.  He come in a ca-noe, along with Tim
Collins and a boy.”

The doc-tor he up and says:

“Would you know the boy again if you was to see him, Hines?”

“I reckon I would, but I don't know.  Why, yon-der he is, now.  I know
him per-fectly easy.”

It was me he poin-ted at.  The doc-tor says:

“Neigh-bors, I don't know whether the new couple is frauds or not; but if
_these_ two ain't frauds, I am an idiot, that's all.  I think it's our
duty to see that they don't get away from here till we've looked into
this thing. Come along, Hines; come along, the rest of you.  We'll take
these fel-lows to the tav-ern and af-front them with t'other couple, and I
reckon we'll find out _something_ be-fore we get through.”

It was nuts for the crowd, though maybe not for the king's friends; so
we all star-ted.  It was about sun-down.  The doc-tor he led me along by
the hand, and was plenty kind enough, but he never let go my hand.

We all got in a big room in the hotel, and lit up some candles, and
fetched in the new couple.  First, the doc-tor says:

“I don't wish to be too hard on these two men, but I think they're
frauds, and they may have com-plices that we don't know noth-ing about.
 If they have, won't the com-plices get away with that bag of gold Peter
Wilks left?  It ain't un-likely.  If these men ain't frauds, they won't
ob-ject to send-ing for that money and let-ting us keep it till they prove
they're all right--ain't that so?”

Every-body agreed to that.  So I judged they had our gang in a pretty
tight place right at the out-start.  But the king he only looked
sor-row-ful, and says:

“Gen-tle-men, I wish the money was there, for I ain't got no dis-pos-i-tion
to throw any-thing in the way of a fair, open, out-and-out in-vest-ig-a-tion
o' this mis-able busi-ness; but, alas, the money ain't there; you k'n send
and see, if you want to.”

“Where is it, then?”

“Well, when my niece give it to me to keep for her I took and hid it
in-side o' the straw tick o' my bed, not wishin' to bank it for the few
days we'd be here, and con-sid-erin' the bed a safe place, we not bein'
used to nig-gers, and sup-pos'n' 'em hon-est, like ser-vants in Eng-land.
 The nig-gers stole it the very next mornin' after I had went down
stairs; and when I sold 'em I hadn't missed the money yit, so they got
clean away with it.  My ser-vant here k'n tell you 'bout it, gen-tle-men.”

The doc-tor and sev-eral said “Shucks!” and I see nobody didn't al-to-gether
be-lieve him.  One man asked me if I see the nig-gers steal it.  I said
no, but I see them sneak-ing out of the room and hust-ling away, and I
never thought noth-ing, only I reckoned they was afraid they had waked up
my mas-ter and was try-ing to get away be-fore he made trouble with them.
 That was all they asked me.  Then the doc-tor whirls on me and says:

“Are _y-ou_ Eng-lish, too?”

I says yes; and him and some oth-ers laughed, and said, “Stuff!”

Well, then they sailed in on the gen-eral in-vest-ig-a-tion, and there we had
it, up and down, hour in, hour out, and nobody never said a word about
sup-per, nor ever seemed to think about it--and so they kept it up, and
kept it up; and it _was_ the worst mixed-up thing you ever see.  They
made the king tell his yarn, and they made the old gen-tle-man tell his'n;
and any-body but a lot of pre-ju-diced chuckle-heads would a _seen_ that the
old gen-tle-man was spin-ning truth and t'other one lies.  And by and by
they had me up to tell what I knowed.  The king he give me a left-handed
look out of the corner of his eye, and so I knowed enough to talk on the
right side.  I be-gun to tell about Shef-field, and how we lived there,
and all about the Eng-lish Wilkses, and so on; but I didn't get pretty
fur till the doc-tor be-gun to laugh; and Levi Bell, the law-yer, says:

“Set down, my boy; I wouldn't strain my-self if I was you.  I reckon
you ain't used to ly-ing, it don't seem to come handy; what you want is
prac-tice.  You do it pretty awk-ward.”

I didn't care noth-ing for the com-pli-ment, but I was glad to be let off,
any-way.

The doc-tor he star-ted to say some-thing, and turns and says:

“If you'd been in town at first, Levi Bell--” The king broke in and
reached out his hand, and says:

“Why, is this my poor dead brother's old friend that he's wrote so of-ten
about?”

The law-yer and him shook hands, and the law-yer smiled and looked
pleased, and they talked right along awhile, and then got to one side
and talked low; and at last the law-yer speaks up and says:

“That 'll fix it.  I'll take the or-der and send it, along with your
brother's, and then they'll know it's all right.”

So they got some pa-per and a pen, and the king he set down and twis-ted
his head to one side, and chawed his tongue, and scrawled off some-thing;
and then they give the pen to the duke--and then for the first time the
duke looked sick.  But he took the pen and wrote.  So then the law-yer
turns to the new old gen-tle-man and says:

“You and your brother please write a line or two and sign your names.”

The old gen-tle-man wrote, but nobody couldn't read it.  The law-yer looked
power-ful as-ton-ished, and says:

“Well, it beats _me_”--and snaked a lot of old let-ters out of his pocket,
and ex-amined them, and then ex-amined the old man's writ-ing, and then
_them_ again; and then says:  “These old let-ters is from Har-vey Wilks;
and here's _these_ two hand-writ-ings, and any-body can see they didn't
write them” (the king and the duke looked sold and fool-ish, I tell
you, to see how the law-yer had took them in), “and here's _this_ old
gen-tle-man's hand writ-ing, and any-body can tell, easy enough, _he_ didn't
write them--fact is, the scratches he makes ain't prop-erly _writ-ing_ at
all.  Now, here's some let-ters from--”

The new old gen-tle-man says:

“If you please, let me ex-plain.  Nobody can read my hand but my brother
there--so he cop-ies for me.  It's _his_ hand you've got there, not mine.”

“_Well_!” says the law-yer, “this _is_ a state of things.  I've got some
of Wil-liam's let-ters, too; so if you'll get him to write a line or so we
can com--”

“He _can't_ write with his left hand,” says the old gen-tle-man.  “If he
could use his right hand, you would see that he wrote his own let-ters
and mine too.  Look at both, please--they're by the same hand.”

The law-yer done it, and says:

“I be-lieve it's so--and if it ain't so, there's a heap stronger
re-semb-lance than I'd no-ticed be-fore, any-way.  Well, well, well!  I
thought we was right on the track of a solu-tion, but it's gone to grass,
partly.  But any-way, one thing is proved--_these_ two ain't either of 'em
Wilkses”--and he wagged his head to-wards the king and the duke.

Well, what do you think?  That mule-headed old fool wouldn't give in
_then_! Indeed he wouldn't.  Said it warn't no fair test.  Said his
brother Wil-liam was the cussed-est joker in the world, and hadn't tried
to write--_he_ see Wil-liam was go-ing to play one of his jokes the minute
he put the pen to pa-per.  And so he warmed up and went warb-ling and
warb-ling right along till he was ac-tuly be-gin-ning to be-lieve what he was
say-ing _him-self_; but pretty soon the new gen-tle-man broke in, and says:

“I've thought of some-thing.  Is there any-body here that helped to lay
out my br--helped to lay out the late Peter Wilks for bury-ing?”

“Yes,” says some-body, “me and Ab Turner done it.  We're both here.”

Then the old man turns to-wards the king, and says:

“Per-haps this gen-tle-man can tell me what was tat-tooed on his breast?”

Blamed if the king didn't have to brace up mighty quick, or he'd a
squshed down like a bluff bank that the river has cut un-der, it took
him so sud-den; and, mind you, it was a thing that was cal-cu-lated to make
most _anybody_ sqush to get fetched such a solid one as that without any
no-tice, be-cause how was _he_ go-ing to know what was tat-tooed on the man?
 He whitened a little; he couldn't help it; and it was mighty still in
there, and every-body bend-ing a little for-wards and gaz-ing at him.  Says
I to my-self, _now_ he'll throw up the sponge--there ain't no more use.
 Well, did he?  A body can't hardly be-lieve it, but he didn't.  I reckon
he thought he'd keep the thing up till he tired them people out, so
they'd thin out, and him and the duke could break loose and get away.
 Any-way, he set there, and pretty soon he be-gun to smile, and says:

“Mf!  It's a _very_ tough ques-tion, _ain't_ it!  _yes_, sir, I k'n
tell you what's tat-tooed on his breast.  It's jest a small, thin, blue
ar-row--that's what it is; and if you don't look clost, you can't see it.
 _now_ what do you say--hey?”

Well, I never see any-thing like that old blister for clean out-and-out
cheek.

The new old gen-tle-man turns brisk to-wards Ab Turner and his pard, and
his eye lights up like he judged he'd got the king _this_ time, and
says:

“There--you've heard what he said!  Was there any such mark on Peter
Wilks' breast?”

Both of them spoke up and says:

“We didn't see no such mark.”

“Good!” says the old gen-tle-man.  “Now, what you _did_ see on his breast
was a small dim P, and a B (which is an ini-tial he dropped when he was
young), and a W, with dashes between them, so:  P--B--W”--and he marked
them that way on a piece of pa-per.  “Come, ain't that what you saw?”

Both of them spoke up again, and says:

“No, we _didn't_.  We never seen any marks at all.”

Well, every-body _was_ in a state of mind now, and they sings out:

“The whole _b-il-in_' of 'm 's frauds!  Le's duck 'em! le's drown 'em!
le's ride 'em on a rail!” and every-body was whoop-ing at once, and there
was a rat-tling pow-wow.  But the law-yer he jumps on the table and yells,
and says:

“Gen-tle-men--gentle_-men!_  Hear me just a word--just a _single_ word--if you
_please_!  There's one way yet--let's go and dig up the corpse and look.”

That took them.

“Hooray!” they all shouted, and was start-ing right off; but the law-yer
and the doc-tor sung out:

“Hold on, hold on!  Col-lar all these four men and the boy, and fetch
_them_ along, too!”

“We'll do it!” they all shouted; “and if we don't find them marks we'll
lynch the whole gang!”

I _was_ scared, now, I tell you.  But there warn't no get-ting away, you
know. They gripped us all, and marched us right along, straight for the
grave-yard, which was a mile and a half down the river, and the whole
town at our heels, for we made noise enough, and it was only nine in the
even-ing.

As we went by our house I wished I hadn't sent Mary Jane out of town;
be-cause now if I could tip her the wink she'd light out and save me, and
blow on our dead-beats.

Well, we swarmed along down the river road, just car-ry-ing on like
wild-cats; and to make it more scary the sky was dark-ing up, and the
light-ning be-gin-ning to wink and flit-ter, and the wind to shiver amongst
the leaves. This was the most aw-ful trouble and most danger-some I ever
was in; and I was kinder stunned; everything was go-ing so dif-fer-ent from
what I had al-lowed for; stead of be-ing fixed so I could take my own time
if I wanted to, and see all the fun, and have Mary Jane at my back to
save me and set me free when the close-fit come, here was noth-ing in the
world betwixt me and sud-den death but just them tat-too-marks.  If they
didn't find them--

I couldn't bear to think about it; and yet, some-how, I couldn't think
about noth-ing else.  It got darker and darker, and it was a beau-ti-ful
time to give the crowd the slip; but that big husky had me by the
wrist--Hines--and a body might as well try to give Go-liar the slip.  He
dragged me right along, he was so ex-cited, and I had to run to keep up.

When they got there they swarmed into the grave-yard and washed over it
like an over-flow.  And when they got to the grave they found they had
about a hun-dred times as many shovels as they wanted, but nobody hadn't
thought to fetch a lan-tern.  But they sailed into dig-ging any-way by the
flicker of the light-ning, and sent a man to the nearest house, a half a
mile off, to bor-row one.

So they dug and dug like everything; and it got aw-ful dark, and the rain
star-ted, and the wind swished and swushed along, and the light-ning come
brisker and brisker, and the thun-der boomed; but them people never took
no no-tice of it, they was so full of this busi-ness; and one minute
you could see everything and every face in that big crowd, and the
shovel-fuls of dirt sail-ing up out of the grave, and the next second the
dark wiped it all out, and you couldn't see noth-ing at all.

At last they got out the coffin and be-gun to un-screw the lid, and then
such an-other crowding and shoul-der-ing and shov-ing as there was, to
scrouge in and get a sight, you never see; and in the dark, that way, it
was aw-ful.  Hines he hurt my wrist dread-ful pulling and tug-ging so,
and I reckon he clean for-got I was in the world, he was so ex-cited and
pant-ing.

All of a sud-den the light-ning let go a per-fect sluice of white glare,
and some-body sings out:

“By the liv-ing jingo, here's the bag of gold on his breast!”

Hines let out a whoop, like every-body else, and dropped my wrist and
give a big surge to bust his way in and get a look, and the way I lit
out and shinned for the road in the dark there ain't nobody can tell.

I had the road all to my-self, and I fairly flew--least-ways, I had it all
to my-self ex-cept the solid dark, and the now-and-then glares, and the
buzz-ing of the rain, and the thrash-ing of the wind, and the split-ting of
the thun-der; and sure as you are born I did clip it along!

When I struck the town I see there warn't nobody out in the storm, so
I never hunted for no back streets, but humped it straight through the
main one; and when I be-gun to get to-wards our house I aimed my eye and
set it. No light there; the house all dark--which made me feel sorry and
dis-ap-poin-ted, I didn't know why.  But at last, just as I was sail-ing by,
_flash_ comes the light in Mary Jane's win-dow! and my heart swelled up
sud-den, like to bust; and the same second the house and all was be-hind
me in the dark, and wasn't ever go-ing to be be-fore me no more in this
world. She _was_ the best girl I ever see, and had the most sand.

The minute I was far enough above the town to see I could make the
tow-head, I be-gun to look sharp for a boat to bor-row, and the first
time the light-ning showed me one that wasn't chained I snatched it and
shoved. It was a ca-noe, and warn't fastened with noth-ing but a rope.
 The tow-head was a rat-tling big dis-tance off, away out there in the
middle of the river, but I didn't lose no time; and when I struck the
raft at last I was so fagged I would a just laid down to blow and gasp
if I could af-forded it.  But I didn't.  As I sprung aboard I sung out:

“Out with you, Jim, and set her loose!  Glory be to good-ness, we're shut
of them!”

Jim lit out, and was a-com-ing for me with both arms spread, he was so
full of joy; but when I glimpsed him in the light-ning my heart shot up
in my mouth and I went over-board back-wards; for I for-got he was old King
Lear and a drown-ded A-rab all in one, and it most scared the liv-ers and
lights out of me.  But Jim fished me out, and was go-ing to hug me and
bless me, and so on, he was so glad I was back and we was shut of the
king and the duke, but I says:

“Not now; have it for break-fast, have it for break-fast!  Cut loose and
let her slide!”

So in two seconds away we went a-slid-ing down the river, and it _did_
seem so good to be free again and all by ourselves on the big river, and
nobody to bother us.  I had to skip around a bit, and jump up and crack
my heels a few times--I couldn't help it; but about the third crack
I no-ticed a sound that I knowed mighty well, and held my breath and
listened and waited; and sure enough, when the next flash bus-ted out
over the wa-ter, here they come!--and just a-lay-ing to their oars and
mak-ing their skiff hum!  It was the king and the duke.

So I wil-ted right down on to the planks then, and give up; and it was
all I could do to keep from cry-ing.




CHAPTER XXX.

WHEN they got aboard the king went for me, and shook me by the col-lar,
and says:

“Tryin' to give us the slip, was ye, you pup!  Tired of our com-pany,
hey?”

I says:

“No, your majesty, we warn't--_please_ don't, your majesty!”

“Quick, then, and tell us what _was_ your idea, or I'll shake the
in-sides out o' you!”

“Hon-est, I'll tell you everything just as it happened, your majesty.
 The man that had a-holt of me was very good to me, and kept say-ing he
had a boy about as big as me that died last year, and he was sorry
to see a boy in such a dan-ger-ous fix; and when they was all took by
sur-prise by find-ing the gold, and made a rush for the coffin, he lets go
of me and whis-pers, 'Heel it now, or they'll hang ye, sure!' and I lit
out.  It didn't seem no good for _me_ to stay--I couldn't do noth-ing,
and I didn't want to be hung if I could get away.  So I never stopped
run-ning till I found the ca-noe; and when I got here I told Jim to hurry,
or they'd catch me and hang me yet, and said I was afeard you and the
duke wasn't alive now, and I was aw-ful sorry, and so was Jim, and was
aw-ful glad when we see you com-ing; you may ask Jim if I didn't.”

Jim said it was so; and the king told him to shut up, and said, “Oh,
yes, it's _mighty_ likely!” and shook me up again, and said he reckoned
he'd drownd me.  But the duke says:

“Leggo the boy, you old idiot!  Would _y-ou_ a done any dif-fer-ent?  Did
you in-quire around for _him_ when you got loose?  I don't re-mem-ber it.”

So the king let go of me, and be-gun to cuss that town and every-body in
it. But the duke says:

“You bet-ter a blame' sight give _y-our-self_ a good cuss-ing, for you're
the one that's en-titled to it most.  You hain't done a thing from the
start that had any sense in it, ex-cept com-ing out so cool and cheeky
with that ima-gin-ary blue-ar-row mark.  That _was_ bright--it was right
down bully; and it was the thing that saved us.  For if it hadn't been
for that they'd a jailed us till them Eng-lish-men's bag-gage come--and
then--the pen-it-en-tiary, you bet! But that trick took 'em to the
grave-yard, and the gold done us a still big-ger kind-ness; for if the
ex-cited fools hadn't let go all holts and made that rush to get a
look we'd a slept in our cravats to-night--cravats war-ran-ted to _wear_,
too--longer than _we'd_ need 'em.”

They was still a minute--think-ing; then the king says, kind of
ab-sent-minded like:

“Mf!  And we reckoned the _nig-gers_ stole it!”

That made me squirm!

“Yes,” says the duke, kinder slow and de-lib-er-ate and sar-castic, “_we_
did.”

After about a half a minute the king drawls out:

“Least-ways, I did.”

The duke says, the same way:

“On the con-trary, I did.”

The king kind of ruffles up, and says:

“Looky here, Bil-ge-wa-ter, what'r you re-fer-rin' to?”

The duke says, pretty brisk:

“When it comes to that, maybe you'll let me ask, what was _y-ou_
re-fer-ring to?”

“Shucks!” says the king, very sar-castic; “but I don't know--maybe you was
asleep, and didn't know what you was about.”

The duke bristles up now, and says:

“Oh, let _up_ on this cussed non-sense; do you take me for a blame' fool?
Don't you reckon I know who hid that money in that coffin?”

“_Yes_, sir!  I know you _do_ know, be-cause you done it your-self!”

“It's a lie!”--and the duke went for him.  The king sings out:

“Take y'r hands off!--leggo my throat!--I take it all back!”

The duke says:

“Well, you just own up, first, that you _did_ hide that money there,
in-tend-ing to give me the slip one of these days, and come back and dig
it up, and have it all to your-self.”

“Wait jest a minute, duke--an-swer me this one ques-tion, hon-est and fair;
if you didn't put the money there, say it, and I'll b'lieve you, and
take back everything I said.”

“You old scoun-drel, I didn't, and you know I didn't.  There, now!”

“Well, then, I b'lieve you.  But an-swer me only jest this one more--now
_don't_ git mad; didn't you have it in your mind to hook the money and
hide it?”

The duke never said noth-ing for a little bit; then he says:

“Well, I don't care if I _did_, I didn't _do_ it, any-way.  But you not
only had it in mind to do it, but you _done_ it.”

“I wisht I never die if I done it, duke, and that's hon-est.  I won't say
I warn't goin' to do it, be-cause I _was_; but you--I mean some-body--got in
ahead o' me.”

“It's a lie!  You done it, and you got to _say_ you done it, or--”

The king began to gurgle, and then he gasps out:

“'Nough!--I _own up!_”

I was very glad to hear him say that; it made me feel much more easier
than what I was feel-ing be-fore.  So the duke took his hands off and
says:

“If you ever deny it again I'll drown you.  It's _well_ for you to set
there and blub-ber like a baby--it's fit-ten for you, after the way
you've ac-ted. I never see such an old os-trich for want-ing to gobble
everything--and I a-trust-ing you all the time, like you was my own
father.  You ought to been ashamed of your-self to stand by and hear it
saddled on to a lot of poor nig-gers, and you never say a word for 'em.
 It makes me feel ri-dicu-lous to think I was soft enough to _be-lieve_
that rub-bage.  Cuss you, I can see now why you was so anxious to make
up the deff-isit--you wanted to get what money I'd got out of the None-such
and one thing or an-other, and scoop it _all_!”

The king says, timid, and still a-snuff-ling:

“Why, duke, it was you that said make up the deff-isit; it warn't me.”

“Dry up!  I don't want to hear no more out of you!” says the duke.  “And
_now_ you see what you GOT by it.  They've got all their own money back,
and all of _ourn_ but a shekel or two _be-sides_.  G'long to bed, and
don't you def-fersit _me_ no more def-fersits, long 's _y-ou_ live!”

So the king sneaked into the wig-wam and took to his bottle for com-fort,
and be-fore long the duke tackled HIS bottle; and so in about a half an
hour they was as thick as thieves again, and the tighter they got the
lovinger they got, and went off a-snor-ing in each other's arms.  They
both got power-ful mel-low, but I no-ticed the king didn't get mel-low
enough to for-get to re-mem-ber to not deny about hid-ing the money-bag
again.  That made me feel easy and sat-is-fied.  Of course when they got
to snor-ing we had a long gabble, and I told Jim everything.




CHAPTER XXXI.

WE dasn't stop again at any town for days and days; kept right along
down the river.  We was down south in the warm weather now, and a mighty
long ways from home.  We be-gun to come to trees with Span-ish moss on
them, hanging down from the limbs like long, gray beards.  It was the
first I ever see it grow-ing, and it made the woods look sol-emn and
dis-mal.  So now the frauds reckoned they was out of danger, and they
be-gun to work the vil-lages again.

First they done a lec-ture on tem-per-ance; but they didn't make enough
for them both to get drunk on.  Then in an-other vil-lage they star-ted
a dan-cing-school; but they didn't know no more how to dance than a
kangaroo does; so the first prance they made the gen-eral pub-lic jumped
in and pranced them out of town.  Another time they tried to go at
yel-loc-u-tion; but they didn't yel-loc-ute long till the audi-ence got up and
give them a solid good cuss-ing, and made them skip out.  They tackled
mis-sion-ary-ing, and mes-mer-iz-ing, and doc-tor-ing, and telling for-tunes, and
a little of everything; but they couldn't seem to have no luck.  So at
last they got just about dead broke, and laid around the raft as she
floated along, think-ing and think-ing, and never say-ing noth-ing, by the
half a day at a time, and dread-ful blue and des-per-ate.

And at last they took a change and be-gun to lay their heads to-gether in
the wig-wam and talk low and con-fid-en-tial two or three hours at a time.
Jim and me got un-easy.  We didn't like the look of it.  We judged they
was study-ing up some kind of worse dev-iltry than ever.  We turned it
over and over, and at last we made up our minds they was go-ing to break
into some-body's house or store, or was go-ing into the coun-ter-feit-money
busi-ness, or some-thing. So then we was pretty scared, and made up an
agree-ment that we wouldn't have noth-ing in the world to do with such
ac-tions, and if we ever got the least show we would give them the cold
shake and clear out and leave them be-hind. Well, early one morn-ing we
hid the raft in a good, safe place about two mile be-low a little bit of
a shabby vil-lage named Pikes-ville, and the king he went ashore and told
us all to stay hid whilst he went up to town and smelt around to see
if any-body had got any wind of the Royal None-such there yet. (“House to
rob, you _mean_,” says I to my-self; “and when you get through rob-bing it
you'll come back here and won-der what has be-come of me and Jim and the
raft--and you'll have to take it out in won-der-ing.”) And he said if he
warn't back by mid-day the duke and me would know it was all right, and
we was to come along.

So we stayed where we was.  The duke he fret-ted and sweated around, and
was in a mighty sour way.  He scol-ded us for everything, and we couldn't
seem to do noth-ing right; he found fault with every little thing.
So-mething was a-brew-ing, sure.  I was good and glad when mid-day come
and no king; we could have a change, any-way--and maybe a chance for _the_
change on top of it.  So me and the duke went up to the vil-lage, and
hunted around there for the king, and by and by we found him in the
back room of a little low dog-gery, very tight, and a lot of loafers
bul-ly-rag-ging him for sport, and he a-cuss-ing and a-threat-en-ing with all
his might, and so tight he couldn't walk, and couldn't do noth-ing to
them.  The duke he be-gun to ab-use him for an old fool, and the king
be-gun to sass back, and the minute they was fairly at it I lit out and
shook the reefs out of my hind legs, and spun down the river road like
a deer, for I see our chance; and I made up my mind that it would be a
long day be-fore they ever see me and Jim again.  I got down there all
out of breath but loaded up with joy, and sung out:

“Set her loose, Jim! we're all right now!”

But there warn't no an-swer, and nobody come out of the wig-wam.  Jim was
gone!  I set up a shout--and then an-other--and then an-other one; and run
this way and that in the woods, whoop-ing and screech-ing; but it warn't
no use--old Jim was gone.  Then I set down and cried; I couldn't help
it. But I couldn't set still long.  Pretty soon I went out on the road,
try-ing to think what I bet-ter do, and I run across a boy walk-ing, and
asked him if he'd seen a strange nig-ger dressed so and so, and he says:

“Yes.”

“Where-abouts?” says I.

“Down to Silas Phelps' place, two mile be-low here.  He's a run-away
nig-ger, and they've got him.  Was you look-ing for him?”

“You bet I ain't!  I run across him in the woods about an hour or two
ago, and he said if I hollered he'd cut my liv-ers out--and told me to lay
down and stay where I was; and I done it.  Been there ever since; afeard
to come out.”

“Well,” he says, “you needn't be afeard no more, becuz they've got him.
He run off f'm down South, som'ers.”

“It's a good job they got him.”

“Well, I _reck-on_!  There's two hun-derd dol-lars re-ward on him.  It's
like pick-ing up money out'n the road.”

“Yes, it is--and I could a had it if I'd been big enough; I see him
_first_. Who nailed him?”

“It was an old fel-low--a stranger--and he sold out his chance in him for
forty dol-lars, becuz he's got to go up the river and can't wait.  Think
o' that, now!  You bet _I'd_ wait, if it was seven year.”

“That's me, every time,” says I.  “But maybe his chance ain't worth
no more than that, if he'll sell it so cheap.  Maybe there's some-thing
ain't straight about it.”

“But it _is_, though--straight as a string.  I see the hand-bill my-self.
 It tells all about him, to a dot--paints him like a pic-ture, and tells
the plant-a-tion he's frum, be-low Ne-wr_leans_.  No-sir-ree-_bob_, they
ain't no trouble 'bout _that_ spec-u-la-tion, you bet you.  Say, gimme a
chaw to-backer, won't ye?”

I didn't have none, so he left.  I went to the raft, and set down in the
wig-wam to think.  But I couldn't come to noth-ing.  I thought till I wore
my head sore, but I couldn't see no way out of the trouble.  After all
this long jour-ney, and after all we'd done for them scoun-drels, here it
was all come to noth-ing, everything all bus-ted up and ruined, be-cause
they could have the heart to serve Jim such a trick as that, and make
him a slave again all his life, and amongst strangers, too, for forty
dirty dol-lars.

Once I said to my-self it would be a thou-sand times bet-ter for Jim to
be a slave at home where his fam-ily was, as long as he'd _got_ to be a
slave, and so I'd bet-ter write a let-ter to Tom Saw-yer and tell him to
tell Miss Wat-son where he was.  But I soon give up that no-tion for two
things: she'd be mad and dis-gus-ted at his ras-cal-ity and un-grate-ful-ness
for leav-ing her, and so she'd sell him straight down the river again;
and if she didn't, every-body nat-ur-ally des-pises an un-grate-ful nig-ger,
and they'd make Jim feel it all the time, and so he'd feel ornery and
dis-graced. And then think of _me_!  It would get all around that Huck
Finn helped a nig-ger to get his free-dom; and if I was ever to see
any-body from that town again I'd be ready to get down and lick his boots
for shame.  That's just the way:  a per-son does a low-down thing, and
then he don't want to take no con-sequences of it. Thinks as long as he
can hide it, it ain't no dis-grace.  That was my fix ex-actly. The more I
stud-ied about this the more my con-science went to grind-ing me, and the
more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feel-ing. And at last, when
it hit me all of a sud-den that here was the plain hand of Provid-ence
slap-ping me in the face and let-ting me know my wicked-ness was be-ing
watched all the time from up there in heaven, whilst I was steal-ing a
poor old wo-man's nig-ger that hadn't ever done me no harm, and now was
show-ing me there's One that's al-ways on the lookout, and ain't a-go-ing
to al-low no such miser-able do-ings to go only just so fur and no fur-ther,
I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared.  Well, I tried the best I
could to kinder soften it up some-how for my-self by say-ing I was brung
up wicked, and so I warn't so much to blame; but some-thing in-side of me
kept say-ing, “There was the Sunday-school, you could a gone to it; and
if you'd a done it they'd a learnt you there that people that acts as
I'd been act-ing about that nig-ger goes to ever-last-ing fire.”

It made me shiver.  And I about made up my mind to pray, and see if I
couldn't try to quit be-ing the kind of a boy I was and be bet-ter.  So
I kneeled down.  But the words wouldn't come.  Why wouldn't they?  It
warn't no use to try and hide it from Him.  Nor from _me_, neither.  I
knowed very well why they wouldn't come.  It was be-cause my heart warn't
right; it was be-cause I warn't square; it was be-cause I was play-ing
double.  I was let-ting _on_ to give up sin, but away in-side of me I was
hold-ing on to the biggest one of all.  I was try-ing to make my mouth
_say_ I would do the right thing and the clean thing, and go and write
to that nig-ger's owner and tell where he was; but deep down in me I
knowed it was a lie, and He knowed it.  You can't pray a lie--I found
that out.

So I was full of trouble, full as I could be; and didn't know what to
do. At last I had an idea; and I says, I'll go and write the let-ter--and
then see if I can pray.  Why, it was as-ton-ish-ing, the way I felt as
light as a feather right straight off, and my troubles all gone.  So I
got a piece of pa-per and a pen-cil, all glad and ex-cited, and set down
and wrote:

Miss Wat-son, your run-away nig-ger Jim is down here two mile be-low
Pikes-ville, and Mr. Phelps has got him and he will give him up for the
re-ward if you send.

_Huck Finn._

I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever
felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now.  But I didn't do it
straight off, but laid the pa-per down and set there think-ing--think-ing
how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to be-ing lost
and go-ing to hell.  And went on think-ing.  And got to think-ing over our
trip down the river; and I see Jim be-fore me all the time:  in the day
and in the night-time, some-times moon-light, some-times storms, and we
a-float-ing along, talk-ing and singing and laugh-ing.  But some-how I
couldn't seem to strike no places to harden me against him, but only the
other kind.  I'd see him stand-ing my watch on top of his'n, 'stead of
call-ing me, so I could go on sleep-ing; and see him how glad he was when
I come back out of the fog; and when I come to him again in the swamp,
up there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would al-ways call
me honey, and pet me and do everything he could think of for me, and how
good he al-ways was; and at last I struck the time I saved him by telling
the men we had small-pox aboard, and he was so grate-ful, and said I was
the best friend old Jim ever had in the world, and the _only_ one he's
got now; and then I happened to look around and see that pa-per.

It was a close place.  I took it up, and held it in my hand.  I was
a-trem-bling, be-cause I'd got to de-cide, forever, betwixt two things, and
I knowed it.  I stud-ied a minute, sort of hold-ing my breath, and then
says to my-self:

“All right, then, I'll _go_ to hell”--and tore it up.

It was aw-ful thoughts and aw-ful words, but they was said.  And I let
them stay said; and never thought no more about re-form-ing.  I shoved the
whole thing out of my head, and said I would take up wicked-ness again,
which was in my line, be-ing brung up to it, and the other warn't.  And
for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again;
and if I could think up any-thing worse, I would do that, too; be-cause as
long as I was in, and in for good, I might as well go the whole hog.

Then I set to think-ing over how to get at it, and turned over some
con-sid-er-able many ways in my mind; and at last fixed up a plan that
suited me.  So then I took the bear-ings of a woody is-land that was down
the river a piece, and as soon as it was fairly dark I crept out with my
raft and went for it, and hid it there, and then turned in.  I slept the
night through, and got up be-fore it was light, and had my break-fast,
and put on my store clothes, and tied up some oth-ers and one thing or
an-other in a bundle, and took the ca-noe and cleared for shore.  I landed
be-low where I judged was Phelps's place, and hid my bundle in the woods,
and then filled up the ca-noe with wa-ter, and loaded rocks into her and
sunk her where I could find her again when I wanted her, about a quarter
of a mile be-low a little steam saw-mill that was on the bank.

Then I struck up the road, and when I passed the mill I see a sign on
it, “Phelps's Saw-mill,” and when I come to the farm-houses, two or
three hun-dred yards fur-ther along, I kept my eyes peeled, but didn't
see nobody around, though it was good day-light now.  But I didn't mind,
be-cause I didn't want to see nobody just yet--I only wanted to get the
lay of the land. Ac-cord-ing to my plan, I was go-ing to turn up there from
the vil-lage, not from be-low.  So I just took a look, and shoved along,
straight for town. Well, the very first man I see when I got there was
the duke.  He was stick-ing up a bill for the Royal None-such--three-night
per-form-ance--like that other time.  They had the cheek, them frauds!  I
was right on him be-fore I could shirk.  He looked as-ton-ished, and says:

“Hel-_lo_!  Where'd _y-ou_ come from?”  Then he says, kind of glad and
eager, “Where's the raft?--got her in a good place?”

I says:

“Why, that's just what I was go-ing to ask your grace.”

Then he didn't look so joy-ful, and says:

“What was your idea for ask-ing _me_?” he says.

“Well,” I says, “when I see the king in that dog-gery yes-ter-day I says
to my-self, we can't get him home for hours, till he's soberer; so I went
a-loaf-ing around town to put in the time and wait.  A man up and offered
me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back to fetch
a sheep, and so I went along; but when we was drag-ging him to the boat,
and the man left me a-holt of the rope and went be-hind him to shove him
along, he was too strong for me and jerked loose and run, and we after
him.  We didn't have no dog, and so we had to chase him all over the
coun-try till we tired him out.  We never got him till dark; then we
fetched him over, and I star-ted down for the raft.  When I got there and
see it was gone, I says to my-self, 'They've got into trouble and had to
leave; and they've took my nig-ger, which is the only nig-ger I've got in
the world, and now I'm in a strange coun-try, and ain't got no prop-erty
no more, nor noth-ing, and no way to make my liv-ing;' so I set down and
cried.  I slept in the woods all night.  But what _did_ be-come of the
raft, then?--and Jim--poor Jim!”

“Blamed if I know--that is, what's be-come of the raft.  That old fool had
made a trade and got forty dol-lars, and when we found him in the dog-gery
the loafers had matched half-dol-lars with him and got every cent but
what he'd spent for whisky; and when I got him home late last night and
found the raft gone, we said, 'That little ras-cal has stole our raft and
shook us, and run off down the river.'”

“I wouldn't shake my _nig-ger_, would I?--the only nig-ger I had in the
world, and the only prop-erty.”

“We never thought of that.  Fact is, I reckon we'd come to con-sider him
_our_ nig-ger; yes, we did con-sider him so--good-ness knows we had trouble
enough for him.  So when we see the raft was gone and we flat broke,
there warn't any-thing for it but to try the Royal None-such an-other
shake. And I've pegged along ever since, dry as a powder-horn.  Where's
that ten cents? Give it here.”

I had con-sid-er-able money, so I give him ten cents, but begged him to
spend it for some-thing to eat, and give me some, be-cause it was all the
money I had, and I hadn't had noth-ing to eat since yes-ter-day.  He never
said noth-ing.  The next minute he whirls on me and says:

“Do you reckon that nig-ger would blow on us?  We'd skin him if he done
that!”

“How can he blow?  Hain't he run off?”

“No!  That old fool sold him, and never di-vided with me, and the money's
gone.”

“_Sold_ him?”  I says, and be-gun to cry; “why, he was _my_ nig-ger, and
that was my money.  Where is he?--I want my nig-ger.”

“Well, you can't _get_ your nig-ger, that's all--so dry up your
blub-ber-ing. Looky here--do you think _you'd_ ven-ture to blow on us?
 Blamed if I think I'd trust you.  Why, if you _was_ to blow on us--”

He stopped, but I never see the duke look so ugly out of his eyes
be-fore. I went on a-whim-per-ing, and says:

“I don't want to blow on nobody; and I ain't got no time to blow, no-how.
I got to turn out and find my nig-ger.”

He looked kinder bothered, and stood there with his bills flut-ter-ing on
his arm, think-ing, and wrink-ling up his fore-head.  At last he says:

“I'll tell you some-thing.  We got to be here three days.  If you'll
prom-ise you won't blow, and won't let the nig-ger blow, I'll tell you
where to find him.”

So I prom-ised, and he says:

“A farmer by the name of Silas Ph--” and then he stopped.  You see, he
star-ted to tell me the truth; but when he stopped that way, and be-gun to
study and think again, I reckoned he was chan-ging his mind.  And so he
was. He wouldn't trust me; he wanted to make sure of hav-ing me out of
the way the whole three days.  So pretty soon he says:

“The man that bought him is named Abram Foster--Abram G. Foster--and he
lives forty mile back here in the coun-try, on the road to La-fay-ette.”

“All right,” I says, “I can walk it in three days.  And I'll start this
very af-ter-noon.”

“No you wont, you'll start _now_; and don't you lose any time about it,
neither, nor do any gab-bling by the way.  Just keep a tight tongue in
your head and move right along, and then you won't get into trouble with
_us_, d'ye hear?”

That was the or-der I wanted, and that was the one I played for.  I
wanted to be left free to work my plans.

“So clear out,” he says; “and you can tell Mr. Foster whatever you want
to. Maybe you can get him to be-lieve that Jim _is_ your nig-ger--some
idi-ots don't re-quire doc-u-ments--least-ways I've heard there's such down
South here.  And when you tell him the hand-bill and the re-ward's bogus,
maybe he'll be-lieve you when you ex-plain to him what the idea was for
get-ting 'em out.  Go 'long now, and tell him any-thing you want to; but
mind you don't work your jaw any _between_ here and there.”

So I left, and struck for the back coun-try.  I didn't look around, but I
kinder felt like he was watch-ing me.  But I knowed I could tire him out
at that.  I went straight out in the coun-try as much as a mile be-fore
I stopped; then I doubled back through the woods to-wards Phelps'.  I
reckoned I bet-ter start in on my plan straight off without fool-ing
around, be-cause I wanted to stop Jim's mouth till these fel-lows could
get away.  I didn't want no trouble with their kind.  I'd seen all I
wanted to of them, and wanted to get en-tirely shut of them.




CHAPTER XXXII.

WHEN I got there it was all still and Sunday-like, and hot and sun-shiny;
the hands was gone to the fields; and there was them kind of faint
dron-ings of bugs and flies in the air that makes it seem so lone-some and
like every-body's dead and gone; and if a breeze fans along and quivers
the leaves it makes you feel mourn-ful, be-cause you feel like it's
spir-its whis-per-ing--spir-its that's been dead ever so many years--and you
al-ways think they're talk-ing about _y-ou_.  As a gen-eral thing it makes a
body wish _he_ was dead, too, and done with it all.

Phelps' was one of these little one-horse cot-ton plant-a-tions, and they
all look alike.  A rail fence round a two-acre yard; a stile made out
of logs sawed off and up-ended in steps, like bar-rels of a dif-fer-ent
length, to climb over the fence with, and for the wo-men to stand on when
they are go-ing to jump on to a horse; some sickly grass-patches in the
big yard, but mostly it was bare and smooth, like an old hat with the
nap rubbed off; big double log-house for the white folks--hewed logs,
with the chinks stopped up with mud or mor-tar, and these mud-stripes
been white-washed some time or an-other; round-log kit-chen, with a big
broad, open but roofed pas-sage join-ing it to the house; log smoke-house
back of the kit-chen; three little log nig-ger-cab-ins in a row t'other
side the smoke-house; one little hut all by it-self away down against
the back fence, and some out-build-ings down a piece the other side;
ash-hop-per and big kettle to bile soap in by the little hut; bench by
the kit-chen door, with bucket of wa-ter and a gourd; hound asleep there
in the sun; more hounds asleep round about; about three shade trees away
off in a corner; some cur-rant bushes and goose-berry bushes in one place
by the fence; out-side of the fence a garden and a wa-ter-melon patch; then
the cot-ton fields be-gins, and after the fields the woods.

I went around and clumb over the back stile by the ash-hop-per, and
star-ted for the kit-chen.  When I got a little ways I heard the dim hum
of a spin-ning-wheel wail-ing along up and sink-ing along down again;
and then I knowed for cer-tain I wished I was dead--for that _is_ the
lone-somest sound in the whole world.

I went right along, not fix-ing up any par-tic-u-lar plan, but just trust-ing
to Provid-ence to put the right words in my mouth when the time come; for
I'd no-ticed that Provid-ence al-ways did put the right words in my mouth
if I left it alone.

When I got half-way, first one hound and then an-other got up and went
for me, and of course I stopped and faced them, and kept still.  And
such an-other pow-wow as they made!  In a quarter of a minute I was a kind
of a hub of a wheel, as you may say--spokes made out of dogs--circle of
fif-teen of them packed to-gether around me, with their necks and noses
stretched up to-wards me, a-bark-ing and howl-ing; and more a-com-ing; you
could see them sail-ing over fences and around corners from every-wheres.

A nig-ger wo-man come tear-ing out of the kit-chen with a rolling-pin in her
hand, singing out, “Be-gone _y-ou_ Tige! you Spot! be-gone sah!” and she
fetched first one and then an-other of them a clip and sent them howl-ing,
and then the rest fol-lowed; and the next second half of them come back,
wag-ging their tails around me, and mak-ing friends with me.  There ain't
no harm in a hound, no-how.

And be-hind the wo-man comes a little nig-ger girl and two little nig-ger
boys without any-thing on but tow-linen shirts, and they hung on to their
mother's gown, and peeped out from be-hind her at me, bash-ful, the way
they al-ways do.  And here comes the white wo-man run-ning from the house,
about forty-five or fifty year old, bare-headed, and her spin-ning-stick
in her hand; and be-hind her comes her little white chil-dren, act-ing the
same way the little nig-gers was do-ing.  She was smil-ing all over so she
could hardly stand--and says:

“It's _y-ou_, at last!--_ain't_ it?”

I out with a “Yes'm” be-fore I thought.

She grabbed me and hugged me tight; and then gripped me by both hands
and shook and shook; and the tears come in her eyes, and run down over;
and she couldn't seem to hug and shake enough, and kept say-ing, “You
don't look as much like your mother as I reckoned you would; but law
sakes, I don't care for that, I'm so glad to see you!  Dear, dear, it
does seem like I could eat you up!  Chil-dren, it's your cousin Tom!--tell
him howdy.”

But they ducked their heads, and put their fin-gers in their mouths, and
hid be-hind her.  So she run on:

“Lize, hurry up and get him a hot break-fast right away--or did you get
your break-fast on the boat?”

I said I had got it on the boat.  So then she star-ted for the house,
lead-ing me by the hand, and the chil-dren tag-ging after.  When we got
there she set me down in a split-bot-tomed chair, and set her-self down on
a little low stool in front of me, hold-ing both of my hands, and says:

“Now I can have a _good_ look at you; and, laws-a-me, I've been hungry
for it a many and a many a time, all these long years, and it's come
at last! We been ex-pect-ing you a couple of days and more.  What kep'
you?--boat get aground?”

“Yes'm--she--”

“Don't say yes'm--say Aunt Sally.  Where'd she get aground?”

I didn't rightly know what to say, be-cause I didn't know whether the
boat would be com-ing up the river or down.  But I go a good deal on
in-stinct; and my in-stinct said she would be com-ing up--from down to-wards
Or-leans. That didn't help me much, though; for I didn't know the names
of bars down that way.  I see I'd got to in-vent a bar, or for-get the
name of the one we got aground on--or--Now I struck an idea, and fetched
it out:

“It warn't the ground-ing--that didn't keep us back but a little.  We
blowed out a cyl-in-der-head.”

“Good gra-cious! any-body hurt?”

“No'm.  Killed a nig-ger.”

“Well, it's lucky; be-cause some-times people do get hurt.  Two years ago
last Christ-mas your uncle Silas was com-ing up from Ne-wr-leans on the old
Lally Rook, and she blowed out a cyl-in-der-head and crippled a man.  And
I think he died af-ter-wards.  He was a Baptist.  Your uncle Silas knowed
a fam-ily in Baton Rouge that knowed his people very well.  Yes, I
re-mem-ber now, he _did_ die.  Mor-ti-fic-a-tion set in, and they had to
am-pu-tate him. But it didn't save him.  Yes, it was mor-ti-fic-a-tion--that
was it.  He turned blue all over, and died in the hope of a glor-i-ous
re-sur-rec-tion. They say he was a sight to look at.  Your uncle's been up
to the town every day to fetch you. And he's gone again, not more'n an
hour ago; he'll be back any minute now. You must a met him on the road,
didn't you?--old-ish man, with a--”

“No, I didn't see nobody, Aunt Sally.  The boat landed just at day-light,
and I left my bag-gage on the wharf-boat and went look-ing around the town
and out a piece in the coun-try, to put in the time and not get here too
soon; and so I come down the back way.”

“Who'd you give the bag-gage to?”

“Nobody.”

“Why, child, it 'll be stole!”

“Not where I hid it I reckon it won't,” I says.

“How'd you get your break-fast so early on the boat?”

It was kinder thin ice, but I says:

“The cap-tain see me stand-ing around, and told me I bet-ter have some-thing
to eat be-fore I went ashore; so he took me in the texas to the of-ficers'
lunch, and give me all I wanted.”

I was get-ting so un-easy I couldn't listen good.  I had my mind on the
chil-dren all the time; I wanted to get them out to one side and pump
them a little, and find out who I was.  But I couldn't get no show, Mrs.
Phelps kept it up and run on so.  Pretty soon she made the cold chills
streak all down my back, be-cause she says:

“But here we're a-run-ning on this way, and you hain't told me a word
about Sis, nor any of them.  Now I'll rest my works a little, and you
start up yourn; just tell me _everything_--tell me all about 'm all every
one of 'm; and how they are, and what they're do-ing, and what they told
you to tell me; and every last thing you can think of.”

Well, I see I was up a stump--and up it good.  Provid-ence had stood by
me this fur all right, but I was hard and tight aground now.  I see it
warn't a bit of use to try to go ahead--I'd got to throw up my hand.  So
I says to my-self, here's an-other place where I got to resk the truth.
 I opened my mouth to be-gin; but she grabbed me and hustled me in be-hind
the bed, and says:

“Here he comes!  Stick your head down lower--there, that'll do; you can't
be seen now.  Don't you let on you're here.  I'll play a joke on him.
Chil-dren, don't you say a word.”

I see I was in a fix now.  But it warn't no use to worry; there warn't
noth-ing to do but just hold still, and try and be ready to stand from
un-der when the light-ning struck.

I had just one little glimpse of the old gen-tle-man when he come in; then
the bed hid him.  Mrs. Phelps she jumps for him, and says:

“Has he come?”

“No,” says her hus-band.

“Good-_ness_ gra-cious!” she says, “what in the warld can have be-come of
him?”

“I can't ima-gine,” says the old gen-tle-man; “and I must say it makes me
dread-ful un-easy.”

“Uneasy!” she says; “I'm ready to go dis-trac-ted!  He _must_ a come; and
you've missed him along the road.  I _know_ it's so--some-thing tells me
so.”

“Why, Sally, I _couldn't_ miss him along the road--_y-ou_ know that.”

“But oh, dear, dear, what _will_ Sis say!  He must a come!  You must a
missed him.  He--”

“Oh, don't dis-tress me any more'n I'm already dis-tressed.  I don't know
what in the world to make of it.  I'm at my wit's end, and I don't mind
ac-know-ledging 't I'm right down scared.  But there's no hope that he's
come; for he _couldn't_ come and me miss him.  Sally, it's ter-rible--just
ter-rible--some-thing's happened to the boat, sure!”

“Why, Silas!  Look yon-der!--up the road!--ain't that some-body com-ing?”

He sprung to the win-dow at the head of the bed, and that give Mrs.
Phelps the chance she wanted.  She stooped down quick at the foot of the
bed and give me a pull, and out I come; and when he turned back from the
win-dow there she stood, a-beam-ing and a-smil-ing like a house afire, and
I stand-ing pretty meek and sweaty along-side.  The old gen-tle-man stared,
and says:

“Why, who's that?”

“Who do you reckon 't is?”

“I hain't no idea.  Who _is_ it?”

“It's _Tom Saw-yer!_”

By jings, I most slumped through the floor!  But there warn't no time to
swap knives; the old man grabbed me by the hand and shook, and kept on
shak-ing; and all the time how the wo-man did dance around and laugh and
cry; and then how they both did fire off ques-tions about Sid, and Mary,
and the rest of the tribe.

But if they was joy-ful, it warn't noth-ing to what I was; for it was like
be-ing born again, I was so glad to find out who I was.  Well, they froze
to me for two hours; and at last, when my chin was so tired it couldn't
hardly go any more, I had told them more about my fam-ily--I mean the
Saw-yer fam-ily--than ever happened to any six Saw-yer fam-il-ies.  And I
ex-plained all about how we blowed out a cyl-in-der-head at the mouth of
White River, and it took us three days to fix it.  Which was all right,
and worked first-rate; be-cause _they_ didn't know but what it would take
three days to fix it.  If I'd a called it a bolt-head it would a done
just as well.

Now I was feel-ing pretty com-fort-able all down one side, and pretty
un-com-fort-able all up the other.  Be-ing Tom Saw-yer was easy and
com-fort-able, and it stayed easy and com-fort-able till by and by I hear a
steam-boat cough-ing along down the river.  Then I says to my-self, s'pose
Tom Saw-yer comes down on that boat?  And s'pose he steps in here any
minute, and sings out my name be-fore I can throw him a wink to keep
quiet?

Well, I couldn't _have_ it that way; it wouldn't do at all.  I must go
up the road and way-lay him.  So I told the folks I reckoned I would go
up to the town and fetch down my bag-gage.  The old gen-tle-man was for
go-ing along with me, but I said no, I could drive the horse my-self, and
I druther he wouldn't take no trouble about me.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

SO I star-ted for town in the wagon, and when I was half-way I see a
wagon com-ing, and sure enough it was Tom Saw-yer, and I stopped and
waited till he come along.  I says “Hold on!” and it stopped along-side,
and his mouth opened up like a trunk, and stayed so; and he swal-lowed
two or three times like a per-son that's got a dry throat, and then says:

“I hain't ever done you no harm.  You know that.  So, then, what you
want to come back and ha'nt _me_ for?”

I says:

“I hain't come back--I hain't been _gone_.”

When he heard my voice it righted him up some, but he warn't quite
sat-is-fied yet.  He says:

“Don't you play noth-ing on me, be-cause I wouldn't on you.  Hon-est in-jun
now, you ain't a ghost?”

“Hon-est in-jun, I ain't,” I says.

“Well--I--I--well, that ought to settle it, of course; but I can't some-how
seem to un-der-stand it no way.  Looky here, warn't you ever murdered _at
all?_”

“No.  I warn't ever murdered at all--I played it on them.  You come in
here and feel of me if you don't be-lieve me.”

So he done it; and it sat-is-fied him; and he was that glad to see me
again he didn't know what to do.  And he wanted to know all about it
right off, be-cause it was a grand ad-ven-ture, and mys-ter-i-ous, and so it
hit him where he lived.  But I said, leave it alone till by and by; and
told his driver to wait, and we drove off a little piece, and I told
him the kind of a fix I was in, and what did he reckon we bet-ter do?  He
said, let him alone a minute, and don't dis-turb him.  So he thought and
thought, and pretty soon he says:

“It's all right; I've got it.  Take my trunk in your wagon, and let on
it's your'n; and you turn back and fool along slow, so as to get to the
house about the time you ought to; and I'll go to-wards town a piece, and
take a fresh start, and get there a quarter or a half an hour after you;
and you needn't let on to know me at first.”

I says:

“All right; but wait a minute.  There's one more thing--a thing that
_nobody_ don't know but me.  And that is, there's a nig-ger here that
I'm a-try-ing to steal out of slavery, and his name is _Jim_--old Miss
Wat-son's Jim.”

He says:

“What!  Why, Jim is--”

He stopped and went to study-ing.  I says:

“I know what you'll say.  You'll say it's dirty, low-down busi-ness; but
what if it is?  I'm low down; and I'm a-go-ing to steal him, and I want
you keep mum and not let on.  Will you?”

His eye lit up, and he says:

“I'll _help_ you steal him!”

Well, I let go all holts then, like I was shot.  It was the most
as-ton-ish-ing speech I ever heard--and I'm bound to say Tom Saw-yer fell
con-sid-er-able in my es-tim-a-tion.  Only I couldn't be-lieve it.  Tom Saw-yer
a _nig-ger-stealer!_

“Oh, shucks!”  I says; “you're jok-ing.”

“I ain't jok-ing, either.”

“Well, then,” I says, “jok-ing or no jok-ing, if you hear any-thing said
about a run-away nig-ger, don't for-get to re-mem-ber that _y-ou_ don't know
noth-ing about him, and I don't know noth-ing about him.”

Then we took the trunk and put it in my wagon, and he drove off his
way and I drove mine.  But of course I for-got all about driv-ing slow on
ac-counts of be-ing glad and full of think-ing; so I got home a heap too
quick for that length of a trip.  The old gen-tle-man was at the door, and
he says:

“Why, this is won-der-ful!  Who-ever would a thought it was in that mare
to do it?  I wish we'd a timed her.  And she hain't sweated a hair--not
a hair. It's won-der-ful.  Why, I wouldn't take a hun-dred dol-lars for that
horse now--I wouldn't, hon-est; and yet I'd a sold her for fif-teen be-fore,
and thought 'twas all she was worth.”

That's all he said.  He was the in-no-cen-test, best old soul I ever see.
But it warn't sur-pris-ing; be-cause he warn't only just a farmer, he was
a preacher, too, and had a little one-horse log church down back of the
plant-a-tion, which he built it him-self at his own ex-pense, for a church
and school-house, and never charged noth-ing for his preach-ing, and it was
worth it, too.  There was plenty other farmer-preach-ers like that, and
done the same way, down South.

In about half an hour Tom's wagon drove up to the front stile, and Aunt
Sally she see it through the win-dow, be-cause it was only about fifty
yards, and says:

“Why, there's some-body come!  I won-der who 'tis?  Why, I do be-lieve it's
a stranger.  Jimmy” (that's one of the chil-dren) “run and tell Lize to
put on an-other plate for din-ner.”

Every-body made a rush for the front door, be-cause, of course, a stranger
don't come _every_ year, and so he lays over the yaller-fever, for
in-terest, when he does come.  Tom was over the stile and start-ing for
the house; the wagon was spin-ning up the road for the vil-lage, and we
was all bunched in the front door.  Tom had his store clothes on, and an
audi-ence--and that was al-ways nuts for Tom Saw-yer.  In them cir-cum-stances
it warn't no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was
suit-able.  He warn't a boy to meeky along up that yard like a sheep; no,
he come ca'm and im-port-ant, like the ram.  When he got a-front of us he
lifts his hat ever so gra-cious and dainty, like it was the lid of a box
that had but-ter-flies asleep in it and he didn't want to dis-turb them,
and says:

“Mr. Archibald Nich-ols, I pre-sume?”

“No, my boy,” says the old gen-tle-man, “I'm sorry to say 't your driver
has de-ceived you; Nich-ols's place is down a mat-ter of three mile more.
Come in, come in.”

Tom he took a look back over his shoulder, and says, “Too late--he's out
of sight.”

“Yes, he's gone, my son, and you must come in and eat your din-ner with
us; and then we'll hitch up and take you down to Nich-ols's.”

“Oh, I _can't_ make you so much trouble; I couldn't think of it.  I'll
walk--I don't mind the dis-tance.”

“But we won't _let_ you walk--it wouldn't be South-ern hos-pit-al-ity to do
it. Come right in.”

“Oh, _do_,” says Aunt Sally; “it ain't a bit of trouble to us, not a
bit in the world.  You must stay.  It's a long, dusty three mile, and
we can't let you walk.  And, be-sides, I've already told 'em to put on
an-other plate when I see you com-ing; so you mustn't dis-ap-point us.  Come
right in and make your-self at home.”

So Tom he thanked them very hearty and hand-some, and let him-self be
per-suaded, and come in; and when he was in he said he was a stranger
from Hicks-ville, Ohio, and his name was Wil-liam Thompson--and he made
an-other bow.

Well, he run on, and on, and on, mak-ing up stuff about Hicks-ville and
every-body in it he could in-vent, and I get-ting a little ner-vi-ous, and
won-der-ing how this was go-ing to help me out of my scrape; and at last,
still talk-ing along, he reached over and kissed Aunt Sally right on the
mouth, and then settled back again in his chair com-fort-able, and was
go-ing on talk-ing; but she jumped up and wiped it off with the back of
her hand, and says:

“You ow-da-cious puppy!”

He looked kind of hurt, and says:

“I'm sur-prised at you, m'am.”

“You're s'rp--Why, what do you reckon I am?  I've a good no-tion to take
and--Say, what do you mean by kiss-ing me?”

He looked kind of humble, and says:

“I didn't mean noth-ing, m'am.  I didn't mean no harm.  I--I--thought you'd
like it.”

“Why, you born fool!”  She took up the spin-ning stick, and it looked
like it was all she could do to keep from giv-ing him a crack with it.
 “What made you think I'd like it?”

“Well, I don't know.  Only, they--they--told me you would.”

“_They_ told you I would.  Who-ever told you's _an-other_ lun-atic.  I
never heard the beat of it.  Who's _they_?”

“Why, every-body.  They all said so, m'am.”

It was all she could do to hold in; and her eyes snapped, and her
fin-gers worked like she wanted to scratch him; and she says:

“Who's 'every-body'?  Out with their names, or ther'll be an idiot
short.”

He got up and looked dis-tressed, and fumbled his hat, and says:

“I'm sorry, and I warn't ex-pect-ing it.  They told me to.  They all told
me to.  They all said, kiss her; and said she'd like it.  They all said
it--every one of them.  But I'm sorry, m'am, and I won't do it no more--I
won't, hon-est.”

“You won't, won't you?  Well, I sh'd _reck-on_ you won't!”

“No'm, I'm hon-est about it; I won't ever do it again--till you ask me.”

“Till I _ask_ you!  Well, I never see the beat of it in my born days!
 I lay you'll be the Meth-u-s-alem-num-skull of cre-ation be-fore ever I ask
you--or the likes of you.”

“Well,” he says, “it does sur-prise me so.  I can't make it out, some-how.
They said you would, and I thought you would.  But--” He stopped and
looked around slow, like he wished he could run across a friendly eye
some-wheres, and fetched up on the old gen-tle-man's, and says, “Didn't
_y-ou_ think she'd like me to kiss her, sir?”

“Why, no; I--I--well, no, I b'lieve I didn't.”

Then he looks on around the same way to me, and says:

“Tom, didn't _y-ou_ think Aunt Sally 'd open out her arms and say, 'Sid
Saw-yer--'”

“My land!” she says, break-ing in and jump-ing for him, “you im-pudent
young ras-cal, to fool a body so--” and was go-ing to hug him, but he
fended her off, and says:

“No, not till you've asked me first.”

So she didn't lose no time, but asked him; and hugged him and kissed
him over and over again, and then turned him over to the old man, and he
took what was left.  And after they got a little quiet again she says:

“Why, dear me, I never see such a sur-prise.  We warn't look-ing for _y-ou_
at all, but only Tom.  Sis never wrote to me about any-body com-ing but
him.”

“It's be-cause it warn't _in-ten-ded_ for any of us to come but Tom,” he
says; “but I begged and begged, and at the last minute she let me
come, too; so, com-ing down the river, me and Tom thought it would be a
first-rate sur-prise for him to come here to the house first, and for me
to by and by tag along and drop in, and let on to be a stranger.  But it
was a mis-take, Aunt Sally.  This ain't no healthy place for a stranger
to come.”

“No--not im-pudent whelps, Sid.  You ought to had your jaws boxed; I
hain't been so put out since I don't know when.  But I don't care, I
don't mind the terms--I'd be will-ing to stand a thou-sand such jokes to
have you here. Well, to think of that per-form-ance!  I don't deny it, I
was most pu-tri-fied with as-ton-ish-ment when you give me that smack.”

We had din-ner out in that broad open pas-sage betwixt the house and
the kit-chen; and there was things enough on that table for seven
fam-il-ies--and all hot, too; none of your flabby, tough meat that's laid
in a cup-board in a damp cel-lar all night and tastes like a hunk of
old cold can-ni-bal in the morn-ing.  Uncle Silas he asked a pretty long
bless-ing over it, but it was worth it; and it didn't cool it a bit,
neither, the way I've seen them kind of in-ter-rup-tions do lots of times.
 There was a con-sid-er-able good deal of talk all the af-ter-noon, and me
and Tom was on the lookout all the time; but it warn't no use, they
didn't hap-pen to say noth-ing about any run-away nig-ger, and we was afraid
to try to work up to it.  But at sup-per, at night, one of the little
boys says:

“Pa, mayn't Tom and Sid and me go to the show?”

“No,” says the old man, “I reckon there ain't go-ing to be any; and you
couldn't go if there was; be-cause the run-away nig-ger told Bur-ton and
me all about that scan-dal-ous show, and Bur-ton said he would tell the
people; so I reckon they've drove the ow-da-cious loafers out of town
be-fore this time.”

So there it was!--but I couldn't help it.  Tom and me was to sleep in the
same room and bed; so, be-ing tired, we bid good-night and went up to
bed right after sup-per, and clumb out of the win-dow and down the
light-ning-rod, and shoved for the town; for I didn't be-lieve any-body was
go-ing to give the king and the duke a hint, and so if I didn't hurry up
and give them one they'd get into trouble sure.

On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was murdered,
and how pap dis-ap-peared pretty soon, and didn't come back no more, and
what a stir there was when Jim run away; and I told Tom all about our
Royal None-such rapscal-lions, and as much of the raft voy-age as I had
time to; and as we struck into the town and up through the the middle of
it--it was as much as half-after eight, then--here comes a ra-ging rush of
people with torches, and an aw-ful whoop-ing and yelling, and banging tin
pans and blow-ing horns; and we jumped to one side to let them go by;
and as they went by I see they had the king and the duke astraddle of a
rail--that is, I knowed it _was_ the king and the duke, though they was
all over tar and feath-ers, and didn't look like noth-ing in the
world that was hu-man--just looked like a couple of mon-strous big
sol-dier-plumes.  Well, it made me sick to see it; and I was sorry for
them poor pi-ti-ful ras-cals, it seemed like I couldn't ever feel any
hard-ness against them any more in the world.  It was a dread-ful thing to
see.  Hu-man be-ings _can_ be aw-ful cruel to one an-other.

We see we was too late--couldn't do no good.  We asked some strag-glers
about it, and they said every-body went to the show look-ing very
in-no-cent; and laid low and kept dark till the poor old king was in the
middle of his ca-vort-ings on the stage; then some-body give a sig-nal, and
the house rose up and went for them.

So we poked along back home, and I warn't feel-ing so brash as I was
be-fore, but kind of ornery, and humble, and to blame, some-how--though
I hadn't done noth-ing.  But that's al-ways the way; it don't make no
dif-fer-ence whether you do right or wrong, a per-son's con-science ain't
got no sense, and just goes for him any-way.  If I had a yaller dog that
didn't know no more than a per-son's con-science does I would pison him.
It takes up more room than all the rest of a per-son's in-sides, and yet
ain't no good, no-how.  Tom Saw-yer he says the same.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

WE stopped talk-ing, and got to think-ing.  By and by Tom says:

“Looky here, Huck, what fools we are to not think of it be-fore!  I bet I
know where Jim is.”

“No!  Where?”

“In that hut down by the ash-hop-per.  Why, looky here.  When we was at
din-ner, didn't you see a nig-ger man go in there with some vittles?”

“Yes.”

“What did you think the vittles was for?”

“For a dog.”

“So 'd I. Well, it wasn't for a dog.”

“Why?”

“Be-cause part of it was wa-ter-melon.”

“So it was--I no-ticed it.  Well, it does beat all that I never thought
about a dog not eat-ing wa-ter-melon.  It shows how a body can see and
don't see at the same time.”

“Well, the nig-ger un-locked the pad-lock when he went in, and he locked it
again when he came out.  He fetched uncle a key about the time we got up
from table--same key, I bet.  Water-melon shows man, lock shows pris-oner;
and it ain't likely there's two pris-on-ers on such a little plant-a-tion,
and where the people's all so kind and good.  Jim's the pris-oner.  All
right--I'm glad we found it out de-tect-ive fash-ion; I wouldn't give shucks
for any other way.  Now you work your mind, and study out a plan to
steal Jim, and I will study out one, too; and we'll take the one we like
the best.”

What a head for just a boy to have!  If I had Tom Saw-yer's head I
wouldn't trade it off to be a duke, nor mate of a steam-boat, nor clown
in a cir-cus, nor noth-ing I can think of.  I went to think-ing out a plan,
but only just to be do-ing some-thing; I knowed very well where the right
plan was go-ing to come from.  Pretty soon Tom says:

“Ready?”

“Yes,” I says.

“All right--bring it out.”

“My plan is this,” I says.  “We can easy find out if it's Jim in there.
Then get up my ca-noe to-mor-row night, and fetch my raft over from the
is-land.  Then the first dark night that comes steal the key out of the
old man's britches after he goes to bed, and shove off down the river
on the raft with Jim, hid-ing day-times and run-ning nights, the way me and
Jim used to do be-fore.  Wouldn't that plan work?”

“_Work_?  Why, cert'nly it would work, like rats a-fight-ing.  But it's
too blame' simple; there ain't noth-ing _to_ it.  What's the good of a
plan that ain't no more trouble than that?  It's as mild as goose-milk.
 Why, Huck, it wouldn't make no more talk than break-ing into a soap
fact-ory.”

I never said noth-ing, be-cause I warn't ex-pect-ing noth-ing dif-fer-ent; but
I knowed mighty well that whenever he got _his_ plan ready it wouldn't
have none of them ob-jec-tions to it.

And it didn't.  He told me what it was, and I see in a minute it was
worth fif-teen of mine for style, and would make Jim just as free a man
as mine would, and maybe get us all killed be-sides.  So I was sat-is-fied,
and said we would waltz in on it.  I needn't tell what it was here,
be-cause I knowed it wouldn't stay the way, it was.  I knowed he would be
chan-ging it around every which way as we went along, and heav-ing in new
bul-li-nesses wherever he got a chance.  And that is what he done.

Well, one thing was dead sure, and that was that Tom Saw-yer was in
earn-est, and was ac-tuly go-ing to help steal that nig-ger out of slavery.
That was the thing that was too many for me.  Here was a boy that was
re-spect-able and well brung up; and had a char-ac-ter to lose; and folks at
home that had char-ac-ters; and he was bright and not leather-headed; and
know-ing and not ig-nor-ant; and not mean, but kind; and yet here he was,
without any more pride, or right-ness, or feel-ing, than to stoop to
this busi-ness, and make him-self a shame, and his fam-ily a shame,
be-fore every-body.  I _couldn't_ un-der-stand it no way at all.  It was
out-rageous, and I knowed I ought to just up and tell him so; and so be
his true friend, and let him quit the thing right where he was and save
him-self. And I _did_ start to tell him; but he shut me up, and says:

“Don't you reckon I know what I'm about?  Don't I gen-erly know what I'm
about?”

“Yes.”

“Didn't I _say_ I was go-ing to help steal the nig-ger?”

“Yes.”

“_Well_, then.”

That's all he said, and that's all I said.  It warn't no use to say any
more; be-cause when he said he'd do a thing, he al-ways done it.  But I
couldn't make out how he was will-ing to go into this thing; so I just
let it go, and never bothered no more about it.  If he was bound to have
it so, I couldn't help it.

When we got home the house was all dark and still; so we went on down to
the hut by the ash-hop-per for to ex-am-ine it.  We went through the yard
so as to see what the hounds would do.  They knowed us, and didn't make
no more noise than coun-try dogs is al-ways do-ing when any-thing comes by
in the night.  When we got to the cabin we took a look at the front and
the two sides; and on the side I warn't ac-quain-ted with--which was the
north side--we found a square win-dow-hole, up tol-er-able high, with just
one stout board nailed across it.  I says:

“Here's the ticket.  This hole's big enough for Jim to get through if we
wrench off the board.”

Tom says:

“It's as simple as tit-tat-toe, three-in-a-row, and as easy as
play-ing hooky.  I should _hope_ we can find a way that's a little more
com-plic-ated than _that_, Huck Finn.”

“Well, then,” I says, “how 'll it do to saw him out, the way I done
be-fore I was murdered that time?”

“That's more _like_,” he says.  “It's real mys-ter-i-ous, and trouble-some,
and good,” he says; “but I bet we can find a way that's twice as long.
 There ain't no hurry; le's keep on look-ing around.”

Betwixt the hut and the fence, on the back side, was a lean-to that
joined the hut at the eaves, and was made out of plank.  It was as long
as the hut, but nar-row--only about six foot wide.  The door to it was at
the south end, and was pad-locked.  Tom he went to the soap-kettle and
searched around, and fetched back the iron thing they lift the lid with;
so he took it and prized out one of the staples.  The chain fell down,
and we opened the door and went in, and shut it, and struck a match,
and see the shed was only built against a cabin and hadn't no con-nec-tion
with it; and there warn't no floor to the shed, nor noth-ing in it but
some old rusty played-out hoes and spades and picks and a crippled plow.
 The match went out, and so did we, and shoved in the staple again, and
the door was locked as good as ever. Tom was joy-ful.  He says;

“Now we're all right.  We'll _dig_ him out.  It 'll take about a week!”

Then we star-ted for the house, and I went in the back door--you only have
to pull a buck-skin latch-string, they don't fasten the doors--but that
warn't ro-mantical enough for Tom Saw-yer; no way would do him but he must
climb up the light-ning-rod.  But after he got up half way about three
times, and missed fire and fell every time, and the last time most
bus-ted his brains out, he thought he'd got to give it up; but after he
was res-ted he al-lowed he would give her one more turn for luck, and this
time he made the trip.

In the morn-ing we was up at break of day, and down to the nig-ger cab-ins
to pet the dogs and make friends with the nig-ger that fed Jim--if it
_was_ Jim that was be-ing fed.  The nig-gers was just get-ting through
break-fast and start-ing for the fields; and Jim's nig-ger was pil-ing up
a tin pan with bread and meat and things; and whilst the oth-ers was
leav-ing, the key come from the house.

This nig-ger had a good-natured, chuckle-headed face, and his wool was
all tied up in little bunches with thread.  That was to keep witches
off.  He said the witches was pes-ter-ing him aw-ful these nights, and
mak-ing him see all kinds of strange things, and hear all kinds of
strange words and noises, and he didn't be-lieve he was ever witched so
long be-fore in his life.  He got so worked up, and got to run-ning on so
about his troubles, he for-got all about what he'd been a-go-ing to do.
 So Tom says:

“What's the vittles for?  Go-ing to feed the dogs?”

The nig-ger kind of smiled around gradu-ally over his face, like when you
heave a brick-bat in a mud-puddle, and he says:

“Yes, Mars Sid, A dog.  Cur'us dog, too.  Does you want to go en look at
'im?”

“Yes.”

I hunched Tom, and whis-pers:

“You go-ing, right here in the day-break?  _that_ warn't the plan.”

“No, it warn't; but it's the plan _now_.”

So, drat him, we went along, but I didn't like it much.  When we got in
we couldn't hardly see any-thing, it was so dark; but Jim was there, sure
enough, and could see us; and he sings out:

“Why, _Huck_!  En good _lan_'! ain' dat Misto Tom?”

I just knowed how it would be; I just ex-pec-ted it.  I didn't know
noth-ing to do; and if I had I couldn't a done it, be-cause that nig-ger
bus-ted in and says:

“Why, de gra-cious sakes! do he know you gen-l-men?”

We could see pretty well now.  Tom he looked at the nig-ger, steady and
kind of won-der-ing, and says:

“Does _who_ know us?”

“Why, dis-yer run-away nig-ger.”

“I don't reckon he does; but what put that into your head?”

“What _put_ it dar?  Didn' he jis' dis minute sing out like he knowed
you?”

Tom says, in a puzzled-up kind of way:

“Well, that's mighty curi-ous.  _Who_ sung out? _when_ did he sing out?
 _what_ did he sing out?” And turns to me, per-fectly ca'm, and says,
“Did _y-ou_ hear any-body sing out?”

Of course there warn't noth-ing to be said but the one thing; so I says:

“No; I ain't heard nobody say noth-ing.”

Then he turns to Jim, and looks him over like he never see him be-fore,
and says:

“Did you sing out?”

“No, sah,” says Jim; “I hain't said noth-ing, sah.”

“Not a word?”

“No, sah, I hain't said a word.”

“Did you ever see us be-fore?”

“No, sah; not as I knows on.”

So Tom turns to the nig-ger, which was look-ing wild and dis-tressed, and
says, kind of severe:

“What do you reckon's the mat-ter with you, any-way?  What made you think
some-body sung out?”

“Oh, it's de dad-blame' witches, sah, en I wisht I was dead, I do.
 Dey's awluz at it, sah, en dey do mos' kill me, dey sk'yers me so.
 Please to don't tell nobody 'bout it sah, er ole Mars Silas he'll scole
me; 'kase he say dey _ain't_ no witches.  I jis' wish to good-ness he was
heah now--_den_ what would he say!  I jis' bet he couldn' fine no way to
git aroun' it _dis_ time.  But it's awluz jis' so; people dat's _sot_,
stays sot; dey won't look into noth'n'en fine it out f'r dey-selves, en
when _y-ou_ fine it out en tell um 'bout it, dey doan' b'lieve you.”

Tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn't tell nobody; and told him to
buy some more thread to tie up his wool with; and then looks at Jim, and
says:

“I won-der if Uncle Silas is go-ing to hang this nig-ger.  If I was to
catch a nig-ger that was un-grate-ful enough to run away, I wouldn't give
him up, I'd hang him.”  And whilst the nig-ger stepped to the door to
look at the dime and bite it to see if it was good, he whis-pers to Jim
and says:

“Don't ever let on to know us.  And if you hear any dig-ging go-ing on
nights, it's us; we're go-ing to set you free.”

Jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it; then the nig-ger
come back, and we said we'd come again some time if the nig-ger wanted
us to; and he said he would, more par-tic-u-lar if it was dark, be-cause the
witches went for him mostly in the dark, and it was good to have folks
around then.




CHAPTER XXXV.

IT would be most an hour yet till break-fast, so we left and struck down
into the woods; be-cause Tom said we got to have _some_ light to see how
to dig by, and a lan-tern makes too much, and might get us into trouble;
what we must have was a lot of them rot-ten chunks that's called
fox-fire, and just makes a soft kind of a glow when you lay them in a
dark place.  We fetched an arm-ful and hid it in the weeds, and set down
to rest, and Tom says, kind of dis-sat-is-fied:

“Blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awk-ward as it can be.
And so it makes it so rot-ten dif-fi-cult to get up a dif-fi-cult plan.
 There ain't no watch-man to be drugged--now there _ought_ to be a
watch-man.  There ain't even a dog to give a sleep-ing-mix-ture to.  And
there's Jim chained by one leg, with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of his
bed:  why, all you got to do is to lift up the bed-stead and slip off
the chain.  And Uncle Silas he trusts every-body; sends the key to the
punkin-headed nig-ger, and don't send nobody to watch the nig-ger.  Jim
could a got out of that win-dow-hole be-fore this, only there wouldn't be
no use try-ing to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg.  Why, drat it,
Huck, it's the stu-pid-est ar-range-ment I ever see. You got to in-vent _all_
the dif-fi-culties.  Well, we can't help it; we got to do the best we can
with the ma-ter-i-als we've got. Anyhow, there's one thing--there's more
honor in get-ting him out through a lot of dif-fi-culties and dangers,
where there warn't one of them fur-nished to you by the people who it was
their duty to fur-nish them, and you had to con-trive them all out of your
own head.  Now look at just that one thing of the lan-tern.  When you
come down to the cold facts, we simply got to _let on_ that a lan-tern's
resky.  Why, we could work with a torch-light pro-ces-sion if we wanted to,
I be-lieve.  Now, whilst I think of it, we got to hunt up some-thing to
make a saw out of the first chance we get.”

“What do we want of a saw?”

“What do we _want_ of it?  Hain't we got to saw the leg of Jim's bed
off, so as to get the chain loose?”

“Why, you just said a body could lift up the bed-stead and slip the chain
off.”

“Well, if that ain't just like you, Huck Finn.  You _can_ get up the
in-fant-school-i-est ways of go-ing at a thing.  Why, hain't you ever read
any books at all?--Baron Trenck, nor Cas-anova, nor Benven-uto Chelleeny,
nor Henri IV., nor none of them her-oes?  Who ever heard of get-ting a
pris-oner loose in such an old-maidy way as that?  No; the way all the
best au-thor-it-ies does is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just
so, and swal-low the saw-dust, so it can't be found, and put some dirt and
grease around the sawed place so the very keen-est seneskal can't see
no sign of it's be-ing sawed, and thinks the bed-leg is per-fectly sound.
Then, the night you're ready, fetch the leg a kick, down she goes; slip
off your chain, and there you are.  Noth-ing to do but hitch your
rope lad-der to the bat-tle-ments, shin down it, break your leg in the
moat--be-cause a rope lad-der is nine-teen foot too short, you know--and
there's your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and
fling you across a saddle, and away you go to your nat-ive Lan-gudoc, or
Nav-arre, or wherever it is. It's gaudy, Huck.  I wish there was a moat
to this cabin. If we get time, the night of the es-cape, we'll dig one.”

I says:

“What do we want of a moat when we're go-ing to snake him out from un-der
the cabin?”

But he never heard me.  He had for-got me and everything else.  He had
his chin in his hand, think-ing.  Pretty soon he sighs and shakes his
head; then sighs again, and says:

“No, it wouldn't do--there ain't ne-ces-sity enough for it.”

“For what?”  I says.

“Why, to saw Jim's leg off,” he says.

“Good land!”  I says; “why, there ain't _no_ ne-ces-sity for it.  And what
would you want to saw his leg off for, any-way?”

“Well, some of the best au-thor-it-ies has done it.  They couldn't get the
chain off, so they just cut their hand off and shoved.  And a leg would
be bet-ter still.  But we got to let that go.  There ain't ne-ces-sity
enough in this case; and, be-sides, Jim's a nig-ger, and wouldn't
un-der-stand the reas-ons for it, and how it's the cus-tom in Europe; so
we'll let it go.  But there's one thing--he can have a rope lad-der; we
can tear up our sheets and make him a rope lad-der easy enough.  And we
can send it to him in a pie; it's mostly done that way.  And I've et
worse pies.”

“Why, Tom Saw-yer, how you talk,” I says; “Jim ain't got no use for a
rope lad-der.”

“He _has_ got use for it.  How _y-ou_ talk, you bet-ter say; you don't
know noth-ing about it.  He's _got_ to have a rope lad-der; they all do.”

“What in the na-tion can he _do_ with it?”

“_Do_ with it?  He can hide it in his bed, can't he?”  That's what they
all do; and _he's_ got to, too.  Huck, you don't ever seem to want to do
any-thing that's reg-u-lar; you want to be start-ing some-thing fresh all the
time. S'pose he _don't_ do noth-ing with it? ain't it there in his bed,
for a clew, after he's gone? and don't you reckon they'll want clews?
 Of course they will.  And you wouldn't leave them any?  That would be a
_pretty_ howdy-do, _wouldn't_ it!  I never heard of such a thing.”

“Well,” I says, “if it's in the reg-u-la-tions, and he's got to have
it, all right, let him have it; be-cause I don't wish to go back on no
reg-u-la-tions; but there's one thing, Tom Saw-yer--if we go to tear-ing up
our sheets to make Jim a rope lad-der, we're go-ing to get into trouble
with Aunt Sally, just as sure as you're born.  Now, the way I look at
it, a hickry-bark lad-der don't cost noth-ing, and don't waste noth-ing,
and is just as good to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick,
as any rag lad-der you can start; and as for Jim, he ain't had no
ex-per-i-ence, and so he don't care what kind of a--”

“Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, if I was as ig-nor-ant as you I'd keep
still--that's what I'D do.  Who ever heard of a state pris-oner es-cap-ing
by a hickry-bark lad-der?  Why, it's per-fectly ri-dicu-lous.”

“Well, all right, Tom, fix it your own way; but if you'll take my
ad-vice, you'll let me bor-row a sheet off of the clothesline.”

He said that would do.  And that gave him an-other idea, and he says:

“Bor-row a shirt, too.”

“What do we want of a shirt, Tom?”

“Want it for Jim to keep a journal on.”

“Journal your granny--_Jim_ can't write.”

“S'pose he _can't_ write--he can make marks on the shirt, can't he, if
we make him a pen out of an old pew-ter spoon or a piece of an old iron
bar-rel-hoop?”

“Why, Tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make him a bet-ter
one; and quicker, too.”

“_Pris-on-ers_ don't have geese run-ning around the don-jon-keep to pull
pens out of, you mug-gins.  They _al-ways_ make their pens out of the
hard-est, toughest, trouble-somest piece of old brass can-dle-stick or
some-thing like that they can get their hands on; and it takes them weeks
and weeks and months and months to file it out, too, be-cause they've got
to do it by rub-bing it on the wall.  _They_ wouldn't use a goose-quill
if they had it. It ain't reg-u-lar.”

“Well, then, what'll we make him the ink out of?”

“Many makes it out of iron-rust and tears; but that's the com-mon sort
and wo-men; the best au-thor-it-ies uses their own blood.  Jim can do that;
and when he wants to send any little com-mon or-din-ary mys-ter-i-ous mes-sage
to let the world know where he's cap-tiv-ated, he can write it on the
bot-tom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the win-dow.  The
Iron Mask al-ways done that, and it's a blame' good way, too.”

“Jim ain't got no tin plates.  They feed him in a pan.”

“That ain't noth-ing; we can get him some.”

“Can't nobody _read_ his plates.”

“That ain't got any-thing to _do_ with it, Huck Finn.  All _he's_ got to
do is to write on the plate and throw it out.  You don't _have_ to be
able to read it. Why, half the time you can't read any-thing a pris-oner
writes on a tin plate, or any-where else.”

“Well, then, what's the sense in wast-ing the plates?”

“Why, blame it all, it ain't the _pris-oner's_ plates.”

“But it's _some-body's_ plates, ain't it?”

“Well, spos'n it is?  What does the _pris-on-er_ care whose--”

He broke off there, be-cause we heard the break-fast-horn blow-ing.  So we
cleared out for the house.

Along dur-ing the morn-ing I bor-rowed a sheet and a white shirt off of the
clothes-line; and I found an old sack and put them in it, and we went
down and got the fox-fire, and put that in too.  I called it bor-row-ing,
be-cause that was what pap al-ways called it; but Tom said it warn't
bor-row-ing, it was steal-ing.  He said we was rep-res-ent-ing pris-on-ers; and
pris-on-ers don't care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody
don't blame them for it, either.  It ain't no crime in a pris-oner to
steal the thing he needs to get away with, Tom said; it's his right; and
so, as long as we was rep-res-ent-ing a pris-oner, we had a per-fect right to
steal any-thing on this place we had the least use for to get ourselves
out of prison with.  He said if we warn't pris-on-ers it would be a very
dif-fer-ent thing, and nobody but a mean, ornery per-son would steal when
he warn't a pris-oner.  So we al-lowed we would steal everything there was
that come handy.  And yet he made a mighty fuss, one day, after that,
when I stole a wa-ter-melon out of the nig-ger-patch and eat it; and he
made me go and give the nig-gers a dime without telling them what it
was for. Tom said that what he meant was, we could steal any-thing we
_needed_. Well, I says, I needed the wa-ter-melon.  But he said I didn't
need it to get out of prison with; there's where the dif-fer-ence was.
 He said if I'd a wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to Jim
to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right.  So I let it go at
that, though I couldn't see no ad-vant-age in my rep-res-ent-ing a pris-oner
if I got to set down and chaw over a lot of gold-leaf dis-tinc-tions like
that every time I see a chance to hog a wa-ter-melon.

Well, as I was say-ing, we waited that morn-ing till every-body was settled
down to busi-ness, and nobody in sight around the yard; then Tom he
car-ried the sack into the lean-to whilst I stood off a piece to keep
watch.  By and by he come out, and we went and set down on the wood-pile
to talk.  He says:

“Everything's all right now ex-cept tools; and that's easy fixed.”

“Tools?”  I says.

“Yes.”

“Tools for what?”

“Why, to dig with.  We ain't a-go-ing to _g-naw_ him out, are we?”

“Ain't them old crippled picks and things in there good enough to dig a
nig-ger out with?”  I says.

He turns on me, look-ing pity-ing enough to make a body cry, and says:

“Huck Finn, did you _ever_ hear of a pris-oner hav-ing picks and shovels,
and all the mod-ern con-veni-ences in his ward-robe to dig him-self out with?
 Now I want to ask you--if you got any reas-on-able-ness in you at all--what
kind of a show would _that_ give him to be a hero?  Why, they might as
well lend him the key and done with it.  Picks and shovels--why, they
wouldn't fur-nish 'em to a king.”

“Well, then,” I says, “if we don't want the picks and shovels, what do
we want?”

“A couple of case-knives.”

“To dig the found-a-tions out from un-der that cabin with?”

“Yes.”

“Con-found it, it's fool-ish, Tom.”

“It don't make no dif-fer-ence how fool-ish it is, it's the _right_ way--and
it's the reg-u-lar way.  And there ain't no _other_ way, that ever I heard
of, and I've read all the books that gives any in-form-a-tion about these
things. They al-ways dig out with a case-knife--and not through dirt, mind
you; gen-erly it's through solid rock.  And it takes them weeks and weeks
and weeks, and for ever and ever.  Why, look at one of them pris-on-ers in
the bot-tom dun-geon of the Castle Deef, in the har-bor of Mar-seilles, that
dug him-self out that way; how long was _he_ at it, you reckon?”

“I don't know.”

“Well, guess.”

“I don't know.  A month and a half.”

“_Thirty-seven year_--and he come out in Ch-ina.  _That's_ the kind.  I
wish the bot-tom of _this_ fort-ress was solid rock.”

“_Jim_ don't know nobody in Ch-ina.”

“What's _that_ got to do with it?  Neither did that other fel-low.  But
you're al-ways a-wan-der-ing off on a side is-sue.  Why can't you stick to
the main point?”

“All right--I don't care where he comes out, so he _comes_ out; and Jim
don't, either, I reckon.  But there's one thing, any-way--Jim's too old to
be dug out with a case-knife.  He won't last.”

“Yes he will _last_, too.  You don't reckon it's go-ing to take
thirty-seven years to dig out through a _dirt_ found-a-tion, do you?”

“How long will it take, Tom?”

“Well, we can't resk be-ing as long as we ought to, be-cause it mayn't
take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down there by New Or-leans.
 He'll hear Jim ain't from there.  Then his next move will be to
ad-vert-ise Jim, or some-thing like that.  So we can't resk be-ing as long
dig-ging him out as we ought to.  By rights I reckon we ought to be
a couple of years; but we can't.  Th-ings be-ing so un-cer-tain, what I
re-com-mend is this:  that we really dig right in, as quick as we can;
and after that, we can _let on_, to ourselves, that we was at it
thirty-seven years.  Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the
first time there's an alarm.  Yes, I reckon that 'll be the best way.”

“Now, there's _sense_ in that,” I says.  “Let-ting on don't cost noth-ing;
let-ting on ain't no trouble; and if it's any ob-ject, I don't mind
let-ting on we was at it a hun-dred and fifty year.  It wouldn't strain
me none, after I got my hand in.  So I'll mo-sey along now, and smouch a
couple of case-knives.”

“Smouch three,” he says; “we want one to make a saw out of.”

“Tom, if it ain't un-reg-u-lar and ir-re-li-gious to sejest it,” I says,
“there's an old rusty saw-blade around yon-der stick-ing un-der the
weather-board-ing be-hind the smoke-house.”

He looked kind of weary and dis-cour-aged-like, and says:

“It ain't no use to try to learn you noth-ing, Huck.  Run along and
smouch the knives--three of them.”  So I done it.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

AS soon as we reckoned every-body was asleep that night we went down the
light-ning-rod, and shut ourselves up in the lean-to, and got out our
pile of fox-fire, and went to work.  We cleared everything out of the
way, about four or five foot along the middle of the bot-tom log.  Tom
said he was right be-hind Jim's bed now, and we'd dig in un-der it, and
when we got through there couldn't nobody in the cabin ever know there
was any hole there, be-cause Jim's counter-pin hung down most to the
ground, and you'd have to raise it up and look un-der to see the hole.
 So we dug and dug with the case-knives till most mid-night; and then
we was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet you couldn't see
we'd done any-thing hardly.  At last I says:

“This ain't no thirty-seven year job; this is a thirty-eight year job,
Tom Saw-yer.”

He never said noth-ing.  But he sighed, and pretty soon he stopped
dig-ging, and then for a good little while I knowed that he was think-ing.
Then he says:

“It ain't no use, Huck, it ain't a-go-ing to work.  If we was pris-on-ers
it would, be-cause then we'd have as many years as we wanted, and no
hurry; and we wouldn't get but a few minutes to dig, every day, while
they was chan-ging watches, and so our hands wouldn't get blistered, and
we could keep it up right along, year in and year out, and do it right,
and the way it ought to be done.  But _we_ can't fool along; we got to
rush; we ain't got no time to spare.  If we was to put in an-other
night this way we'd have to knock off for a week to let our hands get
well--couldn't touch a case-knife with them sooner.”

“Well, then, what we go-ing to do, Tom?”

“I'll tell you.  It ain't right, and it ain't moral, and I wouldn't like
it to get out; but there ain't only just the one way:  we got to dig him
out with the picks, and _let on_ it's case-knives.”

“_Now_ you're _talk-ing_!”  I says; “your head gets lev-eler and lev-eler
all the time, Tom Saw-yer,” I says.  “Picks is the thing, moral or no
moral; and as for me, I don't care shucks for the mor-al-ity of it, no-how.
 When I start in to steal a nig-ger, or a wa-ter-melon, or a Sunday-school
book, I ain't no ways par-tic-u-lar how it's done so it's done.  What I
want is my nig-ger; or what I want is my wa-ter-melon; or what I want is my
Sunday-school book; and if a pick's the han-di-est thing, that's the thing
I'm a-go-ing to dig that nig-ger or that wa-ter-melon or that Sunday-school
book out with; and I don't give a dead rat what the au-thor-it-ies thinks
about it nuther.”

“Well,” he says, “there's ex-cuse for picks and let-ting-on in a case like
this; if it warn't so, I wouldn't ap-prove of it, nor I wouldn't stand by
and see the rules broke--be-cause right is right, and wrong is wrong,
and a body ain't got no busi-ness do-ing wrong when he ain't ig-nor-ant and
knows bet-ter.  It might an-swer for _y-ou_ to dig Jim out with a pick,
_without_ any let-ting on, be-cause you don't know no bet-ter; but it
wouldn't for me, be-cause I do know bet-ter.  Gimme a case-knife.”

He had his own by him, but I handed him mine.  He flung it down, and
says:

“Gimme a _case-knife_.”

I didn't know just what to do--but then I thought.  I scratched around
amongst the old tools, and got a pick-axe and give it to him, and he took
it and went to work, and never said a word.

He was al-ways just that par-tic-u-lar.  Full of prin-ciple.

So then I got a shovel, and then we picked and shoveled, turn about,
and made the fur fly.  We stuck to it about a half an hour, which was as
long as we could stand up; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for
it. When I got up stairs I looked out at the win-dow and see Tom do-ing
his level best with the light-ning-rod, but he couldn't come it, his
hands was so sore.  At last he says:

“It ain't no use, it can't be done.  What you reckon I bet-ter do?  Can't
you think of no way?”

“Yes,” I says, “but I reckon it ain't reg-u-lar.  Come up the stairs, and
let on it's a light-ning-rod.”

So he done it.

Next day Tom stole a pew-ter spoon and a brass can-dle-stick in the house,
for to make some pens for Jim out of, and six tal-low candles; and I
hung around the nig-ger cab-ins and laid for a chance, and stole three tin
plates.  Tom says it wasn't enough; but I said nobody wouldn't ever see
the plates that Jim throwed out, be-cause they'd fall in the dog-fen-nel
and jimpson weeds un-der the win-dow-hole--then we could tote them back and
he could use them over again.  So Tom was sat-is-fied.  Then he says:

“Now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to Jim.”

“Take them in through the hole,” I says, “when we get it done.”

He only just looked scorn-ful, and said some-thing about nobody ever heard
of such an idi-otic idea, and then he went to study-ing.  By and by he
said he had ciphered out two or three ways, but there warn't no need to
de-cide on any of them yet.  Said we'd got to post Jim first.

That night we went down the light-ning-rod a little after ten, and took
one of the candles along, and listened un-der the win-dow-hole, and heard
Jim snor-ing; so we pitched it in, and it didn't wake him.  Then we
whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half
the job was done.  We crept in un-der Jim's bed and into the cabin, and
pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over Jim awhile,
and found him look-ing hearty and healthy, and then we woke him up gentle
and gradual.  He was so glad to see us he most cried; and called us
honey, and all the pet names he could think of; and was for hav-ing us
hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away,
and clear-ing out without los-ing any time.  But Tom he showed him how
un-reg-u-lar it would be, and set down and told him all about our plans,
and how we could al-ter them in a minute any time there was an alarm; and
not to be the least afraid, be-cause we would see he got away, _sure_.
 So Jim he said it was all right, and we set there and talked over old
times awhile, and then Tom asked a lot of ques-tions, and when Jim told
him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him, and Aunt
Sally come in to see if he was com-fort-able and had plenty to eat, and
both of them was kind as they could be, Tom says:

“_Now_ I know how to fix it.  We'll send you some things by them.”

I said, “Don't do noth-ing of the kind; it's one of the most jack-ass
ideas I ever struck;” but he never paid no at-ten-tion to me; went right
on.  It was his way when he'd got his plans set.

So he told Jim how we'd have to smuggle in the rope-lad-der pie and other
large things by Nat, the nig-ger that fed him, and he must be on the
lookout, and not be sur-prised, and not let Nat see him open them; and
we would put small things in uncle's coat-pock-ets and he must steal them
out; and we would tie things to aunt's ap-ron-strings or put them in her
ap-ron-pocket, if we got a chance; and told him what they would be and
what they was for.  And told him how to keep a journal on the shirt with
his blood, and all that. He told him everything.  Jim he couldn't see
no sense in the most of it, but he al-lowed we was white folks and knowed
bet-ter than him; so he was sat-is-fied, and said he would do it all just
as Tom said.

Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and to-bacco; so we had a right down good
so-ci-able time; then we crawled out through the hole, and so home to
bed, with hands that looked like they'd been chawed.  Tom was in high
spir-its. He said it was the best fun he ever had in his life, and the
most in-tel-lec-tural; and said if he only could see his way to it we would
keep it up all the rest of our lives and leave Jim to our chil-dren to
get out; for he be-lieved Jim would come to like it bet-ter and bet-ter the
more he got used to it.  He said that in that way it could be strung out
to as much as eighty year, and would be the best time on re-cord.  And he
said it would make us all cel-eb-rated that had a hand in it.

In the morn-ing we went out to the wood-pile and chopped up the brass
can-dle-stick into handy sizes, and Tom put them and the pew-ter spoon in
his pocket.  Then we went to the nig-ger cab-ins, and while I got Nat's
no-tice off, Tom shoved a piece of can-dle-stick into the middle of a
corn-pone that was in Jim's pan, and we went along with Nat to see how
it would work, and it just worked noble; when Jim bit into it it most
mashed all his teeth out; and there warn't ever any-thing could a worked
bet-ter. Tom said so him-self. Jim he never let on but what it was only
just a piece of rock or some-thing like that that's al-ways get-ting into
bread, you know; but after that he never bit into noth-ing but what he
jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first.

And whilst we was a-stand-ing there in the dim-mish light, here comes a
couple of the hounds bul-ging in from un-der Jim's bed; and they kept on
pil-ing in till there was el-even of them, and there warn't hardly room
in there to get your breath.  By jings, we for-got to fasten that lean-to
door!  The nig-ger Nat he only just hollered “Witches” once, and keeled
over on to the floor amongst the dogs, and be-gun to groan like he was
dy-ing.  Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim's meat,
and the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out him-self and back
again and shut the door, and I knowed he'd fixed the other door too.
Then he went to work on the nig-ger, coax-ing him and pet-ting him, and
ask-ing him if he'd been ima-gin-ing he saw some-thing again.  He raised up,
and blinked his eyes around, and says:

“Mars Sid, you'll say I's a fool, but if I didn't b'lieve I see most a
mil-lion dogs, er dev-ils, er some'n, I wisht I may die right heah in dese
tracks.  I did, mos' sholy.  Mars Sid, I _felt_ um--I _felt_ um, sah; dey
was all over me.  Dad fetch it, I jis' wisht I could git my han's on one
er dem witches jis' wunst--on'y jis' wunst--it's all I'd ast.  But mos'ly
I wisht dey'd lemme 'lone, I does.”

Tom says:

“Well, I tell you what I think.  What makes them come here just at this
run-away nig-ger's break-fast-time?  It's be-cause they're hungry; that's
the reason.  You make them a witch pie; that's the thing for _y-ou_ to
do.”

“But my lan', Mars Sid, how's I gwyne to make 'm a witch pie?  I doan'
know how to make it.  I hain't ever hearn er sich a thing b'fo'.”

“Well, then, I'll have to make it my-self.”

“Will you do it, honey?--will you?  I'll wusshup de groun' und' yo' foot,
I will!”

“All right, I'll do it, see-ing it's you, and you've been good to us and
showed us the run-away nig-ger.  But you got to be mighty care-ful.  When
we come around, you turn your back; and then whatever we've put in the
pan, don't you let on you see it at all.  And don't you look when Jim
un-loads the pan--some-thing might hap-pen, I don't know what.  And above
all, don't you _handle_ the witch-things.”

“_Han-nel 'M_, Mars Sid?  What _is_ you a-talkin' 'bout?  I wouldn'
lay de weight er my fin-ger on um, not f'r ten hund'd thous'n bil-lion
dol-lars, I wouldn't.”




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THAT was all fixed.  So then we went away and went to the rub-bage-pile
in the back yard, where they keep the old boots, and rags, and pieces
of bottles, and wore-out tin things, and all such truck, and scratched
around and found an old tin wash-pan, and stopped up the holes as well as
we could, to bake the pie in, and took it down cel-lar and stole it full
of flour and star-ted for break-fast, and found a couple of shingle-nails
that Tom said would be handy for a pris-oner to scrabble his name and
sor-rows on the dun-geon walls with, and dropped one of them in Aunt
Sally's ap-ron-pocket which was hanging on a chair, and t'other we stuck
in the band of Uncle Silas's hat, which was on the bur-eau, be-cause we
heard the chil-dren say their pa and ma was go-ing to the run-away nig-ger's
house this morn-ing, and then went to break-fast, and Tom dropped the
pew-ter spoon in Uncle Silas's coat-pocket, and Aunt Sally wasn't come
yet, so we had to wait a little while.

And when she come she was hot and red and cross, and couldn't hardly
wait for the bless-ing; and then she went to sluicing out cof-fee with one
hand and crack-ing the han-di-est child's head with her thimble with the
other, and says:

“I've hunted high and I've hunted low, and it does beat all what _has_
be-come of your other shirt.”

My heart fell down amongst my lungs and liv-ers and things, and a hard
piece of corn-crust star-ted down my throat after it and got met on the
road with a cough, and was shot across the table, and took one of the
chil-dren in the eye and curled him up like a fish-ing-worm, and let a cry
out of him the size of a war-whoop, and Tom he turned kinder blue around
the gills, and it all amoun-ted to a con-sid-er-able state of things for
about a quarter of a minute or as much as that, and I would a sold out
for half price if there was a bid-der.  But after that we was all right
again--it was the sud-den sur-prise of it that knocked us so kind of cold.
Uncle Silas he says:

“It's most un-com-mon curi-ous, I can't un-der-stand it.  I know per-fectly
well I took it _off_, be-cause--”

“Be-cause you hain't got but one _on_.  Just _l-isten_ at the man!  I know
you took it off, and know it by a bet-ter way than your wool-geth-er-ing
memory, too, be-cause it was on the clo's-line yes-ter-day--I see it there
my-self. But it's gone, that's the long and the short of it, and you'll
just have to change to a red flann'l one till I can get time to make a
new one. And it 'll be the third I've made in two years.  It just keeps
a body on the jump to keep you in shirts; and whatever you do man-age to
_do_ with 'm all is more'n I can make out.  A body 'd think you _would_
learn to take some sort of care of 'em at your time of life.”

“I know it, Sally, and I do try all I can.  But it oughtn't to be
al-to-gether my fault, be-cause, you know, I don't see them nor have
noth-ing to do with them ex-cept when they're on me; and I don't be-lieve
I've ever lost one of them _off_ of me.”

“Well, it ain't _y-our_ fault if you haven't, Silas; you'd a done it
if you could, I reckon.  And the shirt ain't all that's gone, nuther.
 Ther's a spoon gone; and _that_ ain't all.  There was ten, and now
ther's only nine. The calf got the shirt, I reckon, but the calf never
took the spoon, _that's_ cer-tain.”

“Why, what else is gone, Sally?”

“Ther's six _candles_ gone--that's what.  The rats could a got the
candles, and I reckon they did; I won-der they don't walk off with the
whole place, the way you're al-ways go-ing to stop their holes and don't
do it; and if they warn't fools they'd sleep in your hair, Silas--_you'd_
never find it out; but you can't lay the _spoon_ on the rats, and that I
know.”

“Well, Sally, I'm in fault, and I ac-know-ledge it; I've been re-miss; but
I won't let to-mor-row go by without stop-ping up them holes.”

“Oh, I wouldn't hurry; next year 'll do.  Mat-ilda An-gelina Araminta
_Phelps!_”

Whack comes the thimble, and the child snatches her claws out of the
sugar-bowl without fool-ing around any.  Just then the nig-ger wo-man steps
on to the pas-sage, and says:

“Mis-sus, dey's a sheet gone.”

“A _sheet_ gone!  Well, for the land's sake!”

“I'll stop up them holes to-day,” says Uncle Silas, look-ing sor-row-ful.

“Oh, _do_ shet up!--s'pose the rats took the _sheet_?  _where's_ it gone,
Lize?”

“Clah to good-ness I hain't no no-tion, Miss' Sally.  She wuz on de
clo'sline yistiddy, but she done gone:  she ain' dah no mo' now.”

“I reckon the world _is_ com-ing to an end.  I _nev-er_ see the beat of it
in all my born days.  A shirt, and a sheet, and a spoon, and six can--”

“Mis-sus,” comes a young yaller wench, “dey's a brass can-nel-stick
miss'n.”

“Cler out from here, you hussy, er I'll take a skil-let to ye!”

Well, she was just a-bil-ing.  I be-gun to lay for a chance; I reckoned
I would sneak out and go for the woods till the weather mod-er-ated.  She
kept a-ra-ging right along, run-ning her in-sur-rec-tion all by her-self, and
every-body else mighty meek and quiet; and at last Uncle Silas, look-ing
kind of fool-ish, fishes up that spoon out of his pocket.  She stopped,
with her mouth open and her hands up; and as for me, I wished I was in
Jer-uslem or some-wheres. But not long, be-cause she says:

“It's _just_ as I ex-pec-ted.  So you had it in your pocket all the time;
and like as not you've got the other things there, too.  How'd it get
there?”

“I reely don't know, Sally,” he says, kind of apo-lo-giz-ing, “or you know
I would tell.  I was a-study-ing over my text in Acts Seven-teen be-fore
break-fast, and I reckon I put it in there, not no-ti-cing, mean-ing to put
my Testa-ment in, and it must be so, be-cause my Testa-ment ain't in; but
I'll go and see; and if the Testa-ment is where I had it, I'll know I
didn't put it in, and that will show that I laid the Testa-ment down and
took up the spoon, and--”

“Oh, for the land's sake!  Give a body a rest!  Go 'long now, the whole
kit and bil-ing of ye; and don't come nigh me again till I've got back my
peace of mind.”

I'D a heard her if she'd a said it to her-self, let alone speak-ing it
out; and I'd a got up and obeyed her if I'd a been dead.  As we was
passing through the set-ting-room the old man he took up his hat, and the
shingle-nail fell out on the floor, and he just merely picked it up and
laid it on the man-tel-shelf, and never said noth-ing, and went out.  Tom
see him do it, and re-membered about the spoon, and says:

“Well, it ain't no use to send things by _him_ no more, he ain't
re-li-able.” Then he says:  “But he done us a good turn with the spoon,
any-way, without know-ing it, and so we'll go and do him one without _him_
know-ing it--stop up his rat-holes.”

There was a noble good lot of them down cel-lar, and it took us a whole
hour, but we done the job tight and good and ship-shape.  Then we heard
steps on the stairs, and blowed out our light and hid; and here comes
the old man, with a candle in one hand and a bundle of stuff in t'other,
look-ing as ab-sent-minded as year be-fore last.  He went a moon-ing around,
first to one rat-hole and then an-other, till he'd been to them all.
 Then he stood about five minutes, pick-ing tal-low-drip off of his candle
and think-ing.  Then he turns off slow and dreamy to-wards the stairs,
say-ing:

“Well, for the life of me I can't re-mem-ber when I done it.  I could
show her now that I warn't to blame on ac-count of the rats.  But never
mind--let it go.  I reckon it wouldn't do no good.”

And so he went on a-mum-bling up stairs, and then we left.  He was a
mighty nice old man.  And al-ways is.

Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon, but he said
we'd got to have it; so he took a think.  When he had ciphered it out
he told me how we was to do; then we went and waited around the
spoon-bas-ket till we see Aunt Sally com-ing, and then Tom went to
count-ing the spoons and lay-ing them out to one side, and I slid one of
them up my sleeve, and Tom says:

“Why, Aunt Sally, there ain't but nine spoons _yet_.”

She says:

“Go 'long to your play, and don't bother me.  I know bet-ter, I coun-ted
'm my-self.”

“Well, I've coun-ted them twice, Aunty, and I can't make but nine.”

She looked out of all pa-tience, but of course she come to count--any-body
would.

“I de-clare to gra-cious ther' _ain't_ but nine!” she says.  “Why, what in
the world--plague _take_ the things, I'll count 'm again.”

So I slipped back the one I had, and when she got done count-ing, she
says:

“Hang the trouble-some rub-bage, ther's _ten_ now!” and she looked huffy
and bothered both.  But Tom says:

“Why, Aunty, I don't think there's ten.”

“You num-skull, didn't you see me _count 'm?_”

“I know, but--”

“Well, I'll count 'm _a-gain_.”

So I smouched one, and they come out nine, same as the other time.
 Well, she _was_ in a tear-ing way--just a-trem-bling all over, she was so
mad.  But she coun-ted and coun-ted till she got that addled she'd start
to count in the bas-ket for a spoon some-times; and so, three times they
come out right, and three times they come out wrong.  Then she grabbed
up the bas-ket and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat
gal-ley-west; and she said cle'r out and let her have some peace, and if
we come both-er-ing around her again betwixt that and din-ner she'd skin
us.  So we had the odd spoon, and dropped it in her ap-ron-pocket whilst
she was a-giv-ing us our sail-ing or-ders, and Jim got it all right, along
with her shingle nail, be-fore noon.  We was very well sat-is-fied with
this busi-ness, and Tom al-lowed it was worth twice the trouble it took,
be-cause he said _now_ she couldn't ever count them spoons twice alike
again to save her life; and wouldn't be-lieve she'd coun-ted them right if
she _did_; and said that after she'd about coun-ted her head off for the
next three days he judged she'd give it up and of-fer to kill any-body
that wanted her to ever count them any more.

So we put the sheet back on the line that night, and stole one out of
her closet; and kept on put-ting it back and steal-ing it again for a
couple of days till she didn't know how many sheets she had any more,
and she didn't _care_, and warn't a-go-ing to bul-ly-rag the rest of her
soul out about it, and wouldn't count them again not to save her life;
she druther die first.

So we was all right now, as to the shirt and the sheet and the spoon
and the candles, by the help of the calf and the rats and the mixed-up
count-ing; and as to the can-dle-stick, it warn't no con-sequence, it would
blow over by and by.

But that pie was a job; we had no end of trouble with that pie.  We
fixed it up away down in the woods, and cooked it there; and we got it
done at last, and very sat-is-fact-ory, too; but not all in one day; and we
had to use up three wash-pans full of flour be-fore we got through, and
we got burnt pretty much all over, in places, and eyes put out with
the smoke; be-cause, you see, we didn't want noth-ing but a crust, and we
couldn't prop it up right, and she would al-ways cave in.  But of course
we thought of the right way at last--which was to cook the lad-der, too,
in the pie.  So then we laid in with Jim the second night, and tore
up the sheet all in little strings and twis-ted them to-gether, and long
be-fore day-light we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a per-son
with.  We let on it took nine months to make it.

And in the forenoon we took it down to the woods, but it wouldn't go
into the pie.  Be-ing made of a whole sheet, that way, there was rope
enough for forty pies if we'd a wanted them, and plenty left over
for soup, or saus-age, or any-thing you choose.  We could a had a whole
din-ner.

But we didn't need it.  All we needed was just enough for the pie, and
so we throwed the rest away.  We didn't cook none of the pies in the
wash-pan--afraid the solder would melt; but Uncle Silas he had a noble
brass warm-ing-pan which he thought con-sid-er-able of, be-cause it be-longed
to one of his an-cesters with a long wooden handle that come over from
Eng-land with Wil-liam the Con-queror in the May-flower or one of them early
ships and was hid away up gar-ret with a lot of other old pots and things
that was valu-able, not on ac-count of be-ing any ac-count, be-cause they
warn't, but on ac-count of them be-ing rel-icts, you know, and we snaked
her out, private, and took her down there, but she failed on the first
pies, be-cause we didn't know how, but she come up smil-ing on the last
one.  We took and lined her with dough, and set her in the coals, and
loaded her up with rag rope, and put on a dough roof, and shut down the
lid, and put hot em-bers on top, and stood off five foot, with the long
handle, cool and com-fort-able, and in fif-teen minutes she turned out a
pie that was a sat-is-fac-tion to look at. But the per-son that et it would
want to fetch a couple of kags of tooth-picks along, for if that rope
lad-der wouldn't cramp him down to busi-ness I don't know noth-ing what I'm
talk-ing about, and lay him in enough stom-ach-ache to last him till next
time, too.

Nat didn't look when we put the witch pie in Jim's pan; and we put the
three tin plates in the bot-tom of the pan un-der the vittles; and so Jim
got everything all right, and as soon as he was by him-self he bus-ted
into the pie and hid the rope lad-der in-side of his straw tick,
and scratched some marks on a tin plate and throwed it out of the
win-dow-hole.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

MAKING them pens was a dis-tressid tough job, and so was the saw; and Jim
al-lowed the in-scrip-tion was go-ing to be the toughest of all.  That's the
one which the pris-oner has to scrabble on the wall.  But he had to have
it; Tom said he'd _got_ to; there warn't no case of a state pris-oner not
scrab-bling his in-scrip-tion to leave be-hind, and his coat of arms.

“Look at Lady Jane Grey,” he says; “look at Gil-ford Dud-ley; look at old
Northum-ber-land!  Why, Huck, s'pose it _is_ con-siderble trouble?--what
you go-ing to do?--how you go-ing to get around it?  Jim's _got_ to do his
in-scrip-tion and coat of arms.  They all do.”

Jim says:

“Why, Mars Tom, I hain't got no coat o' arm; I hain't got nuffn but dish
yer ole shirt, en you knows I got to keep de journal on dat.”

“Oh, you don't un-der-stand, Jim; a coat of arms is very dif-fer-ent.”

“Well,” I says, “Jim's right, any-way, when he says he ain't got no coat
of arms, be-cause he hain't.”

“I reckon I knowed that,” Tom says, “but you bet he'll have one be-fore
he goes out of this--be-cause he's go-ing out _right_, and there ain't
go-ing to be no flaws in his re-cord.”

So whilst me and Jim filed away at the pens on a brick-bat apiece, Jim
a-mak-ing his'n out of the brass and I mak-ing mine out of the spoon,
Tom set to work to think out the coat of arms.  By and by he said he'd
struck so many good ones he didn't hardly know which to take, but there
was one which he reckoned he'd de-cide on.  He says:

“On the scutcheon we'll have a bend _or_ in the dex-ter base, a saltire
_mur-rey_ in the fess, with a dog, couchant, for com-mon charge, and un-der
his foot a chain em-battled, for slavery, with a chev-ron _vert_ in a
chief en-grailed, and three in-vec-ted lines on a field _azure_, with the
nom-bril points rampant on a dan-cette in-den-ted; crest, a run-away nig-ger,
_s-able_, with his bundle over his shoulder on a bar sin-is-ter; and a
couple of gules for sup-port-ers, which is you and me; motto, _Mag-giore
Fretta, Minore Otto._  Got it out of a book--means the more haste the
less speed.”

“Gee-whil-likins,” I says, “but what does the rest of it mean?”

“We ain't got no time to bother over that,” he says; “we got to dig in
like all git-out.”

“Well, any-way,” I says, “what's _some_ of it?  What's a fess?”

“A fess--a fess is--_y-ou_ don't need to know what a fess is.  I'll show
him how to make it when he gets to it.”

“Shucks, Tom,” I says, “I think you might tell a per-son.  What's a bar
sin-is-ter?”

“Oh, I don't know.  But he's got to have it.  All the no-bil-ity does.”

That was just his way.  If it didn't suit him to ex-plain a thing to you,
he wouldn't do it.  You might pump at him a week, it wouldn't make no
dif-fer-ence.

He'd got all that coat of arms busi-ness fixed, so now he star-ted in to
fin-ish up the rest of that part of the work, which was to plan out a
mourn-ful in-scrip-tion--said Jim got to have one, like they all done.  He
made up a lot, and wrote them out on a pa-per, and read them off, so:

1.  Here a cap-tive heart bus-ted. 2.  Here a poor pris-oner, for-sook by
the world and friends, fret-ted his sor-row-ful life. 3.  Here a lonely
heart broke, and a worn spirit went to its rest, after thirty-seven
years of sol-it-ary cap-tiv-ity. 4.  Here, home-less and friend-less, after
thirty-seven years of bit-ter cap-tiv-ity, per-ished a noble stranger,
nat-ural son of Louis XIV.

Tom's voice trembled whilst he was read-ing them, and he most broke down.
When he got done he couldn't no way make up his mind which one for Jim
to scrabble on to the wall, they was all so good; but at last he al-lowed
he would let him scrabble them all on.  Jim said it would take him a
year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail, and he
didn't know how to make let-ters, be-sides; but Tom said he would block
them out for him, and then he wouldn't have noth-ing to do but just
fol-low the lines.  Then pretty soon he says:

“Come to think, the logs ain't a-go-ing to do; they don't have log walls
in a dun-geon:  we got to dig the in-scrip-tions into a rock.  We'll fetch
a rock.”

Jim said the rock was worse than the logs; he said it would take him
such a pison long time to dig them into a rock he wouldn't ever get out.
 But Tom said he would let me help him do it.  Then he took a look to
see how me and Jim was get-ting along with the pens.  It was most pesky
te-di-ous hard work and slow, and didn't give my hands no show to get
well of the sores, and we didn't seem to make no head-way, hardly; so Tom
says:

“I know how to fix it.  We got to have a rock for the coat of arms and
mourn-ful in-scrip-tions, and we can kill two birds with that same rock.
There's a gaudy big grind-stone down at the mill, and we'll smouch it,
and carve the things on it, and file out the pens and the saw on it,
too.”

It warn't no slouch of an idea; and it warn't no slouch of a grind-stone
nuther; but we al-lowed we'd tackle it.  It warn't quite mid-night yet,
so we cleared out for the mill, leav-ing Jim at work.  We smouched the
grind-stone, and set out to roll her home, but it was a most na-tion tough
job. So-me-times, do what we could, we couldn't keep her from fall-ing
over, and she come mighty near mash-ing us every time.  Tom said she was
go-ing to get one of us, sure, be-fore we got through.  We got her half
way; and then we was plumb played out, and most drown-ded with sweat.  We
see it warn't no use; we got to go and fetch Jim. So he raised up his
bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg, and wrapt it round and round
his neck, and we crawled out through our hole and down there, and Jim
and me laid into that grind-stone and walked her along like noth-ing; and
Tom su-per-in-ten-ded.  He could out-su-per-in-tend any boy I ever see.  He
knowed how to do everything.

Our hole was pretty big, but it warn't big enough to get the grind-stone
through; but Jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough.  Then Tom
marked out them things on it with the nail, and set Jim to work on them,
with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rub-bage in the
lean-to for a ham-mer, and told him to work till the rest of his candle
quit on him, and then he could go to bed, and hide the grind-stone un-der
his straw tick and sleep on it.  Then we helped him fix his chain back
on the bed-leg, and was ready for bed ourselves.  But Tom thought of
some-thing, and says:

“You got any spiders in here, Jim?”

“No, sah, thanks to good-ness I hain't, Mars Tom.”

“All right, we'll get you some.”

“But bless you, honey, I doan' _want_ none.  I's afeard un um.  I jis'
's soon have rattlesnakes aroun'.”

Tom thought a minute or two, and says:

“It's a good idea.  And I reckon it's been done.  It _must_ a been done;
it stands to reason.  Yes, it's a prime good idea.  Where could you keep
it?”

“Keep what, Mars Tom?”

“Why, a rattlesnake.”

“De good-ness gra-cious alive, Mars Tom!  Why, if dey was a rattlesnake to
come in heah I'd take en bust right out thoo dat log wall, I would, wid
my head.”

“Why, Jim, you wouldn't be afraid of it after a little.  You could tame
it.”

“_Tame_ it!”

“Yes--easy enough.  Every an-imal is grate-ful for kind-ness and pet-ting,
and they wouldn't _think_ of hurt-ing a per-son that pets them.  Any book
will tell you that.  You try--that's all I ask; just try for two or three
days. Why, you can get him so, in a little while, that he'll love you;
and sleep with you; and won't stay away from you a minute; and will let
you wrap him round your neck and put his head in your mouth.”

“_Please_, Mars Tom--_doan_' talk so!  I can't _stan_' it!  He'd _let_
me shove his head in my mouf--fer a fa-vor, hain't it?  I lay he'd wait a
pow'ful long time 'fo' I _ast_ him.  En mo' en dat, I doan' _want_ him
to sleep wid me.”

“Jim, don't act so fool-ish.  A pris-oner's _got_ to have some kind of a
dumb pet, and if a rattlesnake hain't ever been tried, why, there's more
glory to be gained in your be-ing the first to ever try it than any other
way you could ever think of to save your life.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I doan' _want_ no sich glory.  Snake take 'n bite
Jim's chin off, den _whah_ is de glory?  No, sah, I doan' want no sich
doin's.”

“Blame it, can't you _try_?  I only _want_ you to try--you needn't keep
it up if it don't work.”

“But de trouble all _done_ ef de snake bite me while I's a tryin' him.
Mars Tom, I's wil-lin' to tackle mos' any-thing 'at ain't on-reas-on-able,
but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame, I's
gwyne to _leave_, dat's _shore_.”

“Well, then, let it go, let it go, if you're so bull-headed about it.
 We can get you some garter-snakes, and you can tie some but-tons on
their tails, and let on they're rattlesnakes, and I reckon that 'll have
to do.”

“I k'n stan' _dem_, Mars Tom, but blame' 'f I couldn' get along widout
um, I tell you dat.  I never knowed b'fo' 't was so much bother and
trouble to be a pris-oner.”

“Well, it _al-ways_ is when it's done right.  You got any rats around
here?”

“No, sah, I hain't seed none.”

“Well, we'll get you some rats.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I doan' _want_ no rats.  Dey's de dad-blamed-est cre-turs
to 'sturb a body, en rustle roun' over 'im, en bite his feet, when he's
tryin' to sleep, I ever see.  No, sah, gimme g'yarter-snakes, 'f I's
got to have 'm, but doan' gimme no rats; I hain' got no use f'r um,
skasely.”

“But, Jim, you _got_ to have 'em--they all do.  So don't make no more
fuss about it.  Pris-on-ers ain't ever without rats.  There ain't no
in-stance of it.  And they train them, and pet them, and learn them
tricks, and they get to be as so-ci-able as flies.  But you got to play
mu-sic to them.  You got any-thing to play mu-sic on?”

“I ain' got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o' pa-per, en a juice-harp;
but I reck'n dey wouldn' take no stock in a juice-harp.”

“Yes they would _they_ don't care what kind of mu-sic 'tis.  A
jews-harp's plenty good enough for a rat.  All an-im-als like mu-sic--in a
prison they dote on it.  Spe-cially, pain-ful mu-sic; and you can't get no
other kind out of a jews-harp.  It al-ways in-terests them; they come out
to see what's the mat-ter with you.  Yes, you're all right; you're fixed
very well.  You want to set on your bed nights be-fore you go to sleep,
and early in the morn-ings, and play your jews-harp; play 'The Last Link
is Broken'--that's the thing that 'll scoop a rat quicker 'n any-thing
else; and when you've played about two minutes you'll see all the rats,
and the snakes, and spiders, and things be-gin to feel wor-ried about you,
and come.  And they'll just fairly swarm over you, and have a noble good
time.”

“Yes, _dey_ will, I reck'n, Mars Tom, but what kine er time is _Jim_
havin'? Blest if I kin see de pint.  But I'll do it ef I got to.  I
reck'n I bet-ter keep de an-im-als sat-is-fied, en not have no trouble in de
house.”

Tom waited to think it over, and see if there wasn't noth-ing else; and
pretty soon he says:

“Oh, there's one thing I for-got.  Could you raise a flower here, do you
reckon?”

“I doan know but maybe I could, Mars Tom; but it's tolable dark in heah,
en I ain' got no use f'r no flower, no-how, en she'd be a pow'ful sight
o' trouble.”

“Well, you try it, any-way.  Some other pris-on-ers has done it.”

“One er dem big cat-tail-lookin' mul-len-stalks would grow in heah, Mars
Tom, I reck'n, but she wouldn't be wuth half de trouble she'd coss.”

“Don't you be-lieve it.  We'll fetch you a little one and you plant it in
the corner over there, and raise it.  And don't call it mul-len, call it
Pit-chi-ola--that's its right name when it's in a prison.  And you want to
wa-ter it with your tears.”

“Why, I got plenty spring wa-ter, Mars Tom.”

“You don't _want_ spring wa-ter; you want to wa-ter it with your tears.
 It's the way they al-ways do.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I lay I kin raise one er dem mul-len-stalks twyste wid
spring wa-ter whiles an-other man's a _start'n_ one wid tears.”

“That ain't the idea.  You _got_ to do it with tears.”

“She'll die on my han's, Mars Tom, she sholy will; kase I doan' skasely
ever cry.”

So Tom was stumped.  But he stud-ied it over, and then said Jim would
have to worry along the best he could with an onion.  He prom-ised
he would go to the nig-ger cab-ins and drop one, private, in Jim's
cof-fee-pot, in the morn-ing. Jim said he would “jis' 's soon have
to-backer in his cof-fee;” and found so much fault with it, and with the
work and bother of rais-ing the mul-len, and jews-harp-ing the rats, and
pet-ting and flat-ter-ing up the snakes and spiders and things, on top of
all the other work he had to do on pens, and in-scrip-tions, and journ-als,
and things, which made it more trouble and worry and re-spons-ib-il-ity to
be a pris-oner than any-thing he ever un-der-took, that Tom most lost all
pa-tience with him; and said he was just loadened down with more gaud-ier
chances than a pris-oner ever had in the world to make a name for
him-self, and yet he didn't know enough to ap-pre-ci-ate them, and they was
just about wasted on him.  So Jim he was sorry, and said he wouldn't
be-have so no more, and then me and Tom shoved for bed.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

IN the morn-ing we went up to the vil-lage and bought a wire rat-trap and
fetched it down, and un-stopped the best rat-hole, and in about an hour
we had fif-teen of the bul-li-est kind of ones; and then we took it and put
it in a safe place un-der Aunt Sally's bed.  But while we was gone for
spiders little Tho-mas Frank-lin Ben-jamin Jef-fer-son El-ex-an-der Phelps found
it there, and opened the door of it to see if the rats would come out,
and they did; and Aunt Sally she come in, and when we got back she was
a-stand-ing on top of the bed rais-ing Cain, and the rats was do-ing what
they could to keep off the dull times for her.  So she took and dus-ted
us both with the hickry, and we was as much as two hours catch-ing
an-other fif-teen or six-teen, drat that meddle-some cub, and they warn't
the like-li-est, nuther, be-cause the first haul was the pick of the flock.
 I never see a like-lier lot of rats than what that first haul was.

We got a splen-did stock of sor-ted spiders, and bugs, and frogs, and
cater-pil-lars, and one thing or an-other; and we like to got a hor-net's
nest, but we didn't.  The fam-ily was at home.  We didn't give it right
up, but stayed with them as long as we could; be-cause we al-lowed we'd
tire them out or they'd got to tire us out, and they done it.  Then we
got al-ly-cumpain and rubbed on the places, and was pretty near all right
again, but couldn't set down con-veni-ent.  And so we went for the snakes,
and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes, and put them in
a bag, and put it in our room, and by that time it was sup-per-time, and
a rat-tling good hon-est day's work:  and hungry?--oh, no, I reckon not!
 And there warn't a blessed snake up there when we went back--we didn't
half tie the sack, and they worked out some-how, and left.  But it didn't
mat-ter much, be-cause they was still on the premises some-wheres.  So
we judged we could get some of them again.  No, there warn't no real
scarcity of snakes about the house for a con-sid-er-able spell.  You'd see
them drip-ping from the rafters and places every now and then; and they
gen-erly landed in your plate, or down the back of your neck, and most
of the time where you didn't want them.  Well, they was hand-some and
striped, and there warn't no harm in a mil-lion of them; but that never
made no dif-fer-ence to Aunt Sally; she des-pised snakes, be the breed what
they might, and she couldn't stand them no way you could fix it; and
every time one of them flopped down on her, it didn't make no dif-fer-ence
what she was do-ing, she would just lay that work down and light out.  I
never see such a wo-man.  And you could hear her whoop to Jericho.  You
couldn't get her to take a-holt of one of them with the tongs.  And if
she turned over and found one in bed she would scramble out and lift a
howl that you would think the house was afire.  She dis-turbed the old
man so that he said he could most wish there hadn't ever been no snakes
cre-ated.  Why, after every last snake had been gone clear out of the
house for as much as a week Aunt Sally warn't over it yet; she warn't
near over it; when she was set-ting think-ing about some-thing you could
touch her on the back of her neck with a feather and she would jump
right out of her stock-ings.  It was very curi-ous.  But Tom said all
wo-men was just so.  He said they was made that way for some reason or
other.

We got a lick-ing every time one of our snakes come in her way, and she
al-lowed these lick-ings warn't noth-ing to what she would do if we ever
loaded up the place again with them.  I didn't mind the lick-ings,
be-cause they didn't amount to noth-ing; but I minded the trouble we
had to lay in an-other lot.  But we got them laid in, and all the other
things; and you never see a cabin as blithe-some as Jim's was when they'd
all swarm out for mu-sic and go for him.  Jim didn't like the spiders,
and the spiders didn't like Jim; and so they'd lay for him, and make it
mighty warm for him.  And he said that between the rats and the snakes
and the grind-stone there warn't no room in bed for him, skasely; and
when there was, a body couldn't sleep, it was so lively, and it was
al-ways lively, he said, be-cause _they_ never all slept at one time, but
took turn about, so when the snakes was asleep the rats was on deck, and
when the rats turned in the snakes come on watch, so he al-ways had one
gang un-der him, in his way, and t'other gang hav-ing a cir-cus over him,
and if he got up to hunt a new place the spiders would take a chance at
him as he crossed over. He said if he ever got out this time he wouldn't
ever be a pris-oner again, not for a salary.

Well, by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape.
 The shirt was sent in early, in a pie, and every time a rat bit Jim he
would get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was fresh;
the pens was made, the in-scrip-tions and so on was all carved on the
grind-stone; the bed-leg was sawed in two, and we had et up the saw-dust,
and it give us a most amaz-ing stom-ach-ache.  We reckoned we was all
go-ing to die, but didn't.  It was the most un-di-gest-ible saw-dust I ever
see; and Tom said the same.

But as I was say-ing, we'd got all the work done now, at last; and we was
all pretty much fagged out, too, but mainly Jim.  The old man had wrote
a couple of times to the plant-a-tion be-low Or-leans to come and get their
run-away nig-ger, but hadn't got no an-swer, be-cause there warn't no such
plant-a-tion; so he al-lowed he would ad-vert-ise Jim in the St. Louis and
New Or-leans pa-pers; and when he men-tioned the St. Louis ones it give me
the cold shivers, and I see we hadn't no time to lose. So Tom said, now
for the non-nam-ous let-ters.

“What's them?”  I says.

“Warn-ings to the people that some-thing is up.  So-me-times it's done one
way, some-times an-other.  But there's al-ways some-body spy-ing around that
gives no-tice to the gov-ernor of the castle.  When Louis XVI. was go-ing
to light out of the Tool-er-ies, a ser-vant-girl done it.  It's a very good
way, and so is the non-nam-ous let-ters.  We'll use them both.  And it's
usual for the pris-oner's mother to change clothes with him, and she
stays in, and he slides out in her clothes.  We'll do that, too.”

“But looky here, Tom, what do we want to _warn_ any-body for that
some-thing's up?  Let them find it out for them-selves--it's their
lookout.”

“Yes, I know; but you can't de-pend on them.  It's the way they've ac-ted
from the very start--left us to do _everything_.  They're so con-fid-ing
and mul-let-headed they don't take no-tice of noth-ing at all.  So if we
don't _give_ them no-tice there won't be nobody nor noth-ing to in-ter-fere
with us, and so after all our hard work and trouble this es-cape 'll go
off per-fectly flat; won't amount to noth-ing--won't be noth-ing _to_ it.”

“Well, as for me, Tom, that's the way I'd like.”

“Shucks!” he says, and looked dis-gus-ted.  So I says:

“But I ain't go-ing to make no com-plaint.  Any way that suits you suits
me. What you go-ing to do about the ser-vant-girl?”

“You'll be her.  You slide in, in the middle of the night, and hook that
yaller girl's frock.”

“Why, Tom, that 'll make trouble next morn-ing; be-cause, of course, she
prob'bly hain't got any but that one.”

“I know; but you don't want it but fif-teen minutes, to carry the
non-nam-ous let-ter and shove it un-der the front door.”

“All right, then, I'll do it; but I could carry it just as handy in my
own togs.”

“You wouldn't look like a ser-vant-girl _then_, would you?”

“No, but there won't be nobody to see what I look like, _any-way_.”

“That ain't got noth-ing to do with it.  The thing for us to do is just
to do our _duty_, and not worry about whether any-body _sees_ us do it or
not. Hain't you got no prin-ciple at all?”

“All right, I ain't say-ing noth-ing; I'm the ser-vant-girl.  Who's Jim's
mother?”

“I'm his mother.  I'll hook a gown from Aunt Sally.”

“Well, then, you'll have to stay in the cabin when me and Jim leaves.”

“Not much.  I'll stuff Jim's clothes full of straw and lay it on his bed
to rep-res-ent his mother in dis-guise, and Jim 'll take the nig-ger wo-man's
gown off of me and wear it, and we'll all evade to-gether.  When a
pris-oner of style es-capes it's called an eva-sion.  It's al-ways called
so when a king es-capes, f'rinstance.  And the same with a king's son;
it don't make no dif-fer-ence whether he's a nat-ural one or an un-nat-ural
one.”

So Tom he wrote the non-nam-ous let-ter, and I smouched the yaller wench's
frock that night, and put it on, and shoved it un-der the front door, the
way Tom told me to.  It said:

Be-ware.  Trouble is brew-ing.  Keep a sharp lookout. _Unknown_ _Friend_.

Next night we stuck a pic-ture, which Tom drawed in blood, of a skull and
cross-bones on the front door; and next night an-other one of a coffin on
the back door.  I never see a fam-ily in such a sweat.  They couldn't a
been worse scared if the place had a been full of ghosts lay-ing for them
be-hind everything and un-der the beds and shiv-er-ing through the air.  If
a door banged, Aunt Sally she jumped and said “ouch!” if any-thing fell,
she jumped and said “ouch!” if you happened to touch her, when she
warn't no-ti-cing, she done the same; she couldn't face no-way and be
sat-is-fied, be-cause she al-lowed there was some-thing be-hind her every
time--so she was al-ways a-whirl-ing around sud-den, and say-ing “ouch,” and
be-fore she'd got two-thirds around she'd whirl back again, and say it
again; and she was afraid to go to bed, but she dasn't set up.  So the
thing was work-ing very well, Tom said; he said he never see a thing work
more sat-is-fact-ory. He said it showed it was done right.

So he said, now for the grand bulge!  So the very next morn-ing at the
streak of dawn we got an-other let-ter ready, and was won-der-ing what we
bet-ter do with it, be-cause we heard them say at sup-per they was go-ing
to have a nig-ger on watch at both doors all night.  Tom he went down the
light-ning-rod to spy around; and the nig-ger at the back door was asleep,
and he stuck it in the back of his neck and come back.  This let-ter
said:

Don't be-tray me, I wish to be your friend.  There is a de-sprate gang of
cut-throats from over in the In-dian Ter-rit-ory go-ing to steal your run-away
nig-ger to-night, and they have been try-ing to scare you so as you will
stay in the house and not bother them.  I am one of the gang, but have
got re-lig-gion and wish to quit it and lead an hon-est life again, and
will be-tray the hel-ish design. They will sneak down from northards,
along the fence, at mid-night ex-act, with a false key, and go in the
nig-ger's cabin to get him. I am to be off a piece and blow a tin horn
if I see any danger; but stead of that I will _baa_ like a sheep soon as
they get in and not blow at all; then whilst they are get-ting his
chains loose, you slip there and lock them in, and can kill them at your
leas-ure.  Don't do any-thing but just the way I am telling you, if you do
they will sus-pi-cion some-thing and raise whoop-jam-bor-ee-hoo. I do not wish
any re-ward but to know I have done the right thing. _Unknown Friend._




CHAPTER XL.

WE was feel-ing pretty good after break-fast, and took my ca-noe and went
over the river a-fish-ing, with a lunch, and had a good time, and took a
look at the raft and found her all right, and got home late to sup-per,
and found them in such a sweat and worry they didn't know which end they
was stand-ing on, and made us go right off to bed the minute we was done
sup-per, and wouldn't tell us what the trouble was, and never let on a
word about the new let-ter, but didn't need to, be-cause we knowed as much
about it as any-body did, and as soon as we was half up stairs and her
back was turned we slid for the cel-lar cup-board and loaded up a good
lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed, and got up about
half-past el-even, and Tom put on Aunt Sally's dress that he stole and
was go-ing to start with the lunch, but says:

“Where's the but-ter?”

“I laid out a hunk of it,” I says, “on a piece of a corn-pone.”

“Well, you _left_ it laid out, then--it ain't here.”

“We can get along without it,” I says.

“We can get along _with_ it, too,” he says; “just you slide down cel-lar
and fetch it.  And then mo-sey right down the light-ning-rod and come
along. I'll go and stuff the straw into Jim's clothes to rep-res-ent his
mother in dis-guise, and be ready to _baa_ like a sheep and shove soon as
you get there.”

So out he went, and down cel-lar went I. The hunk of but-ter, big as
a per-son's fist, was where I had left it, so I took up the slab of
corn-pone with it on, and blowed out my light, and star-ted up stairs
very stealthy, and got up to the main floor all right, but here comes
Aunt Sally with a candle, and I clapped the truck in my hat, and clapped
my hat on my head, and the next second she see me; and she says:

“You been down cel-lar?”

“Yes'm.”

“What you been do-ing down there?”

“Noth'n.”

“_Noth'n!_”

“No'm.”

“Well, then, what pos-sessed you to go down there this time of night?”

“I don't know 'm.”

“You don't _know_?  Don't an-swer me that way. Tom, I want to know what
you been _do-ing_ down there.”

“I hain't been do-ing a single thing, Aunt Sally, I hope to gra-cious if I
have.”

I reckoned she'd let me go now, and as a gen-erl thing she would; but I
s'pose there was so many strange things go-ing on she was just in a sweat
about every little thing that warn't yard-stick straight; so she says,
very de-cided:

“You just march into that set-ting-room and stay there till I come.  You
been up to some-thing you no busi-ness to, and I lay I'll find out what it
is be-fore I'M done with you.”

So she went away as I opened the door and walked into the set-ting-room.
My, but there was a crowd there!  Fif-teen farm-ers, and every one of them
had a gun.  I was most power-ful sick, and slunk to a chair and set down.
They was set-ting around, some of them talk-ing a little, in a low voice,
and all of them fid-gety and un-easy, but try-ing to look like they warn't;
but I knowed they was, be-cause they was al-ways tak-ing off their hats,
and put-ting them on, and scratch-ing their heads, and chan-ging their
seats, and fum-bling with their but-tons.  I warn't easy my-self, but I
didn't take my hat off, all the same.

I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with me, and lick me, if
she wanted to, and let me get away and tell Tom how we'd over-done this
thing, and what a thun-der-ing hor-net's-nest we'd got ourselves into, so
we could stop fool-ing around straight off, and clear out with Jim be-fore
these rips got out of pa-tience and come for us.

At last she come and be-gun to ask me ques-tions, but I _couldn't_ an-swer
them straight, I didn't know which end of me was up; be-cause these men
was in such a fid-get now that some was want-ing to start right NOW and
lay for them des-peradoes, and say-ing it warn't but a few minutes to
mid-night; and oth-ers was try-ing to get them to hold on and wait for the
sheep-sig-nal; and here was Aunty peg-ging away at the ques-tions, and
me a-shak-ing all over and ready to sink down in my tracks I was
that scared; and the place get-ting hot-ter and hot-ter, and the but-ter
be-gin-ning to melt and run down my neck and be-hind my ears; and pretty
soon, when one of them says, “I'M for go-ing and get-ting in the cabin
_first_ and right _now_, and catch-ing them when they come,” I most
dropped; and a streak of but-ter come a-trick-ling down my fore-head, and
Aunt Sally she see it, and turns white as a sheet, and says:

“For the land's sake, what _is_ the mat-ter with the child?  He's got the
brain-fever as shore as you're born, and they're ooz-ing out!”

And every-body runs to see, and she snatches off my hat, and out comes
the bread and what was left of the but-ter, and she grabbed me, and
hugged me, and says:

“Oh, what a turn you did give me! and how glad and grate-ful I am it
ain't no worse; for luck's against us, and it never rains but it pours,
and when I see that truck I thought we'd lost you, for I knowed by
the color and all it was just like your brains would be if--Dear,
dear, whyd'nt you _tell_ me that was what you'd been down there for, I
wouldn't a cared.  Now cler out to bed, and don't lemme see no more of
you till morn-ing!”

I was up stairs in a second, and down the light-ning-rod in an-other one,
and shin-ning through the dark for the lean-to.  I couldn't hardly get my
words out, I was so anxious; but I told Tom as quick as I could we must
jump for it now, and not a minute to lose--the house full of men, yon-der,
with guns!

His eyes just blazed; and he says:

“No!--is that so?  _ain't_ it bully!  Why, Huck, if it was to do over
again, I bet I could fetch two hun-dred!  If we could put it off till--”

“Hurry!  _Hurry_!”  I says.  “Where's Jim?”

“Right at your el-bow; if you reach out your arm you can touch him.
 He's dressed, and everything's ready.  Now we'll slide out and give the
sheep-sig-nal.”

But then we heard the tramp of men com-ing to the door, and heard them
be-gin to fumble with the pad-lock, and heard a man say:

“I _told_ you we'd be too soon; they haven't come--the door is locked.
Here, I'll lock some of you into the cabin, and you lay for 'em in the
dark and kill 'em when they come; and the rest scat-ter around a piece,
and listen if you can hear 'em com-ing.”

So in they come, but couldn't see us in the dark, and most trod on
us whilst we was hust-ling to get un-der the bed.  But we got un-der all
right, and out through the hole, swift but soft--Jim first, me next,
and Tom last, which was ac-cord-ing to Tom's or-ders.  Now we was in the
lean-to, and heard tramp-ings close by out-side.  So we crept to the door,
and Tom stopped us there and put his eye to the crack, but couldn't make
out noth-ing, it was so dark; and whispered and said he would listen
for the steps to get fur-ther, and when he nudged us Jim must glide out
first, and him last.  So he set his ear to the crack and listened, and
listened, and listened, and the steps a-scrap-ing around out there all
the time; and at last he nudged us, and we slid out, and stooped down,
not breath-ing, and not mak-ing the least noise, and slipped stealthy
to-wards the fence in In-jun file, and got to it all right, and me and Jim
over it; but Tom's britches catched fast on a splinter on the top
rail, and then he hear the steps com-ing, so he had to pull loose, which
snapped the splinter and made a noise; and as he dropped in our tracks
and star-ted some-body sings out:

“Who's that?  An-swer, or I'll shoot!”

But we didn't an-swer; we just un-furled our heels and shoved.  Then there
was a rush, and a _Bang, Bang, Bang!_ and the bul-lets fairly whizzed
around us! We heard them sing out:

“Here they are!  They've broke for the river!  After 'em, boys, and turn
loose the dogs!”

So here they come, full tilt.  We could hear them be-cause they wore
boots and yelled, but we didn't wear no boots and didn't yell.  We was
in the path to the mill; and when they got pretty close on to us we
dodged into the bush and let them go by, and then dropped in be-hind
them.  They'd had all the dogs shut up, so they wouldn't scare off the
rob-bers; but by this time some-body had let them loose, and here they
come, mak-ing pow-wow enough for a mil-lion; but they was our dogs; so we
stopped in our tracks till they catched up; and when they see it warn't
nobody but us, and no ex-cite-ment to of-fer them, they only just said
howdy, and tore right ahead to-wards the shout-ing and clat-ter-ing; and
then we up-steam again, and whizzed along after them till we was nearly
to the mill, and then struck up through the bush to where my ca-noe was
tied, and hopped in and pulled for dear life to-wards the middle of the
river, but didn't make no more noise than we was ob-lee-ged to. Then we
struck out, easy and com-fort-able, for the is-land where my raft was; and
we could hear them yelling and bark-ing at each other all up and down the
bank, till we was so far away the sounds got dim and died out.  And when
we stepped on to the raft I says:

“_Now_, old Jim, you're a free man again, and I bet you won't ever be a
slave no more.”

“En a mighty good job it wuz, too, Huck.  It 'uz planned beau-ti-ful, en
it 'uz done beau-ti-ful; en dey ain't _nobody_ kin git up a plan dat's mo'
mixed-up en splen-did den what dat one wuz.”

We was all glad as we could be, but Tom was the glad-dest of all be-cause
he had a bul-let in the calf of his leg.

When me and Jim heard that we didn't feel so brash as what we did
be-fore. It was hurt-ing him con-sid-er-able, and bleed-ing; so we laid him in
the wig-wam and tore up one of the duke's shirts for to band-age him, but
he says:

“Gimme the rags; I can do it my-self.  Don't stop now; don't fool around
here, and the eva-sion boom-ing along so hand-some; man the sweeps, and set
her loose!  Boys, we done it el-eg-ant!--'deed we did.  I wish _we'd_ a
had the hand-ling of Louis XVI., there wouldn't a been no 'Son of Saint
Louis, as-cend to heaven!' wrote down in _his_ bio-graphy; no, sir, we'd
a whooped him over the _bor-der_--that's what we'd a done with _him_--and
done it just as slick as noth-ing at all, too.  Man the sweeps--man the
sweeps!”

But me and Jim was con-sult-ing--and think-ing.  And after we'd thought a
minute, I says:

“Say it, Jim.”

So he says:

“Well, den, dis is de way it look to me, Huck.  Ef it wuz _him_ dat 'uz
bein' sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he say, 'Go on
en save me, nem-mine 'bout a doc-tor f'r to save dis one?'  Is dat like
Mars Tom Saw-yer?  Would he say dat?  You _bet_ he wouldn't!  _well_,
den, is _Jim_ gy-wne to say it?  No, sah--I doan' budge a step out'n dis
place 'dout a _doc-tor_, not if it's forty year!”

I knowed he was white in-side, and I reckoned he'd say what he did say--so
it was all right now, and I told Tom I was a-go-ing for a doc-tor.
 He raised con-sid-er-able row about it, but me and Jim stuck to it and
wouldn't budge; so he was for crawl-ing out and set-ting the raft loose
him-self; but we wouldn't let him.  Then he give us a piece of his mind,
but it didn't do no good.

So when he sees me get-ting the ca-noe ready, he says:

“Well, then, if you're bound to go, I'll tell you the way to do when you
get to the vil-lage.  Shut the door and blind-fold the doc-tor tight and
fast, and make him swear to be si-lent as the grave, and put a purse
full of gold in his hand, and then take and lead him all around the
back al-leys and every-wheres in the dark, and then fetch him here in the
ca-noe, in a round-about way amongst the is-lands, and search him and take
his chalk away from him, and don't give it back to him till you get him
back to the vil-lage, or else he will chalk this raft so he can find it
again. It's the way they all do.”

So I said I would, and left, and Jim was to hide in the woods when he
see the doc-tor com-ing till he was gone again.




CHAPTER XLI.

THE doc-tor was an old man; a very nice, kind-look-ing old man when I got
him up.  I told him me and my brother was over on Span-ish Is-land hunt-ing
yes-ter-day af-ter-noon, and camped on a piece of a raft we found, and about
mid-night he must a kicked his gun in his dreams, for it went off and
shot him in the leg, and we wanted him to go over there and fix it and
not say noth-ing about it, nor let any-body know, be-cause we wanted to
come home this even-ing and sur-prise the folks.

“Who is your folks?” he says.

“The Phelpses, down yon-der.”

“Oh,” he says.  And after a minute, he says:

“How'd you say he got shot?”

“He had a dream,” I says, “and it shot him.”

“Sin-gu-lar dream,” he says.

So he lit up his lan-tern, and got his saddle-bags, and we star-ted.  But
when he sees the ca-noe he didn't like the look of her--said she was big
enough for one, but didn't look pretty safe for two.  I says:

“Oh, you needn't be afeard, sir, she car-ried the three of us easy
enough.”

“What three?”

“Why, me and Sid, and--and--and _the guns_; that's what I mean.”

“Oh,” he says.

But he put his foot on the gun-nel and rocked her, and shook his head,
and said he reckoned he'd look around for a big-ger one.  But they was
all locked and chained; so he took my ca-noe, and said for me to wait
till he come back, or I could hunt around fur-ther, or maybe I bet-ter
go down home and get them ready for the sur-prise if I wanted to.  But
I said I didn't; so I told him just how to find the raft, and then he
star-ted.

I struck an idea pretty soon.  I says to my-self, spos'n he can't fix
that leg just in three shakes of a sheep's tail, as the say-ing is?
spos'n it takes him three or four days?  What are we go-ing to do?--lay
around there till he lets the cat out of the bag?  No, sir; I know what
_I'll_ do.  I'll wait, and when he comes back if he says he's got to
go any more I'll get down there, too, if I swim; and we'll take and tie
him, and keep him, and shove out down the river; and when Tom's done
with him we'll give him what it's worth, or all we got, and then let him
get ashore.

So then I crept into a lum-ber-pile to get some sleep; and next time I
waked up the sun was away up over my head!  I shot out and went for the
doc-tor's house, but they told me he'd gone away in the night some time
or other, and warn't back yet.  Well, thinks I, that looks power-ful bad
for Tom, and I'll dig out for the is-land right off.  So away I shoved,
and turned the corner, and nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas's
stom-ach! He says:

“Why, _Tom!_  Where you been all this time, you ras-cal?”

“I hain't been nowheres,” I says, “only just hunt-ing for the run-away
nig-ger--me and Sid.”

“Why, where ever did you go?” he says.  “Your aunt's been mighty
un-easy.”

“She needn't,” I says, “be-cause we was all right.  We fol-lowed the men
and the dogs, but they out-run us, and we lost them; but we thought we
heard them on the wa-ter, so we got a ca-noe and took out after them and
crossed over, but couldn't find noth-ing of them; so we cruised along
up-shore till we got kind of tired and beat out; and tied up the ca-noe
and went to sleep, and never waked up till about an hour ago; then we
paddled over here to hear the news, and Sid's at the post-of-fice to see
what he can hear, and I'm a-branch-ing out to get some-thing to eat for
us, and then we're go-ing home.”

So then we went to the post-of-fice to get “Sid”; but just as I
sus-pi-cioned, he warn't there; so the old man he got a let-ter out of the
of-fice, and we waited awhile longer, but Sid didn't come; so the old man
said, come along, let Sid foot it home, or ca-noe it, when he got done
fool-ing around--but we would ride.  I couldn't get him to let me stay
and wait for Sid; and he said there warn't no use in it, and I must come
along, and let Aunt Sally see we was all right.

When we got home Aunt Sally was that glad to see me she laughed and
cried both, and hugged me, and give me one of them lick-ings of hern that
don't amount to shucks, and said she'd serve Sid the same when he come.

And the place was plum full of farm-ers and farm-ers' wives, to din-ner;
and such an-other clack a body never heard.  Old Mrs. Hotch-kiss was the
worst; her tongue was a-go-ing all the time.  She says:

“Well, Sister Phelps, I've ran-sacked that-air cabin over, an' I b'lieve
the nig-ger was crazy.  I says to Sister Dam-rell--didn't I, Sister
Dam-rell?--s'I, he's crazy, s'I--them's the very words I said.  You all
hearn me: he's crazy, s'I; everything shows it, s'I.  Look at that-air
grind-stone, s'I; want to tell _me_'t any cre-tur 't's in his right mind
's a goin' to scrabble all them crazy things onto a grind-stone, s'I?
 Here sich 'n' sich a per-son bus-ted his heart; 'n' here so 'n' so
pegged along for thirty-seven year, 'n' all that--natcherl son o' Louis
some-body, 'n' sich ever-last'n rub-bage.  He's plumb crazy, s'I; it's what
I says in the fust place, it's what I says in the middle, 'n' it's what
I says last 'n' all the time--the nig-ger's crazy--crazy 's Ne-bokood-neezer,
s'I.”

“An' look at that-air lad-der made out'n rags, Sister Hotch-kiss,” says
old Mrs. Dam-rell; “what in the name o' good-ness _could_ he ever want
of--”

“The very words I was a-sayin' no longer ago th'n this minute to Sister
Ut-ter-back, 'n' she'll tell you so her-self.  Sh-she, look at that-air rag
lad-der, sh-she; 'n' s'I, yes, _look_ at it, s'I--what _could_ he a-wanted
of it, s'I.  Sh-she, Sister Hotch-kiss, sh-she--”

“But how in the na-tion'd they ever _git_ that grind-stone _in_ there,
_any-way_? 'n' who dug that-air _hole_? 'n' who--”

“My very _words_, Brer Pen-rod!  I was a-sayin'--pass that-air sas-ser o'
m'lasses, won't ye?--I was a-sayin' to Sister Dun-lap, jist this minute,
how _did_ they git that grind-stone in there, s'I.  Without _help_, mind
you--'thout _help_!  _that's_ wher 'tis.  Don't tell _me_, s'I; there
_wuz_ help, s'I; 'n' ther' wuz a _plenty_ help, too, s'I; ther's ben a
_dozen_ a-helpin' that nig-ger, 'n' I lay I'd skin every last nig-ger on
this place but _I'd_ find out who done it, s'I; 'n' moreover, s'I--”

“A _dozen_ says you!--_forty_ couldn't a done every thing that's been
done. Look at them case-knife saws and things, how te-di-ous they've been
made; look at that bed-leg sawed off with 'm, a week's work for six men;
look at that nig-ger made out'n straw on the bed; and look at--”

“You may _well_ say it, Brer Hightower!  It's jist as I was a-sayin'
to Brer Phelps, his own self.  S'e, what do _y-ou_ think of it, Sister
Hotch-kiss, s'e? Think o' what, Brer Phelps, s'I?  Think o' that bed-leg
sawed off that a way, s'e?  _think_ of it, s'I?  I lay it never sawed
_it-self_ off, s'I--some-body _sawed_ it, s'I; that's my opin-ion, take it
or leave it, it mayn't be no 'count, s'I, but sich as 't is, it's my
opin-ion, s'I, 'n' if any body k'n start a bet-ter one, s'I, let him _do_
it, s'I, that's all.  I says to Sister Dun-lap, s'I--”

“Why, dog my cats, they must a ben a house-full o' nig-gers in there
every night for four weeks to a done all that work, Sister Phelps.  Look
at that shirt--every last inch of it kivered over with secret African
writ'n done with blood!  Must a ben a raft uv 'm at it right along, all
the time, amost.  Why, I'd give two dol-lars to have it read to me; 'n'
as for the nig-gers that wrote it, I 'low I'd take 'n' lash 'm t'll--”

“People to _help_ him, Brother Marples!  Well, I reckon you'd _think_
so if you'd a been in this house for a while back.  Why, they've stole
everything they could lay their hands on--and we a-watch-ing all the time,
mind you. They stole that shirt right off o' the line! and as for that
sheet they made the rag lad-der out of, ther' ain't no telling how
many times they _didn't_ steal that; and flour, and candles, and
can-dle-sticks, and spoons, and the old warm-ing-pan, and most a thou-sand
things that I dis-re-mem-ber now, and my new calico dress; and me and
Silas and my Sid and Tom on the con-stant watch day _and_ night, as I was
a-telling you, and not a one of us could catch hide nor hair nor sight
nor sound of them; and here at the last minute, lo and be-hold you, they
slides right in un-der our noses and fools us, and not only fools _us_
but the In-jun Ter-rit-ory rob-bers too, and ac-tuly gets _away_ with that
nig-ger safe and sound, and that with six-teen men and twenty-two dogs
right on their very heels at that very time!  I tell you, it just bangs
any-thing I ever _heard_ of. Why, _sper-its_ couldn't a done bet-ter and
been no smarter. And I reckon they must a _been_ sper-its--be-cause, _y-ou_
know our dogs, and ther' ain't no bet-ter; well, them dogs never even got
on the _track_ of 'm once!  You ex-plain _that_ to me if you can!--_any_
of you!”

“Well, it does beat--”

“Laws alive, I never--”

“So help me, I wouldn't a be--”

“_House_-thieves as well as--”

“Good-ness-gra-cious-sakes, I'd a ben afeard to live in sich a--”

“'Fraid to _live_!--why, I was that scared I dasn't hardly go to bed, or
get up, or lay down, or _set_ down, Sister Ridge-way.  Why, they'd steal
the very--why, good-ness sakes, you can guess what kind of a fluster I was
in by the time mid-night come last night.  I hope to gra-cious if I warn't
afraid they'd steal some o' the fam-ily!  I was just to that pass I
didn't have no reas-on-ing fac-ulties no more.  It looks fool-ish enough
_now_, in the day-time; but I says to my-self, there's my two poor boys
asleep, 'way up stairs in that lone-some room, and I de-clare to good-ness
I was that un-easy 't I crep' up there and locked 'em in!  I _did_.  And
any-body would. Be-cause, you know, when you get scared that way, and it
keeps run-ning on, and get-ting worse and worse all the time, and your
wits gets to ad-dling, and you get to do-ing all sorts o' wild things,
and by and by you think to your-self, spos'n I was a boy, and was away up
there, and the door ain't locked, and you--” She stopped, look-ing kind
of won-der-ing, and then she turned her head around slow, and when her eye
lit on me--I got up and took a walk.

Says I to my-self, I can ex-plain bet-ter how we come to not be in that
room this morn-ing if I go out to one side and study over it a little.
 So I done it.  But I dasn't go fur, or she'd a sent for me.  And when
it was late in the day the people all went, and then I come in and
told her the noise and shoot-ing waked up me and “Sid,” and the door was
locked, and we wanted to see the fun, so we went down the light-ning-rod,
and both of us got hurt a little, and we didn't never want to try _that_
no more.  And then I went on and told her all what I told Uncle Silas
be-fore; and then she said she'd for-give us, and maybe it was all right
enough any-way, and about what a body might ex-pect of boys, for all boys
was a pretty harum-scarum lot as fur as she could see; and so, as long
as no harm hadn't come of it, she judged she bet-ter put in her time
be-ing grate-ful we was alive and well and she had us still, stead of
fret-ting over what was past and done.  So then she kissed me, and pat-ted
me on the head, and dropped into a kind of a brown study; and pretty
soon jumps up, and says:

“Why, lawsamercy, it's most night, and Sid not come yet!  What _has_
be-come of that boy?”

I see my chance; so I skips up and says:

“I'll run right up to town and get him,” I says.

“No you won't,” she says.  “You'll stay right wher' you are; _one's_
enough to be lost at a time.  If he ain't here to sup-per, your uncle 'll
go.”

Well, he warn't there to sup-per; so right after sup-per uncle went.

He come back about ten a little bit un-easy; hadn't run across Tom's
track. Aunt Sally was a good _deal_ un-easy; but Uncle Silas he said
there warn't no oc-ca-sion to be--boys will be boys, he said, and you'll
see this one turn up in the morn-ing all sound and right.  So she had
to be sat-is-fied.  But she said she'd set up for him a while any-way, and
keep a light burn-ing so he could see it.

And then when I went up to bed she come up with me and fetched her
candle, and tucked me in, and mothered me so good I felt mean, and like
I couldn't look her in the face; and she set down on the bed and talked
with me a long time, and said what a splen-did boy Sid was, and didn't
seem to want to ever stop talk-ing about him; and kept ask-ing me every
now and then if I reckoned he could a got lost, or hurt, or maybe
drown-ded, and might be lay-ing at this minute some-wheres suf-fer-ing or
dead, and she not by him to help him, and so the tears would drip down
si-lent, and I would tell her that Sid was all right, and would be home
in the morn-ing, sure; and she would squeeze my hand, or maybe kiss me,
and tell me to say it again, and keep on say-ing it, be-cause it done her
good, and she was in so much trouble.  And when she was go-ing away she
looked down in my eyes so steady and gentle, and says:

“The door ain't go-ing to be locked, Tom, and there's the win-dow and
the rod; but you'll be good, _won't_ you?  And you won't go?  For _my_
sake.”

Laws knows I _wanted_ to go bad enough to see about Tom, and was all
in-tend-ing to go; but after that I wouldn't a went, not for king-doms.

But she was on my mind and Tom was on my mind, so I slept very rest-less.
And twice I went down the rod away in the night, and slipped around
front, and see her set-ting there by her candle in the win-dow with her
eyes to-wards the road and the tears in them; and I wished I could do
some-thing for her, but I couldn't, only to swear that I wouldn't never
do noth-ing to grieve her any more.  And the third time I waked up at
dawn, and slid down, and she was there yet, and her candle was most out,
and her old gray head was rest-ing on her hand, and she was asleep.




CHAPTER XLII.

THE old man was up-town again be-fore break-fast, but couldn't get no
track of Tom; and both of them set at the table think-ing, and not say-ing
noth-ing, and look-ing mourn-ful, and their cof-fee get-ting cold, and not
eat-ing any-thing. And by and by the old man says:

“Did I give you the let-ter?”

“What let-ter?”

“The one I got yes-ter-day out of the post-of-fice.”

“No, you didn't give me no let-ter.”

“Well, I must a for-got it.”

So he rum-maged his pock-ets, and then went off some-wheres where he had
laid it down, and fetched it, and give it to her.  She says:

“Why, it's from St. Peters-burg--it's from Sis.”

I al-lowed an-other walk would do me good; but I couldn't stir.  But
be-fore she could break it open she dropped it and run--for she see
some-thing. And so did I. It was Tom Saw-yer on a mat-tress; and that old
doc-tor; and Jim, in _her_ calico dress, with his hands tied be-hind him;
and a lot of people.  I hid the let-ter be-hind the first thing that come
handy, and rushed.  She flung her-self at Tom, cry-ing, and says:

“Oh, he's dead, he's dead, I know he's dead!”

And Tom he turned his head a little, and muttered some-thing or other,
which showed he warn't in his right mind; then she flung up her hands,
and says:

“He's alive, thank God!  And that's enough!” and she snatched a kiss of
him, and flew for the house to get the bed ready, and scat-ter-ing or-ders
right and left at the nig-gers and every-body else, as fast as her tongue
could go, every jump of the way.

I fol-lowed the men to see what they was go-ing to do with Jim; and the
old doc-tor and Uncle Silas fol-lowed after Tom into the house.  The men
was very huffy, and some of them wanted to hang Jim for an ex-ample to
all the other nig-gers around there, so they wouldn't be try-ing to run
away like Jim done, and mak-ing such a raft of trouble, and keep-ing a
whole fam-ily scared most to death for days and nights.  But the oth-ers
said, don't do it, it wouldn't an-swer at all; he ain't our nig-ger, and
his owner would turn up and make us pay for him, sure.  So that cooled
them down a little, be-cause the people that's al-ways the most anxious
for to hang a nig-ger that hain't done just right is al-ways the very
ones that ain't the most anxious to pay for him when they've got their
sat-is-fac-tion out of him.

They cussed Jim con-siderble, though, and give him a cuff or two side the
head once in a while, but Jim never said noth-ing, and he never let on to
know me, and they took him to the same cabin, and put his own clothes
on him, and chained him again, and not to no bed-leg this time, but to
a big staple drove into the bot-tom log, and chained his hands, too, and
both legs, and said he warn't to have noth-ing but bread and wa-ter to
eat after this till his owner come, or he was sold at auc-tion be-cause
he didn't come in a cer-tain length of time, and filled up our hole, and
said a couple of farm-ers with guns must stand watch around about the
cabin every night, and a bull-dog tied to the door in the day-time; and
about this time they was through with the job and was taper-ing off with
a kind of gen-erl good-bye cuss-ing, and then the old doc-tor comes and
takes a look, and says:

“Don't be no rougher on him than you're ob-lee-ged to, be-cause he ain't
a bad nig-ger.  When I got to where I found the boy I see I couldn't cut
the bul-let out without some help, and he warn't in no con-di-tion for
me to leave to go and get help; and he got a little worse and a little
worse, and after a long time he went out of his head, and wouldn't let
me come a-nigh him any more, and said if I chalked his raft he'd kill
me, and no end of wild fool-ish-ness like that, and I see I couldn't do
any-thing at all with him; so I says, I got to have _help_ some-how; and
the minute I says it out crawls this nig-ger from some-wheres and says
he'll help, and he done it, too, and done it very well.  Of course I
judged he must be a run-away nig-ger, and there I _was_! and there I had
to stick right straight along all the rest of the day and all night.  It
was a fix, I tell you! I had a couple of pa-tients with the chills, and
of course I'd of liked to run up to town and see them, but I dasn't,
be-cause the nig-ger might get away, and then I'd be to blame; and yet
never a skiff come close enough for me to hail.  So there I had to stick
plumb un-til day-light this morn-ing; and I never see a nig-ger that was a
bet-ter nuss or faith-fuller, and yet he was risk-ing his free-dom to do it,
and was all tired out, too, and I see plain enough he'd been worked
main hard lately.  I liked the nig-ger for that; I tell you, gen-tle-men, a
nig-ger like that is worth a thou-sand dol-lars--and kind treat-ment, too.  I
had everything I needed, and the boy was do-ing as well there as he
would a done at home--bet-ter, maybe, be-cause it was so quiet; but there I
_was_, with both of 'm on my hands, and there I had to stick till about
dawn this morn-ing; then some men in a skiff come by, and as good luck
would have it the nig-ger was set-ting by the pal-let with his head propped
on his knees sound asleep; so I mo-tioned them in quiet, and they slipped
up on him and grabbed him and tied him be-fore he knowed what he was
about, and we never had no trouble. And the boy be-ing in a kind of a
flighty sleep, too, we muffled the oars and hitched the raft on, and
towed her over very nice and quiet, and the nig-ger never made the least
row nor said a word from the start.  He ain't no bad nig-ger, gen-tle-men;
that's what I think about him.”

Some-body says:

“Well, it sounds very good, doc-tor, I'm ob-lee-ged to say.”

Then the oth-ers softened up a little, too, and I was mighty thank-ful
to that old doc-tor for do-ing Jim that good turn; and I was glad it was
ac-cord-ing to my judg-ment of him, too; be-cause I thought he had a good
heart in him and was a good man the first time I see him.  Then they
all agreed that Jim had ac-ted very well, and was de-serving to have some
no-tice took of it, and re-ward.  So every one of them prom-ised, right out
and hearty, that they wouldn't cuss him no more.

Then they come out and locked him up.  I hoped they was go-ing to say he
could have one or two of the chains took off, be-cause they was rot-ten
heavy, or could have meat and greens with his bread and wa-ter; but they
didn't think of it, and I reckoned it warn't best for me to mix in, but
I judged I'd get the doc-tor's yarn to Aunt Sally some-how or other as
soon as I'd got through the break-ers that was lay-ing just ahead of
me--ex-plan-a-tions, I mean, of how I for-got to men-tion about Sid be-ing shot
when I was telling how him and me put in that drat-ted night pad-dling
around hunt-ing the run-away nig-ger.

But I had plenty time.  Aunt Sally she stuck to the sick-room all day
and all night, and every time I see Uncle Silas moon-ing around I dodged
him.

Next morn-ing I heard Tom was a good deal bet-ter, and they said Aunt
Sally was gone to get a nap.  So I slips to the sick-room, and if I
found him awake I reckoned we could put up a yarn for the fam-ily that
would wash. But he was sleep-ing, and sleep-ing very peace-ful, too; and
pale, not fire-faced the way he was when he come.  So I set down and
laid for him to wake.  In about half an hour Aunt Sally comes glid-ing
in, and there I was, up a stump again!  She mo-tioned me to be still, and
set down by me, and be-gun to whis-per, and said we could all be joy-ful
now, be-cause all the symp-toms was first-rate, and he'd been sleep-ing
like that for ever so long, and look-ing bet-ter and peace-fuller all the
time, and ten to one he'd wake up in his right mind.

So we set there watch-ing, and by and by he stirs a bit, and opened his
eyes very nat-ural, and takes a look, and says:

“Hello!--why, I'm at _home_!  How's that?  Where's the raft?”

“It's all right,” I says.

“And _Jim_?”

“The same,” I says, but couldn't say it pretty brash.  But he never
no-ticed, but says:

“Good!  Splen-did!  _Now_ we're all right and safe! Did you tell Aunty?”

I was go-ing to say yes; but she chipped in and says:  “About what, Sid?”

“Why, about the way the whole thing was done.”

“What whole thing?”

“Why, _the_ whole thing.  There ain't but one; how we set the run-away
nig-ger free--me and Tom.”

“Good land!  Set the run--What _is_ the child talk-ing about!  Dear, dear,
out of his head again!”

“_No_, I ain't out of my _head_; I know all what I'm talk-ing about.  We
_did_ set him free--me and Tom.  We laid out to do it, and we _done_ it.
 And we done it el-eg-ant, too.”  He'd got a start, and she never checked
him up, just set and stared and stared, and let him clip along, and
I see it warn't no use for _me_ to put in.  “Why, Aunty, it cost us a
power of work--weeks of it--hours and hours, every night, whilst you was
all asleep. And we had to steal candles, and the sheet, and the shirt,
and your dress, and spoons, and tin plates, and case-knives, and the
warm-ing-pan, and the grind-stone, and flour, and just no end of things,
and you can't think what work it was to make the saws, and pens, and
in-scrip-tions, and one thing or an-other, and you can't think _half_ the
fun it was.  And we had to make up the pic-tures of coffins and things,
and non-nam-ous let-ters from the rob-bers, and get up and down the
light-ning-rod, and dig the hole into the cabin, and made the rope lad-der
and send it in cooked up in a pie, and send in spoons and things to work
with in your ap-ron pocket--”

“Mercy sakes!”

“--and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on, for com-pany for
Jim; and then you kept Tom here so long with the but-ter in his hat that
you come near spil-ing the whole busi-ness, be-cause the men come be-fore
we was out of the cabin, and we had to rush, and they heard us and let
drive at us, and I got my share, and we dodged out of the path and let
them go by, and when the dogs come they warn't in-ter-ested in us, but
went for the most noise, and we got our ca-noe, and made for the
raft, and was all safe, and Jim was a free man, and we done it all by
ourselves, and _wasn't_ it bully, Aunty!”

“Well, I never heard the likes of it in all my born days!  So it was
_y-ou_, you little rapscal-lions, that's been mak-ing all this trouble,
and turned every-body's wits clean in-side out and scared us all most to
death.  I've as good a no-tion as ever I had in my life to take it out
o' you this very minute.  To think, here I've been, night after night,
a--_y-ou_ just get well once, you young scamp, and I lay I'll tan the Old
Harry out o' both o' ye!”

But Tom, he _was_ so proud and joy-ful, he just _couldn't_ hold in,
and his tongue just _went_ it--she a-chip-ping in, and spit-ting fire all
along, and both of them go-ing it at once, like a cat con-ven-tion; and she
says:

“_Well_, you get all the en-joy-ment you can out of it _now_, for mind I
tell you if I catch you med-dling with him again--”

“Med-dling with _who_?”  Tom says, drop-ping his smile and look-ing
sur-prised.

“With _who_?  Why, the run-away nig-ger, of course.  Who'd you reckon?”

Tom looks at me very grave, and says:

“Tom, didn't you just tell me he was all right?  Hasn't he got away?”

“_Him_?” says Aunt Sally; “the run-away nig-ger?  'Deed he hasn't.
 They've got him back, safe and sound, and he's in that cabin again,
on bread and wa-ter, and loaded down with chains, till he's claimed or
sold!”

Tom rose square up in bed, with his eye hot, and his nos-trils open-ing
and shut-ting like gills, and sings out to me:

“They hain't no _right_ to shut him up!  SHOVE!--and don't you lose a
minute.  Turn him loose! he ain't no slave; he's as free as any cre-tur
that walks this earth!”

“What _does_ the child mean?”

“I mean every word I _say_, Aunt Sally, and if some-body don't go, _I'll_
go. I've knowed him all his life, and so has Tom, there.  Old Miss
Wat-son died two months ago, and she was ashamed she ever was go-ing to
sell him down the river, and _said_ so; and she set him free in her
will.”

“Then what on earth did _y-ou_ want to set him free for, see-ing he was
already free?”

“Well, that _is_ a ques-tion, I must say; and just like wo-men!  Why,
I wanted the _ad-ven-ture_ of it; and I'd a waded neck-deep in blood
to--good-ness alive, _Aunt Polly!_”

If she warn't stand-ing right there, just in-side the door, look-ing as
sweet and con-ten-ted as an an-gel half full of pie, I wish I may never!

Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off of her, and
cried over her, and I found a good enough place for me un-der the bed,
for it was get-ting pretty sul-try for us, seemed to me.  And I peeped
out, and in a little while Tom's Aunt Polly shook her-self loose and
stood there look-ing across at Tom over her spec-tacles--kind of grind-ing
him into the earth, you know.  And then she says:

“Yes, you _bet-ter_ turn y'r head away--I would if I was you, Tom.”

“Oh, deary me!” says Aunt Sally; “_Is_ he changed so?  Why, that ain't
_Tom_, it's Sid; Tom's--Tom's--why, where is Tom?  He was here a minute
ago.”

“You mean where's Huck _Finn_--that's what you mean!  I reckon I hain't
raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years not to know him when I
_see_ him.  That _would_ be a pretty howdy-do. Come out from un-der that
bed, Huck Finn.”

So I done it.  But not feel-ing brash.

Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-up-est-look-ing per-sons I ever
see--ex-cept one, and that was Uncle Silas, when he come in and they told
it all to him.  It kind of made him drunk, as you may say, and he didn't
know noth-ing at all the rest of the day, and preached a prayer-meet-ing
ser-mon that night that gave him a rat-tling ru-pu-ta-tion, be-cause the
old-est man in the world couldn't a un-der-stood it.  So Tom's Aunt Polly,
she told all about who I was, and what; and I had to up and tell how
I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom
Saw-yer--she chipped in and says, “Oh, go on and call me Aunt Sally, I'm
used to it now, and 'tain't no need to change”--that when Aunt Sally took
me for Tom Saw-yer I had to stand it--there warn't no other way, and
I knowed he wouldn't mind, be-cause it would be nuts for him, be-ing
a mys-tery, and he'd make an ad-ven-ture out of it, and be per-fectly
sat-is-fied.  And so it turned out, and he let on to be Sid, and made
things as soft as he could for me.

And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Wat-son set-ting
Jim free in her will; and so, sure enough, Tom Saw-yer had gone and took
all that trouble and bother to set a free nig-ger free! and I couldn't
ever un-der-stand be-fore, un-til that minute and that talk, how he _could_
help a body set a nig-ger free with his bring-ing-up.

Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom and
_Sid_ had come all right and safe, she says to her-self:

“Look at that, now!  I might have ex-pec-ted it, let-ting him go off that
way without any-body to watch him.  So now I got to go and trapse all
the way down the river, el-even hun-dred mile, and find out what that
creetur's up to _this_ time, as long as I couldn't seem to get any
an-swer out of you about it.”

“Why, I never heard noth-ing from you,” says Aunt Sally.

“Well, I won-der!  Why, I wrote you twice to ask you what you could mean
by Sid be-ing here.”

“Well, I never got 'em, Sis.”

Aunt Polly she turns around slow and severe, and says:

“You, Tom!”

“Well--_what_?” he says, kind of pet-tish.

“Don't you what _me_, you im-pudent thing--hand out them let-ters.”

“What let-ters?”

“_Them_ let-ters.  I be bound, if I have to take a-holt of you I'll--”

“They're in the trunk.  There, now.  And they're just the same as they
was when I got them out of the of-fice.  I hain't looked into them, I
hain't touched them.  But I knowed they'd make trouble, and I thought if
you warn't in no hurry, I'd--”

“Well, you _do_ need skin-ning, there ain't no mis-take about it.  And I
wrote an-other one to tell you I was com-ing; and I s'pose he--”

“No, it come yes-ter-day; I hain't read it yet, but _it's_ all right, I've
got that one.”

I wanted to of-fer to bet two dol-lars she hadn't, but I reckoned maybe it
was just as safe to not to.  So I never said noth-ing.




CHAPTER THE LAST

THE first time I catched Tom private I asked him what was his idea, time
of the eva-sion?--what it was he'd planned to do if the eva-sion worked all
right and he man-aged to set a nig-ger free that was already free be-fore?
And he said, what he had planned in his head from the start, if we got
Jim out all safe, was for us to run him down the river on the raft, and
have ad-ven-tures plumb to the mouth of the river, and then tell him about
his be-ing free, and take him back up home on a steam-boat, in style,
and pay him for his lost time, and write word ahead and get out all
the nig-gers around, and have them waltz him into town with a torch-light
pro-ces-sion and a brass-band, and then he would be a hero, and so would
we.  But I reckoned it was about as well the way it was.

We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly and Uncle
Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped the doc-tor nurse Tom,
they made a heap of fuss over him, and fixed him up prime, and give him
all he wanted to eat, and a good time, and noth-ing to do.  And we had
him up to the sick-room, and had a high talk; and Tom give Jim forty
dol-lars for be-ing pris-oner for us so pa-tient, and do-ing it up so good,
and Jim was pleased most to death, and bus-ted out, and says:

“Dah, now, Huck, what I tell you?--what I tell you up dah on Jack-son
is-lan'?  I _tole_ you I got a hairy breas', en what's de sign un it; en
I _tole_ you I ben rich wunst, en gwine-ter to be rich _a-gin_; en it's
come true; en heah she is!  _dah_, now! doan' talk to _me_--signs is
_signs_, mine I tell you; en I knowed jis' 's well 'at I 'uz gwine-ter be
rich agin as I's a-stan-nin' heah dis minute!”

And then Tom he talked along and talked along, and says, le's all three
slide out of here one of these nights and get an out-fit, and go for
howl-ing ad-ven-tures amongst the In-juns, over in the Ter-rit-ory, for a
couple of weeks or two; and I says, all right, that suits me, but I
ain't got no money for to buy the out-fit, and I reckon I couldn't get
none from home, be-cause it's likely pap's been back be-fore now, and got
it all away from Judge Thatcher and drunk it up.

“No, he hain't,” Tom says; “it's all there yet--six thou-sand dol-lars
and more; and your pap hain't ever been back since.  Hadn't when I come
away, any-how.”

Jim says, kind of sol-emn:

“He ain't a-comin' back no mo', Huck.”

I says:

“Why, Jim?”

“Nem-mine why, Huck--but he ain't comin' back no mo.”

But I kept at him; so at last he says:

“Doan' you 'mem-ber de house dat was float'n down de river, en dey wuz a
man in dah, kivered up, en I went in en un-kivered him and didn' let you
come in?  Well, den, you kin git yo' money when you wants it, kase dat
wuz him.”

Tom's most well now, and got his bul-let around his neck on a watch-guard
for a watch, and is al-ways see-ing what time it is, and so there ain't
noth-ing more to write about, and I am rot-ten glad of it, be-cause if I'd
a knowed what a trouble it was to make a book I wouldn't a tackled it,
and ain't a-go-ing to no more.  But I reckon I got to light out for the
Ter-rit-ory ahead of the rest, be-cause Aunt Sally she's go-ing to ad-opt me
and siv-il-ize me, and I can't stand it.  I been there be-fore.

THE END. YOURS TRULY, _HUCK FINN_.
