ALICE’S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND

Lewis Car-roll

THE MILLENNIUM FULCRUM EDITION 3.0




CHAPTER I. Down the Rab-bit-Hole

Alice was be-gin-ning to get very tired of sit-ting by her sis-ter on the
bank, and of hav-ing noth-ing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the
book her sis-ter was read-ing, but it had no pic-tures or con-ver-sa-tions in
it, ‘and what is the use of a book,’ thought Alice ‘without pic-tures or
con-ver-sa-tions?’

So she was con-sid-er-ing in her own mind (as well as she could, for the
hot day made her feel very sleepy and stu-pid), whether the pleas-ure
of mak-ing a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of get-ting up and
pick-ing the dais-ies, when sud-denly a White Rab-bit with pink eyes ran
close by her.

There was noth-ing so VERY re-mark-able in that; nor did Alice think it so
VERY much out of the way to hear the Rab-bit say to it-self, ‘Oh dear!
Oh dear! I shall be late!’ (when she thought it over af-ter-wards, it
oc-curred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time
it all seemed quite nat-ural); but when the Rab-bit ac-tu-ally TOOK A WATCH
OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-POCKET, and looked at it, and then hur-ried on,
Alice star-ted to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had
never be-fore seen a rab-bit with either a waist-coat-pocket, or a watch
to take out of it, and burn-ing with curi-os-ity, she ran across the field
after it, and for-tu-nately was just in time to see it pop down a large
rab-bit-hole un-der the hedge.

In an-other mo-ment down went Alice after it, never once con-sid-er-ing how
in the world she was to get out again.

The rab-bit-hole went straight on like a tun-nel for some way, and then
dipped sud-denly down, so sud-denly that Alice had not a mo-ment to think
about stop-ping her-self be-fore she found her-self fall-ing down a very deep
well.

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to won-der what was
go-ing to hap-pen next. First, she tried to look down and make out what
she was com-ing to, but it was too dark to see any-thing; then she
looked at the sides of the well, and no-ticed that they were filled with
cup-boards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and pic-tures
hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as
she passed; it was la-belled ‘ORANGE MARMALADE’, but to her great
dis-ap-point-ment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear
of killing some-body, so man-aged to put it into one of the cup-boards as
she fell past it.

‘Well!’ thought Alice to her-self, ‘after such a fall as this, I shall
think noth-ing of tum-bling down stairs! How brave they’ll all think me at
home! Why, I wouldn’t say any-thing about it, even if I fell off the top
of the house!’ (Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall NEVER come to an end! ‘I won-der how
many miles I’ve fallen by this time?’ she said aloud. ‘I must be get-ting
some-where near the centre of the earth. Let me see: that would be four
thou-sand miles down, I think--’ (for, you see, Alice had learnt sev-eral
things of this sort in her les-sons in the school-room, and though this
was not a VERY good op-por-tun-ity for show-ing off her know-ledge, as there
was no one to listen to her, still it was good prac-tice to say it over)
‘--yes, that’s about the right dis-tance--but then I won-der what Lat-it-ude
or Lon-git-ude I’ve got to?’ (Alice had no idea what Lat-it-ude was, or
Lon-git-ude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)

Presently she began again. ‘I won-der if I shall fall right THROUGH the
earth! How funny it’ll seem to come out among the people that walk with
their heads down-ward! The An-ti-path-ies, I think--’ (she was rather glad
there WAS no one listen-ing, this time, as it didn’t sound at all the
right word) ‘--but I shall have to ask them what the name of the coun-try
is, you know. Please, Ma’am, is this New Zea-l-and or Aus-tralia?’ (and
she tried to curt-sey as she spoke--fancy CURTSEYING as you’re fall-ing
through the air! Do you think you could man-age it?) ‘And what an
ig-nor-ant little girl she’ll think me for ask-ing! No, it’ll never do to
ask: per-haps I shall see it writ-ten up some-where.’

Down, down, down. There was noth-ing else to do, so Alice soon began
talk-ing again. ‘Di-nah’ll miss me very much to-night, I should think!’
(Di-nah was the cat.) ‘I hope they’ll re-mem-ber her sau-cer of milk at
tea-time. Di-nah my dear! I wish you were down here with me! There are no
mice in the air, I’m afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that’s very
like a mouse, you know. But do cats eat bats, I won-der?’ And here Alice
began to get rather sleepy, and went on say-ing to her-self, in a dreamy
sort of way, ‘Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?’ and some-times, ‘Do
bats eat cats?’ for, you see, as she couldn’t an-swer either ques-tion,
it didn’t much mat-ter which way she put it. She felt that she was doz-ing
off, and had just be-gun to dream that she was walk-ing hand in hand with
Di-nah, and say-ing to her very earn-estly, ‘Now, Di-nah, tell me the truth:
did you ever eat a bat?’ when sud-denly, thump! thump! down she came upon
a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a mo-ment:
she looked up, but it was all dark over-head; be-fore her was an-other
long pas-sage, and the White Rab-bit was still in sight, hur-ry-ing down it.
There was not a mo-ment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and
was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, ‘Oh my ears
and whiskers, how late it’s get-ting!’ She was close be-hind it when she
turned the corner, but the Rab-bit was no longer to be seen: she found
her-self in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging
from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when
Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, try-ing every
door, she walked sadly down the middle, won-der-ing how she was ever to
get out again.

Sud-denly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid
glass; there was noth-ing on it ex-cept a tiny golden key, and Alice’s
first thought was that it might be-long to one of the doors of the hall;
but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small,
but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second
time round, she came upon a low cur-tain she had not no-ticed be-fore, and
be-hind it was a little door about fif-teen inches high: she tried the
little golden key in the lock, and to her great de-light it fit-ted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small pas-sage, not
much lar-ger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the pas-sage
into the love-li-est garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of
that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and
those cool foun-tains, but she could not even get her head through the
door-way; ‘and even if my head would go through,’ thought poor Alice, ‘it
would be of very little use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could
shut up like a tele-scope! I think I could, if I only knew how to be-gin.’
For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately,
that Alice had be-gun to think that very few things in-deed were really
im-possible.

There seemed to be no use in wait-ing by the little door, so she went
back to the table, half hop-ing she might find an-other key on it, or at
any rate a book of rules for shut-ting people up like tele-scopes: this
time she found a little bottle on it, [‘which cer-tainly was not here
be-fore,’ said Alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a pa-per
la-bel, with the words ‘DRINK ME’ beau-ti-fully prin-ted on it in large
let-ters.

It was all very well to say ‘Drink me,’ but the wise little Alice was
not go-ing to do THAT in a hurry. ‘No, I’ll look first,’ she said, ‘and
see whether it’s marked “poison” or not’; for she had read sev-eral nice
little his-tor-ies about chil-dren who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild
beasts and other un-pleas-ant things, all be-cause they WOULD not re-mem-ber
the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot
poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your
fin-ger VERY deeply with a knife, it usu-ally bleeds; and she had never
for-got-ten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked ‘poison,’ it is
al-most cer-tain to dis-agree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was NOT marked ‘poison,’ so Alice ven-tured to taste
it, and find-ing it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed fla-vour
of cherry-tart, cus-tard, pine-apple, roast tur-key, tof-fee, and hot
buttered toast,) she very soon fin-ished it off.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘What a curi-ous feel-ing!’ said Alice; ‘I must be shut-ting up like a
tele-scope.’

And so it was in-deed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for go-ing
through the little door into that lovely garden. First, how-ever, she
waited for a few minutes to see if she was go-ing to shrink any fur-ther:
she felt a little nervous about this; ‘for it might end, you know,’ said
Alice to her-self, ‘in my go-ing out al-to-gether, like a candle. I won-der
what I should be like then?’ And she tried to fancy what the flame of a
candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not re-mem-ber
ever hav-ing seen such a thing.

After a while, find-ing that noth-ing more happened, she de-cided on go-ing
into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! when she got to the
door, she found she had for-got-ten the little golden key, and when she
went back to the table for it, she found she could not pos-sibly reach
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her
best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slip-pery;
and when she had tired her-self out with try-ing, the poor little thing
sat down and cried.

‘Come, there’s no use in cry-ing like that!’ said Alice to her-self,
rather sharply; ‘I ad-vise you to leave off this minute!’ She gen-er-ally
gave her-self very good ad-vice, (though she very sel-dom fol-lowed it),
and some-times she scol-ded her-self so severely as to bring tears into
her eyes; and once she re-membered try-ing to box her own ears for hav-ing
cheated her-self in a game of cro-quet she was play-ing against her-self,
for this curi-ous child was very fond of pre-tend-ing to be two people.
‘But it’s no use now,’ thought poor Alice, ‘to pre-tend to be two people!
Why, there’s hardly enough of me left to make ONE re-spect-able per-son!’

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was ly-ing un-der the table:
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words
‘EAT ME’ were beau-ti-fully marked in cur-rants. ‘Well, I’ll eat it,’ said
Alice, ‘and if it makes me grow lar-ger, I can reach the key; and if it
makes me grow smal-ler, I can creep un-der the door; so either way I’ll
get into the garden, and I don’t care which hap-pens!’

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to her-self, ‘Which way? Which
way?’, hold-ing her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was
grow-ing, and she was quite sur-prised to find that she re-mained the same
size: to be sure, this gen-er-ally hap-pens when one eats cake, but Alice
had got so much into the way of ex-pect-ing noth-ing but out-of-the-way
things to hap-pen, that it seemed quite dull and stu-pid for life to go on
in the com-mon way.

So she set to work, and very soon fin-ished off the cake.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *




CHAPTER II. The Pool of Tears

‘Curi-ouser and curi-ouser!’ cried Alice (she was so much sur-prised, that
for the mo-ment she quite for-got how to speak good Eng-lish); ‘now I’m
open-ing out like the largest tele-scope that ever was! Good-bye, feet!’
(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be al-most out of
sight, they were get-ting so far off). ‘Oh, my poor little feet, I won-der
who will put on your shoes and stock-ings for you now, dears? I’m sure
_I_ shan’t be able! I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble
my-self about you: you must man-age the best way you can;--but I must be
kind to them,’ thought Alice, ‘or per-haps they won’t walk the way I want
to go! Let me see: I’ll give them a new pair of boots every Christ-mas.’

And she went on plan-ning to her-self how she would man-age it. ‘They must
go by the car-rier,’ she thought; ‘and how funny it’ll seem, send-ing
presents to one’s own feet! And how odd the dir-ec-tions will look!

     ALICE’S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
       HEARTHRUG,
         NEAR THE FENDER,
           (WITH ALICE’S LOVE).

Oh dear, what non-sense I’m talk-ing!’

Just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was
now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden
key and hur-ried off to the garden door.

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, ly-ing down on one side, to
look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more
hope-less than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.

‘You ought to be ashamed of your-self,’ said Alice, ‘a great girl like
you,’ (she might well say this), ‘to go on cry-ing in this way! Stop this
mo-ment, I tell you!’ But she went on all the same, shed-ding gal-lons of
tears, un-til there was a large pool all round her, about four inches
deep and reach-ing half down the hall.

After a time she heard a little pat-ter-ing of feet in the dis-tance, and
she hast-ily dried her eyes to see what was com-ing. It was the White
Rab-bit re-turn-ing, splen-didly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in
one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trot-ting along in a great
hurry, mut-ter-ing to him-self as he came, ‘Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess!
Oh! won’t she be sav-age if I’ve kept her wait-ing!’ Alice felt so
des-per-ate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Rab-bit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, ‘If you please, sir--’
The Rab-bit star-ted vi-ol-ently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan,
and skur-ried away into the dark-ness as hard as he could go.

Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she
kept fan-ning her-self all the time she went on talk-ing: ‘Dear, dear! How
queer everything is to-day! And yes-ter-day things went on just as usual.
I won-der if I’ve been changed in the night? Let me think: was I the
same when I got up this morn-ing? I al-most think I can re-mem-ber feel-ing a
little dif-fer-ent. But if I’m not the same, the next ques-tion is, Who
in the world am I? Ah, THAT’S the great puzzle!’ And she began think-ing
over all the chil-dren she knew that were of the same age as her-self, to
see if she could have been changed for any of them.

‘I’m sure I’m not Ada,’ she said, ‘for her hair goes in such long
ring-lets, and mine doesn’t go in ring-lets at all; and I’m sure I can’t
be Ma-bel, for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh! she knows such a
very little! Besides, SHE’S she, and I’m I, and--oh dear, how puzz-ling
it all is! I’ll try if I know all the things I used to know. Let me
see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thir-teen, and
four times seven is--oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at that rate!
However, the Mul-ti-plic-a-tion Table doesn’t sig-nify: let’s try Geo-graphy.
Lon-don is the cap-ital of Paris, and Paris is the cap-ital of Rome, and
Rome--no, THAT’S all wrong, I’m cer-tain! I must have been changed for
Ma-bel! I’ll try and say “How doth the little--“’ and she crossed her
hands on her lap as if she were say-ing les-sons, and began to re-peat it,
but her voice soun-ded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the
same as they used to do:--

     ‘How doth the little cro-codile
      Im-prove his shin-ing tail,
     And pour the wa-ters of the Nile
      On every golden scale!

     ‘How cheer-fully he seems to grin,
      How neatly spread his claws,
     And wel-come little fishes in
      With gently smil-ing jaws!’

‘I’m sure those are not the right words,’ said poor Alice, and her eyes
filled with tears again as she went on, ‘I must be Ma-bel after all, and
I shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to
no toys to play with, and oh! ever so many les-sons to learn! No, I’ve
made up my mind about it; if I’m Ma-bel, I’ll stay down here! It’ll be no
use their put-ting their heads down and say-ing “Come up again, dear!” I
shall only look up and say “Who am I then? Tell me that first, and then,
if I like be-ing that per-son, I’ll come up: if not, I’ll stay down here
till I’m some-body else”--but, oh dear!’ cried Alice, with a sud-den burst
of tears, ‘I do wish they WOULD put their heads down! I am so VERY tired
of be-ing all alone here!’

As she said this she looked down at her hands, and was sur-prised to see
that she had put on one of the Rab-bit’s little white kid gloves while
she was talk-ing. ‘How CAN I have done that?’ she thought. ‘I must
be grow-ing small again.’ She got up and went to the table to meas-ure
her-self by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now
about two feet high, and was go-ing on shrink-ing rap-idly: she soon found
out that the cause of this was the fan she was hold-ing, and she dropped
it hast-ily, just in time to avoid shrink-ing away al-to-gether.

‘That WAS a nar-row es-cape!’ said Alice, a good deal frightened at the
sud-den change, but very glad to find her-self still in ex-ist-ence; ‘and
now for the garden!’ and she ran with all speed back to the little door:
but, alas! the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was
ly-ing on the glass table as be-fore, ‘and things are worse than ever,’
thought the poor child, ‘for I never was so small as this be-fore, never!
And I de-clare it’s too bad, that it is!’

As she said these words her foot slipped, and in an-other mo-ment, splash!
she was up to her chin in salt wa-ter. Her first idea was that she
had some-how fallen into the sea, ‘and in that case I can go back by
rail-way,’ she said to her-self. (Alice had been to the sea-side once in
her life, and had come to the gen-eral con-clu-sion, that wherever you go
to on the Eng-lish coast you find a num-ber of bathing ma-chines in the
sea, some chil-dren dig-ging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row
of lodging houses, and be-hind them a rail-way sta-tion.) However, she soon
made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she
was nine feet high.

‘I wish I hadn’t cried so much!’ said Alice, as she swam about, try-ing
to find her way out. ‘I shall be pun-ished for it now, I sup-pose, by
be-ing drowned in my own tears! That WILL be a queer thing, to be sure!
However, everything is queer to-day.’

Just then she heard some-thing splash-ing about in the pool a little way
off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought
it must be a wal-rus or hip-po-pot-amus, but then she re-membered how small
she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had
slipped in like her-self.

‘Would it be of any use, now,’ thought Alice, ‘to speak to this mouse?
Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think very
likely it can talk: at any rate, there’s no harm in try-ing.’ So she
began: ‘O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired
of swim-ming about here, O Mouse!’ (Alice thought this must be the right
way of speak-ing to a mouse: she had never done such a thing be-fore, but
she re-membered hav-ing seen in her brother’s Latin Gram-mar, ‘A mouse--of
a mouse--to a mouse--a mouse--O mouse!’) The Mouse looked at her rather
in-quis-it-ively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes,
but it said noth-ing.

‘Per-haps it doesn’t un-der-stand Eng-lish,’ thought Alice; ‘I daresay it’s
a French mouse, come over with Wil-liam the Con-queror.’ (For, with all
her know-ledge of his-tory, Alice had no very clear no-tion how long ago
any-thing had happened.) So she began again: ‘Ou est ma chatte?’ which
was the first sen-tence in her French les-son-book. The Mouse gave a
sud-den leap out of the wa-ter, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.
‘Oh, I beg your par-don!’ cried Alice hast-ily, afraid that she had hurt
the poor an-imal’s feel-ings. ‘I quite for-got you didn’t like cats.’

‘Not like cats!’ cried the Mouse, in a shrill, pas-sion-ate voice. ‘Would
YOU like cats if you were me?’

‘Well, per-haps not,’ said Alice in a sooth-ing tone: ‘don’t be angry
about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Di-nah: I think you’d
take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She is such a dear quiet
thing,’ Alice went on, half to her-self, as she swam lazily about in the
pool, ‘and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, lick-ing her paws and
wash-ing her face--and she is such a nice soft thing to nurse--and she’s
such a cap-ital one for catch-ing mice--oh, I beg your par-don!’ cried
Alice again, for this time the Mouse was brist-ling all over, and she
felt cer-tain it must be really of-fen-ded. ‘We won’t talk about her any
more if you’d rather not.’

‘We in-deed!’ cried the Mouse, who was trem-bling down to the end of his
tail. ‘As if I would talk on such a sub-ject! Our fam-ily al-ways HATED
cats: nasty, low, vul-gar things! Don’t let me hear the name again!’

‘I won’t in-deed!’ said Alice, in a great hurry to change the sub-ject of
con-ver-sa-tion. ‘Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs?’ The Mouse did not
an-swer, so Alice went on eagerly: ‘There is such a nice little dog near
our house I should like to show you! A little bright-eyed ter-rier, you
know, with oh, such long curly brown hair! And it’ll fetch things when
you throw them, and it’ll sit up and beg for its din-ner, and all sorts
of things--I can’t re-mem-ber half of them--and it be-longs to a farmer,
you know, and he says it’s so use-ful, it’s worth a hun-dred pounds! He
says it kills all the rats and--oh dear!’ cried Alice in a sor-row-ful
tone, ‘I’m afraid I’ve of-fen-ded it again!’ For the Mouse was swim-ming
away from her as hard as it could go, and mak-ing quite a com-mo-tion in
the pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, ‘Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we
won’t talk about cats or dogs either, if you don’t like them!’ When the
Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its
face was quite pale (with pas-sion, Alice thought), and it said in a low
trem-bling voice, ‘Let us get to the shore, and then I’ll tell you my
his-tory, and you’ll un-der-stand why it is I hate cats and dogs.’

It was high time to go, for the pool was get-ting quite crowded with the
birds and an-im-als that had fallen into it: there were a Duck and a Dodo,
a Lory and an Eag-let, and sev-eral other curi-ous creatures. Alice led the
way, and the whole party swam to the shore.




CHAPTER III. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale

They were in-deed a queer-look-ing party that as-sembled on the bank--the
birds with draggled feath-ers, the an-im-als with their fur cling-ing close
to them, and all drip-ping wet, cross, and un-com-fort-able.

The first ques-tion of course was, how to get dry again: they had a
con-sulta-tion about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite nat-ural
to Alice to find her-self talk-ing fa-mil-iarly with them, as if she had
known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a long ar-gu-ment with the
Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, ‘I am older than
you, and must know bet-ter’; and this Alice would not al-low without
know-ing how old it was, and, as the Lory pos-it-ively re-fused to tell its
age, there was no more to be said.

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a per-son of au-thor-ity among them,
called out, ‘Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! I’LL soon make you
dry enough!’ They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse
in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt
sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.

‘Ahem!’ said the Mouse with an im-port-ant air, ‘are you all ready? This
is the driest thing I know. Si-lence all round, if you please! “Wil-liam
the Con-queror, whose cause was fa-voured by the pope, was soon sub-mit-ted
to by the Eng-lish, who wanted lead-ers, and had been of late much
ac-cus-tomed to usurp-a-tion and con-quest. Ed-win and Mor-car, the earls of
Mer-cia and Northum-bria--“’

‘Ugh!’ said the Lory, with a shiver.

‘I beg your par-don!’ said the Mouse, frown-ing, but very po-litely: ‘Did
you speak?’

‘Not I!’ said the Lory hast-ily.

‘I thought you did,’ said the Mouse. ‘--I pro-ceed. “Ed-win and Mor-car,
the earls of Mer-cia and Northum-bria, de-clared for him: and even Stig-and,
the pat-ri-otic arch-bishop of Can-ter-bury, found it ad-vis-able--“’

‘Found WHAT?’ said the Duck.

‘Found IT,’ the Mouse replied rather crossly: ‘of course you know what
“it” means.’

‘I know what “it” means well enough, when I find a thing,’ said the
Duck: ‘it’s gen-er-ally a frog or a worm. The ques-tion is, what did the
arch-bishop find?’

The Mouse did not no-tice this ques-tion, but hur-riedly went on, ‘“--found
it ad-vis-able to go with Edgar Ath-el-ing to meet Wil-liam and of-fer him the
crown. Wil-liam’s con-duct at first was mod-er-ate. But the in-solence of his
Nor-mans--” How are you get-ting on now, my dear?’ it con-tin-ued, turn-ing
to Alice as it spoke.

‘As wet as ever,’ said Alice in a mel-an-choly tone: ‘it doesn’t seem to
dry me at all.’

‘In that case,’ said the Dodo sol-emnly, rising to its feet, ‘I move
that the meet-ing ad-journ, for the im-me-di-ate ad-op-tion of more en-er-getic
rem-ed-ies--’

‘Speak Eng-lish!’ said the Eag-let. ‘I don’t know the mean-ing of half
those long words, and, what’s more, I don’t be-lieve you do either!’ And
the Eag-let bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds
tittered aud-ibly.

‘What I was go-ing to say,’ said the Dodo in an of-fen-ded tone, ‘was, that
the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.’

‘What IS a Caucus-race?’ said Alice; not that she wanted much to know,
but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY ought to speak,
and no one else seemed in-clined to say any-thing.

‘Why,’ said the Dodo, ‘the best way to ex-plain it is to do it.’ (And, as
you might like to try the thing your-self, some winter day, I will tell
you how the Dodo man-aged it.)

First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, [‘the ex-act
shape doesn’t mat-ter,’ it said,) and then all the party were placed
along the course, here and there. There was no ‘One, two, three, and
away,’ but they began run-ning when they liked, and left off when they
liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over. However,
when they had been run-ning half an hour or so, and were quite dry again,
the Dodo sud-denly called out ‘The race is over!’ and they all crowded
round it, pant-ing, and ask-ing, ‘But who has won?’

This ques-tion the Dodo could not an-swer without a great deal of thought,
and it sat for a long time with one fin-ger pressed upon its fore-head
(the po-s-i-tion in which you usu-ally see Shakespeare, in the pic-tures
of him), while the rest waited in si-lence. At last the Dodo said,
‘EVERYBODY has won, and all must have prizes.’

‘But who is to give the prizes?’ quite a chorus of voices asked.

‘Why, SHE, of course,’ said the Dodo, point-ing to Alice with one fin-ger;
and the whole party at once crowded round her, call-ing out in a con-fused
way, ‘Pr-izes! Pr-izes!’

Alice had no idea what to do, and in des-pair she put her hand in her
pocket, and pulled out a box of com-fits, (luck-ily the salt wa-ter had
not got into it), and handed them round as prizes. There was ex-actly one
a-piece all round.

‘But she must have a prize her-self, you know,’ said the Mouse.

‘Of course,’ the Dodo replied very gravely. ‘What else have you got in
your pocket?’ he went on, turn-ing to Alice.

‘Only a thimble,’ said Alice sadly.

‘Hand it over here,’ said the Dodo.

Then they all crowded round her once more, while the Dodo sol-emnly
presen-ted the thimble, say-ing ‘We beg your ac-cept-ance of this el-eg-ant
thimble’; and, when it had fin-ished this short speech, they all cheered.

Alice thought the whole thing very ab-surd, but they all looked so grave
that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of any-thing
to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, look-ing as sol-emn as she
could.

The next thing was to eat the com-fits: this caused some noise and
con-fu-sion, as the large birds com-plained that they could not taste
theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be pat-ted on the back.
However, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and
begged the Mouse to tell them some-thing more.

‘You prom-ised to tell me your his-tory, you know,’ said Alice, ‘and why
it is you hate--C and D,’ she ad-ded in a whis-per, half afraid that it
would be of-fen-ded again.

‘Mine is a long and a sad tale!’ said the Mouse, turn-ing to Alice, and
sigh-ing.

‘It IS a long tail, cer-tainly,’ said Alice, look-ing down with won-der at
the Mouse’s tail; ‘but why do you call it sad?’ And she kept on puzz-ling
about it while the Mouse was speak-ing, so that her idea of the tale was
some-thing like this:--

         ‘Fury said to a
         mouse, That he
        met in the
       house,
     “Let us
      both go to
       law: I will
        pro-sec-ute
         YOU.--Come,
           I’ll take no
           denial; We
          must have a
        trial: For
      really this
     morn-ing I’ve
    noth-ing
    to do.”
      Said the
      mouse to the
       cur, “Such
        a trial,
         dear Sir,
            With
          no jury
        or judge,
       would be
      wast-ing
      our
      breath.”
        “I’ll be
        judge, I’ll
         be jury,”
             Said
         cun-ning
          old Fury:
          “I’ll
          try the
            whole
            cause,
              and
           con-demn
           you
          to
           death.”’


‘You are not at-tend-ing!’ said the Mouse to Alice severely. ‘What are you
think-ing of?’

‘I beg your par-don,’ said Alice very humbly: ‘you had got to the fifth
bend, I think?’

‘I had NOT!’ cried the Mouse, sharply and very an-grily.

‘A knot!’ said Alice, al-ways ready to make her-self use-ful, and look-ing
anxiously about her. ‘Oh, do let me help to undo it!’

‘I shall do noth-ing of the sort,’ said the Mouse, get-ting up and walk-ing
away. ‘You in-sult me by talk-ing such non-sense!’

‘I didn’t mean it!’ pleaded poor Alice. ‘But you’re so eas-ily of-fen-ded,
you know!’

The Mouse only growled in reply.

‘Please come back and fin-ish your story!’ Alice called after it; and the
oth-ers all joined in chorus, ‘Yes, please do!’ but the Mouse only shook
its head im-pa-tiently, and walked a little quicker.

‘What a pity it wouldn’t stay!’ sighed the Lory, as soon as it was quite
out of sight; and an old Crab took the op-por-tun-ity of say-ing to her
daugh-ter ‘Ah, my dear! Let this be a les-son to you never to lose
YOUR tem-per!’ ‘Hold your tongue, Ma!’ said the young Crab, a little
snap-pishly. ‘You’re enough to try the pa-tience of an oyster!’

‘I wish I had our Di-nah here, I know I do!’ said Alice aloud, ad-dress-ing
nobody in par-tic-u-lar. ‘She’d soon fetch it back!’

‘And who is Di-nah, if I might ven-ture to ask the ques-tion?’ said the
Lory.

Alice replied eagerly, for she was al-ways ready to talk about her pet:
‘Di-nah’s our cat. And she’s such a cap-ital one for catch-ing mice you
can’t think! And oh, I wish you could see her after the birds! Why,
she’ll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!’

This speech caused a re-mark-able sen-sa-tion among the party. Some of the
birds hur-ried off at once: one old Mag-pie began wrap-ping it-self up very
care-fully, re-mark-ing, ‘I really must be get-ting home; the night-air
doesn’t suit my throat!’ and a Canary called out in a trem-bling voice to
its chil-dren, ‘Come away, my dears! It’s high time you were all in bed!’
On vari-ous pre-texts they all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

‘I wish I hadn’t men-tioned Di-nah!’ she said to her-self in a mel-an-choly
tone. ‘Nobody seems to like her, down here, and I’m sure she’s the best
cat in the world! Oh, my dear Di-nah! I won-der if I shall ever see you
any more!’ And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very
lonely and low-spir-ited. In a little while, how-ever, she again heard
a little pat-ter-ing of foot-steps in the dis-tance, and she looked up
eagerly, half hop-ing that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was com-ing
back to fin-ish his story.




CHAPTER IV. The Rab-bit Sends in a Little Bill

It was the White Rab-bit, trot-ting slowly back again, and look-ing
anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost some-thing; and she heard
it mut-ter-ing to it-self ‘The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh
my fur and whiskers! She’ll get me ex-ecuted, as sure as fer-rets are
fer-rets! Where CAN I have dropped them, I won-der?’ Alice guessed in a
mo-ment that it was look-ing for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves,
and she very good-naturedly began hunt-ing about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her swim in
the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door,
had van-ished com-pletely.

Very soon the Rab-bit no-ticed Alice, as she went hunt-ing about, and
called out to her in an angry tone, ‘Why, Mary Ann, what ARE you do-ing
out here? Run home this mo-ment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan!
Quick, now!’ And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once
in the dir-ec-tion it poin-ted to, without try-ing to ex-plain the mis-take it
had made.

‘He took me for his house-maid,’ she said to her-self as she ran. ‘How
sur-prised he’ll be when he finds out who I am! But I’d bet-ter take him
his fan and gloves--that is, if I can find them.’ As she said this, she
came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass
plate with the name ‘W. RABBIT’ en-graved upon it. She went in without
knock-ing, and hur-ried up-stairs, in great fear lest she should meet the
real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house be-fore she had found the
fan and gloves.

‘How queer it seems,’ Alice said to her-self, ‘to be go-ing mes-sages for
a rab-bit! I sup-pose Di-nah’ll be send-ing me on mes-sages next!’ And she
began fancy-ing the sort of thing that would hap-pen: ‘“Miss Alice! Come
here dir-ectly, and get ready for your walk!” “Com-ing in a minute,
nurse! But I’ve got to see that the mouse doesn’t get out.” Only I don’t
think,’ Alice went on, ‘that they’d let Di-nah stop in the house if it
began or-der-ing people about like that!’

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table
in the win-dow, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs
of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves,
and was just go-ing to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little
bottle that stood near the look-ing-glass. There was no la-bel this time
with the words ‘DRINK ME,’ but nev-er-the-less she un-corked it and put it
to her lips. ‘I know SOMETHING in-ter-est-ing is sure to hap-pen,’ she said
to her-self, ‘whenever I eat or drink any-thing; so I’ll just see what
this bottle does. I do hope it’ll make me grow large again, for really
I’m quite tired of be-ing such a tiny little thing!’

It did so in-deed, and much sooner than she had ex-pec-ted: be-fore she had
drunk half the bottle, she found her head press-ing against the ceil-ing,
and had to stoop to save her neck from be-ing broken. She hast-ily put
down the bottle, say-ing to her-self ‘That’s quite enough--I hope I shan’t
grow any more--As it is, I can’t get out at the door--I do wish I hadn’t
drunk quite so much!’

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She went on grow-ing, and grow-ing,
and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in an-other minute there
was not even room for this, and she tried the ef-fect of ly-ing down with
one el-bow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
Still she went on grow-ing, and, as a last re-source, she put one arm out
of the win-dow, and one foot up the chim-ney, and said to her-self ‘Now I
can do no more, whatever hap-pens. What WILL be-come of me?’

Luck-ily for Alice, the little ma-gic bottle had now had its full ef-fect,
and she grew no lar-ger: still it was very un-com-fort-able, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever get-ting out of the room
again, no won-der she felt un-happy.

‘It was much pleas-anter at home,’ thought poor Alice, ‘when one wasn’t
al-ways grow-ing lar-ger and smal-ler, and be-ing ordered about by mice and
rab-bits. I al-most wish I hadn’t gone down that rab-bit-hole--and yet--and
yet--it’s rather curi-ous, you know, this sort of life! I do won-der what
CAN have happened to me! When I used to read fairy-tales, I fan-cied that
kind of thing never happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!
There ought to be a book writ-ten about me, that there ought! And when I
grow up, I’ll write one--but I’m grown up now,’ she ad-ded in a sor-row-ful
tone; ‘at least there’s no room to grow up any more HERE.’

‘But then,’ thought Alice, ‘shall I NEVER get any older than I am
now? That’ll be a com-fort, one way--never to be an old wo-man--but
then--al-ways to have les-sons to learn! Oh, I shouldn’t like THAT!’

‘Oh, you fool-ish Alice!’ she answered her-self. ‘How can you learn
les-sons in here? Why, there’s hardly room for YOU, and no room at all
for any les-son-books!’

And so she went on, tak-ing first one side and then the other, and mak-ing
quite a con-ver-sa-tion of it al-to-gether; but after a few minutes she heard
a voice out-side, and stopped to listen.

‘Mary Ann! Mary Ann!’ said the voice. ‘Fetch me my gloves this mo-ment!’
Then came a little pat-ter-ing of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was
the Rab-bit com-ing to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the
house, quite for-get-ting that she was now about a thou-sand times as large
as the Rab-bit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rab-bit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as
the door opened in-wards, and Alice’s el-bow was pressed hard against it,
that at-tempt proved a fail-ure. Alice heard it say to it-self ‘Then I’ll
go round and get in at the win-dow.’

‘THAT you won’t’ thought Alice, and, after wait-ing till she fan-cied
she heard the Rab-bit just un-der the win-dow, she sud-denly spread out her
hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of any-thing,
but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass,
from which she con-cluded that it was just pos-sible it had fallen into a
cu-cum-ber-frame, or some-thing of the sort.

Next came an angry voice--the Rab-bit’s--‘Pat! Pat! Where are you?’ And
then a voice she had never heard be-fore, ‘Sure then I’m here! Dig-ging
for apples, yer hon-our!’

‘Dig-ging for apples, in-deed!’ said the Rab-bit an-grily. ‘Here! Come and
help me out of THIS!’ (Sounds of more broken glass.)

‘Now tell me, Pat, what’s that in the win-dow?’

‘Sure, it’s an arm, yer hon-our!’ (He pro-nounced it ‘ar-rum.’)

‘An arm, you goose! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it fills the whole
win-dow!’

‘Sure, it does, yer hon-our: but it’s an arm for all that.’

‘Well, it’s got no busi-ness there, at any rate: go and take it away!’

There was a long si-lence after this, and Alice could only hear whis-pers
now and then; such as, ‘Sure, I don’t like it, yer hon-our, at all, at
all!’ ‘Do as I tell you, you cow-ard!’ and at last she spread out her
hand again, and made an-other snatch in the air. This time there were
TWO little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass. ‘What a num-ber of
cu-cum-ber-frames there must be!’ thought Alice. ‘I won-der what they’ll do
next! As for pulling me out of the win-dow, I only wish they COULD! I’m
sure I don’t want to stay in here any longer!’

She waited for some time without hear-ing any-thing more: at last came a
rum-bling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices
all talk-ing to-gether: she made out the words: ‘Where’s the other
lad-der?--Why, I hadn’t to bring but one; Bill’s got the other--Bill!
fetch it here, lad!--Here, put ‘em up at this corner--No, tie ‘em
to-gether first--they don’t reach half high enough yet--Oh! they’ll
do well enough; don’t be par-tic-u-lar--Here, Bill! catch hold of this
rope--Will the roof bear?--Mind that loose slate--Oh, it’s com-ing
down! Heads be-low!’ (a loud crash)--‘Now, who did that?--It was Bill, I
fancy--Who’s to go down the chim-ney?--Nay, I shan’t! YOU do it!--That I
won’t, then!--Bill’s to go down--Here, Bill! the mas-ter says you’re to
go down the chim-ney!’

‘Oh! So Bill’s got to come down the chim-ney, has he?’ said Alice to
her-self. ‘Shy, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I wouldn’t be in
Bill’s place for a good deal: this fire-place is nar-row, to be sure; but
I THINK I can kick a little!’

She drew her foot as far down the chim-ney as she could, and waited
till she heard a little an-imal (she couldn’t guess of what sort it was)
scratch-ing and scram-bling about in the chim-ney close above her: then,
say-ing to her-self ‘This is Bill,’ she gave one sharp kick, and waited to
see what would hap-pen next.

The first thing she heard was a gen-eral chorus of ‘There goes Bill!’
then the Rab-bit’s voice along--‘Catch him, you by the hedge!’ then
si-lence, and then an-other con-fu-sion of voices--‘Hold up his head--Brandy
now--Don’t choke him--How was it, old fel-low? What happened to you? Tell
us all about it!’

Last came a little feeble, squeak-ing voice, [‘That’s Bill,’ thought
Alice,) ‘Well, I hardly know--No more, thank ye; I’m bet-ter now--but I’m
a deal too flustered to tell you--all I know is, some-thing comes at me
like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket!’

‘So you did, old fel-low!’ said the oth-ers.

‘We must burn the house down!’ said the Rab-bit’s voice; and Alice called
out as loud as she could, ‘If you do. I’ll set Di-nah at you!’

There was a dead si-lence in-stantly, and Alice thought to her-self, ‘I
won-der what they WILL do next! If they had any sense, they’d take the
roof off.’ After a minute or two, they began mov-ing about again, and
Alice heard the Rab-bit say, ‘A bar-row-ful will do, to be-gin with.’

‘A bar-row-ful of WHAT?’ thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt,
for the next mo-ment a shower of little pebbles came rat-tling in at the
win-dow, and some of them hit her in the face. ‘I’ll put a stop to this,’
she said to her-self, and shouted out, ‘You’d bet-ter not do that again!’
which pro-duced an-other dead si-lence.

Alice no-ticed with some sur-prise that the pebbles were all turn-ing into
little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her
head. ‘If I eat one of these cakes,’ she thought, ‘it’s sure to make
SOME change in my size; and as it can’t pos-sibly make me lar-ger, it must
make me smal-ler, I sup-pose.’

So she swal-lowed one of the cakes, and was de-lighted to find that she
began shrink-ing dir-ectly. As soon as she was small enough to get through
the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little
an-im-als and birds wait-ing out-side. The poor little Liz-ard, Bill, was
in the middle, be-ing held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giv-ing it
some-thing out of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the mo-ment she
ap-peared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found her-self
safe in a thick wood.

‘The first thing I’ve got to do,’ said Alice to her-self, as she wandered
about in the wood, ‘is to grow to my right size again; and the second
thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think that will be
the best plan.’

It soun-ded an ex-cel-lent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply
ar-ranged; the only dif-fi-culty was, that she had not the smal-lest idea
how to set about it; and while she was peer-ing about anxiously among
the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a
great hurry.

An enorm-ous puppy was look-ing down at her with large round eyes, and
feebly stretch-ing out one paw, try-ing to touch her. ‘Poor little thing!’
said Alice, in a coax-ing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but
she was ter-ribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be
hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of
all her coax-ing.

Hardly know-ing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and
held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off
all its feet at once, with a yelp of de-light, and rushed at the stick,
and made be-lieve to worry it; then Alice dodged be-hind a great thistle,
to keep her-self from be-ing run over; and the mo-ment she ap-peared on the
other side, the puppy made an-other rush at the stick, and tumbled head
over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then Alice, think-ing it was
very like hav-ing a game of play with a cart-horse, and ex-pect-ing every
mo-ment to be trampled un-der its feet, ran round the thistle again; then
the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, run-ning a very
little way for-wards each time and a long way back, and bark-ing hoarsely
all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, pant-ing, with
its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to Alice a good op-por-tun-ity for mak-ing her es-cape; so she
set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and
till the puppy’s bark soun-ded quite faint in the dis-tance.

‘And yet what a dear little puppy it was!’ said Alice, as she leant
against a but-ter-cup to rest her-self, and fanned her-self with one of the
leaves: ‘I should have liked teach-ing it tricks very much, if--if I’d
only been the right size to do it! Oh dear! I’d nearly for-got-ten that
I’ve got to grow up again! Let me see--how IS it to be man-aged? I
sup-pose I ought to eat or drink some-thing or other; but the great
ques-tion is, what?’

The great ques-tion cer-tainly was, what? Alice looked all round her at
the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see any-thing that
looked like the right thing to eat or drink un-der the cir-cum-stances.
There was a large mush-room grow-ing near her, about the same height as
her-self; and when she had looked un-der it, and on both sides of it, and
be-hind it, it oc-curred to her that she might as well look and see what
was on the top of it.

She stretched her-self up on tip-toe, and peeped over the edge of the
mush-room, and her eyes im-me-di-ately met those of a large cater-pil-lar,
that was sit-ting on the top with its arms fol-ded, quietly smoking a long
hookah, and tak-ing not the smal-lest no-tice of her or of any-thing else.




CHAPTER V. Ad-vice from a Cater-pil-lar

The Cater-pil-lar and Alice looked at each other for some time in si-lence:
at last the Cater-pil-lar took the hookah out of its mouth, and ad-dressed
her in a lan-guid, sleepy voice.

‘Who are YOU?’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

This was not an en-cour-aging open-ing for a con-ver-sa-tion. Alice replied,
rather shyly, ‘I--I hardly know, sir, just at present--at least I know
who I WAS when I got up this morn-ing, but I think I must have been
changed sev-eral times since then.’

‘What do you mean by that?’ said the Cater-pil-lar sternly. ‘Ex-plain
your-self!’

‘I can’t ex-plain MYSELF, I’m afraid, sir’ said Alice, ‘be-cause I’m not
my-self, you see.’

‘I don’t see,’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

‘I’m afraid I can’t put it more clearly,’ Alice replied very po-litely,
‘for I can’t un-der-stand it my-self to be-gin with; and be-ing so many
dif-fer-ent sizes in a day is very con-fus-ing.’

‘It isn’t,’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

‘Well, per-haps you haven’t found it so yet,’ said Alice; ‘but when you
have to turn into a chrysalis--you will some day, you know--and then
after that into a but-ter-fly, I should think you’ll feel it a little
queer, won’t you?’

‘Not a bit,’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

‘Well, per-haps your feel-ings may be dif-fer-ent,’ said Alice; ‘all I know
is, it would feel very queer to ME.’

‘You!’ said the Cater-pil-lar con-temp-tu-ously. ‘Who are YOU?’

Which brought them back again to the be-gin-ning of the con-ver-sa-tion.
Alice felt a little ir-rit-ated at the Cater-pil-lar’s mak-ing such VERY
short re-marks, and she drew her-self up and said, very gravely, ‘I think,
you ought to tell me who YOU are, first.’

‘Why?’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

Here was an-other puzz-ling ques-tion; and as Alice could not think of any
good reason, and as the Cater-pil-lar seemed to be in a VERY un-pleas-ant
state of mind, she turned away.

‘Come back!’ the Cater-pil-lar called after her. ‘I’ve some-thing im-port-ant
to say!’

This soun-ded prom-ising, cer-tainly: Alice turned and came back again.

‘Keep your tem-per,’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

‘Is that all?’ said Alice, swal-low-ing down her an-ger as well as she
could.

‘No,’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had noth-ing else to do, and
per-haps after all it might tell her some-thing worth hear-ing. For some
minutes it puffed away without speak-ing, but at last it un-fol-ded its
arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, ‘So you think
you’re changed, do you?’

‘I’m afraid I am, sir,’ said Alice; ‘I can’t re-mem-ber things as I
used--and I don’t keep the same size for ten minutes to-gether!’

‘Can’t re-mem-ber WHAT things?’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

‘Well, I’ve tried to say “HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE,” but it all came
dif-fer-ent!’ Alice replied in a very mel-an-choly voice.

‘Repeat, “YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,”’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

Alice fol-ded her hands, and began:--

   ‘You are old, Father Wil-liam,’ the young man said,
    ‘And your hair has be-come very white;
   And yet you in-cess-antly stand on your head--
    Do you think, at your age, it is right?’

   ‘In my youth,’ Father Wil-liam replied to his son,
    ‘I feared it might in-jure the brain;
   But, now that I’m per-fectly sure I have none,
    Why, I do it again and again.’

   ‘You are old,’ said the youth, ‘as I men-tioned be-fore,
    And have grown most un-com-monly fat;
   Yet you turned a back-somer-sault in at the door--
    Pray, what is the reason of that?’

   ‘In my youth,’ said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
    ‘I kept all my limbs very supple
   By the use of this oint-ment--one shil-ling the box--
    Al-low me to sell you a couple?’

   ‘You are old,’ said the youth, ‘and your jaws are too weak
    For any-thing tougher than suet;
   Yet you fin-ished the goose, with the bones and the beak--
    Pray how did you man-age to do it?’

   ‘In my youth,’ said his father, ‘I took to the law,
    And ar-gued each case with my wife;
   And the mus-cu-lar strength, which it gave to my jaw,
    Has las-ted the rest of my life.’

   ‘You are old,’ said the youth, ‘one would hardly sup-pose
    That your eye was as steady as ever;
   Yet you bal-anced an eel on the end of your nose--
    What made you so aw-fully clever?’

   ‘I have answered three ques-tions, and that is enough,’
    Said his father; ‘don’t give your-self airs!
   Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
    Be off, or I’ll kick you down stairs!’


‘That is not said right,’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

‘Not QUITE right, I’m afraid,’ said Alice, tim-idly; ‘some of the words
have got altered.’

‘It is wrong from be-gin-ning to end,’ said the Cater-pil-lar de-cidedly, and
there was si-lence for some minutes.

The Cater-pil-lar was the first to speak.

‘What size do you want to be?’ it asked.

‘Oh, I’m not par-tic-u-lar as to size,’ Alice hast-ily replied; ‘only one
doesn’t like chan-ging so of-ten, you know.’

‘I DON’T know,’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

Alice said noth-ing: she had never been so much con-tra-dicted in her life
be-fore, and she felt that she was los-ing her tem-per.

‘Are you con-tent now?’ said the Cater-pil-lar.

‘Well, I should like to be a LITTLE lar-ger, sir, if you wouldn’t mind,’
said Alice: ‘three inches is such a wretched height to be.’

‘It is a very good height in-deed!’ said the Cater-pil-lar an-grily, rear-ing
it-self up-right as it spoke (it was ex-actly three inches high).

‘But I’m not used to it!’ pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone. And
she thought of her-self, ‘I wish the creatures wouldn’t be so eas-ily
of-fen-ded!’

‘You’ll get used to it in time,’ said the Cater-pil-lar; and it put the
hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.

This time Alice waited pa-tiently un-til it chose to speak again. In
a minute or two the Cater-pil-lar took the hookah out of its mouth
and yawned once or twice, and shook it-self. Then it got down off the
mush-room, and crawled away in the grass, merely re-mark-ing as it went,
‘One side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you
grow shorter.’

‘One side of WHAT? The other side of WHAT?’ thought Alice to her-self.

‘Of the mush-room,’ said the Cater-pil-lar, just as if she had asked it
aloud; and in an-other mo-ment it was out of sight.

Alice re-mained look-ing thought-fully at the mush-room for a minute, try-ing
to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was per-fectly
round, she found this a very dif-fi-cult ques-tion. However, at last she
stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit
of the edge with each hand.

‘And now which is which?’ she said to her-self, and nibbled a little of
the right-hand bit to try the ef-fect: the next mo-ment she felt a vi-ol-ent
blow un-der-neath her chin: it had struck her foot!

She was a good deal frightened by this very sud-den change, but she felt
that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrink-ing rap-idly; so she
set to work at once to eat some of the other bit. Her chin was pressed
so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her
mouth; but she did it at last, and man-aged to swal-low a morsel of the
lefthand bit.


  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Come, my head’s free at last!’ said Alice in a tone of de-light, which
changed into alarm in an-other mo-ment, when she found that her shoulders
were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was
an im-mense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a
sea of green leaves that lay far be-low her.

‘What CAN all that green stuff be?’ said Alice. ‘And where HAVE my
shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can’t see you?’
She was mov-ing them about as she spoke, but no res-ult seemed to fol-low,
ex-cept a little shak-ing among the dis-tant green leaves.

As there seemed to be no chance of get-ting her hands up to her head, she
tried to get her head down to them, and was de-lighted to find that her
neck would bend about eas-ily in any dir-ec-tion, like a ser-pent. She had
just suc-ceeded in curving it down into a grace-ful zig-zag, and was go-ing
to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be noth-ing but the tops
of the trees un-der which she had been wan-der-ing, when a sharp hiss made
her draw back in a hurry: a large pi-geon had flown into her face, and
was beat-ing her vi-ol-ently with its wings.

‘Ser-pent!’ screamed the Pi-geon.

‘I’m NOT a ser-pent!’ said Alice in-dig-nantly. ‘Let me alone!’

‘Ser-pent, I say again!’ re-peated the Pi-geon, but in a more sub-dued tone,
and ad-ded with a kind of sob, ‘I’ve tried every way, and noth-ing seems
to suit them!’

‘I haven’t the least idea what you’re talk-ing about,’ said Alice.

‘I’ve tried the roots of trees, and I’ve tried banks, and I’ve tried
hedges,’ the Pi-geon went on, without at-tend-ing to her; ‘but those
ser-pents! There’s no pleas-ing them!’

Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in
say-ing any-thing more till the Pi-geon had fin-ished.

‘As if it wasn’t trouble enough hatch-ing the eggs,’ said the Pi-geon;
‘but I must be on the look-out for ser-pents night and day! Why, I
haven’t had a wink of sleep these three weeks!’

‘I’m very sorry you’ve been an-noyed,’ said Alice, who was be-gin-ning to
see its mean-ing.

‘And just as I’d taken the highest tree in the wood,’ con-tin-ued the
Pi-geon, rais-ing its voice to a shriek, ‘and just as I was think-ing I
should be free of them at last, they must needs come wrig-gling down from
the sky! Ugh, Ser-pent!’

‘But I’m NOT a ser-pent, I tell you!’ said Alice. ‘I’m a--I’m a--’

‘Well! WHAT are you?’ said the Pi-geon. ‘I can see you’re try-ing to
in-vent some-thing!’

‘I--I’m a little girl,’ said Alice, rather doubt-fully, as she re-membered
the num-ber of changes she had gone through that day.

‘A likely story in-deed!’ said the Pi-geon in a tone of the deep-est
con-tempt. ‘I’ve seen a good many little girls in my time, but never ONE
with such a neck as that! No, no! You’re a ser-pent; and there’s no use
deny-ing it. I sup-pose you’ll be telling me next that you never tasted an
egg!’

‘I HAVE tasted eggs, cer-tainly,’ said Alice, who was a very truth-ful
child; ‘but little girls eat eggs quite as much as ser-pents do, you
know.’

‘I don’t be-lieve it,’ said the Pi-geon; ‘but if they do, why then they’re
a kind of ser-pent, that’s all I can say.’

This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite si-lent for a
minute or two, which gave the Pi-geon the op-por-tun-ity of adding, ‘You’re
look-ing for eggs, I know THAT well enough; and what does it mat-ter to me
whether you’re a little girl or a ser-pent?’

‘It mat-ters a good deal to ME,’ said Alice hast-ily; ‘but I’m not look-ing
for eggs, as it hap-pens; and if I was, I shouldn’t want YOURS: I don’t
like them raw.’

‘Well, be off, then!’ said the Pi-geon in a sulky tone, as it settled
down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well as
she could, for her neck kept get-ting en-tangled among the branches, and
every now and then she had to stop and un-twist it. After a while she
re-membered that she still held the pieces of mush-room in her hands, and
she set to work very care-fully, nib-bling first at one and then at the
other, and grow-ing some-times taller and some-times shorter, un-til she had
suc-ceeded in bring-ing her-self down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been any-thing near the right size, that it
felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes,
and began talk-ing to her-self, as usual. ‘Come, there’s half my plan done
now! How puzz-ling all these changes are! I’m never sure what I’m go-ing
to be, from one minute to an-other! However, I’ve got back to my right
size: the next thing is, to get into that beau-ti-ful garden--how IS that
to be done, I won-der?’ As she said this, she came sud-denly upon an open
place, with a little house in it about four feet high. ‘Who-ever lives
there,’ thought Alice, ‘it’ll never do to come upon them THIS size: why,
I should frighten them out of their wits!’ So she began nib-bling at the
righthand bit again, and did not ven-ture to go near the house till she
had brought her-self down to nine inches high.




CHAPTER VI. Pig and Pep-per

For a minute or two she stood look-ing at the house, and won-der-ing what
to do next, when sud-denly a foot-man in liv-ery came run-ning out of the
wood--(she con-sidered him to be a foot-man be-cause he was in liv-ery:
oth-er-wise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a
fish)--and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles. It was opened
by an-other foot-man in liv-ery, with a round face, and large eyes like a
frog; and both foot-men, Alice no-ticed, had powdered hair that curled all
over their heads. She felt very curi-ous to know what it was all about,
and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.

The Fish-Foot-man began by pro-du-cing from un-der his arm a great let-ter,
nearly as large as him-self, and this he handed over to the other,
say-ing, in a sol-emn tone, ‘For the Duchess. An in-vit-a-tion from the Queen
to play cro-quet.’ The Frog-Foot-man re-peated, in the same sol-emn tone,
only chan-ging the or-der of the words a little, ‘From the Queen. An
in-vit-a-tion for the Duchess to play cro-quet.’

Then they both bowed low, and their curls got en-tangled to-gether.

Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the
wood for fear of their hear-ing her; and when she next peeped out the
Fish-Foot-man was gone, and the other was sit-ting on the ground near the
door, star-ing stu-pidly up into the sky.

Alice went tim-idly up to the door, and knocked.

‘There’s no sort of use in knock-ing,’ said the Foot-man, ‘and that for
two reas-ons. First, be-cause I’m on the same side of the door as you
are; secondly, be-cause they’re mak-ing such a noise in-side, no one could
pos-sibly hear you.’ And cer-tainly there was a most ex-traordin-ary noise
go-ing on within--a con-stant howl-ing and sneez-ing, and every now and then
a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.

‘Please, then,’ said Alice, ‘how am I to get in?’

‘There might be some sense in your knock-ing,’ the Foot-man went on
without at-tend-ing to her, ‘if we had the door between us. For in-stance,
if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let you out, you know.’
He was look-ing up into the sky all the time he was speak-ing, and this
Alice thought de-cidedly un-civil. ‘But per-haps he can’t help it,’ she
said to her-self; ‘his eyes are so VERY nearly at the top of his head.
But at any rate he might an-swer ques-tions.--How am I to get in?’ she
re-peated, aloud.

‘I shall sit here,’ the Foot-man re-marked, ‘till to-mor-row--’

At this mo-ment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came
skim-ming out, straight at the Foot-man’s head: it just grazed his nose,
and broke to pieces against one of the trees be-hind him.

‘--or next day, maybe,’ the Foot-man con-tin-ued in the same tone, ex-actly
as if noth-ing had happened.

‘How am I to get in?’ asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

‘ARE you to get in at all?’ said the Foot-man. ‘That’s the first
ques-tion, you know.’

It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so. ‘It’s really
dread-ful,’ she muttered to her-self, ‘the way all the creatures ar-gue.
It’s enough to drive one crazy!’

The Foot-man seemed to think this a good op-por-tun-ity for re-peat-ing his
re-mark, with vari-ations. ‘I shall sit here,’ he said, ‘on and off, for
days and days.’

‘But what am I to do?’ said Alice.

‘Anything you like,’ said the Foot-man, and began whist-ling.

‘Oh, there’s no use in talk-ing to him,’ said Alice des-per-ately: ‘he’s
per-fectly idi-otic!’ And she opened the door and went in.

The door led right into a large kit-chen, which was full of smoke from
one end to the other: the Duchess was sit-ting on a three-legged stool in
the middle, nurs-ing a baby; the cook was lean-ing over the fire, stir-ring
a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.

‘There’s cer-tainly too much pep-per in that soup!’ Alice said to her-self,
as well as she could for sneez-ing.

There was cer-tainly too much of it in the air. Even the Duchess
sneezed oc-ca-sion-ally; and as for the baby, it was sneez-ing and howl-ing
al-tern-ately without a mo-ment’s pause. The only things in the kit-chen
that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sit-ting on
the hearth and grin-ning from ear to ear.

‘Please would you tell me,’ said Alice, a little tim-idly, for she was
not quite sure whether it was good man-ners for her to speak first, ‘why
your cat grins like that?’

‘It’s a Cheshire cat,’ said the Duchess, ‘and that’s why. Pig!’

She said the last word with such sud-den vi-ol-ence that Alice quite
jumped; but she saw in an-other mo-ment that it was ad-dressed to the baby,
and not to her, so she took cour-age, and went on again:--

‘I didn’t know that Cheshire cats al-ways grinned; in fact, I didn’t know
that cats COULD grin.’

‘They all can,’ said the Duchess; ‘and most of ‘em do.’

‘I don’t know of any that do,’ Alice said very po-litely, feel-ing quite
pleased to have got into a con-ver-sa-tion.

‘You don’t know much,’ said the Duchess; ‘and that’s a fact.’

Alice did not at all like the tone of this re-mark, and thought it would
be as well to in-tro-duce some other sub-ject of con-ver-sa-tion. While she
was try-ing to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the
fire, and at once set to work throw-ing everything within her reach at
the Duchess and the baby--the fire-irons came first; then fol-lowed a
shower of sauce-pans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no no-tice of
them even when they hit her; and the baby was howl-ing so much already,
that it was quite im-possible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

‘Oh, PLEASE mind what you’re do-ing!’ cried Alice, jump-ing up and down in
an agony of ter-ror. ‘Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS nose’; as an un-usu-ally
large sauce-pan flew close by it, and very nearly car-ried it off.

‘If every-body minded their own busi-ness,’ the Duchess said in a hoarse
growl, ‘the world would go round a deal faster than it does.’

‘Which would NOT be an ad-vant-age,’ said Alice, who felt very glad to get
an op-por-tun-ity of show-ing off a little of her know-ledge. ‘Just think of
what work it would make with the day and night! You see the earth takes
twenty-four hours to turn round on its axis--’

‘Talk-ing of axes,’ said the Duchess, ‘chop off her head!’

Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take
the hint; but the cook was busily stir-ring the soup, and seemed not to
be listen-ing, so she went on again: ‘Twenty-four hours, I THINK; or is
it twelve? I--’

‘Oh, don’t bother ME,’ said the Duchess; ‘I never could abide fig-ures!’
And with that she began nurs-ing her child again, singing a sort of
lul-laby to it as she did so, and giv-ing it a vi-ol-ent shake at the end of
every line:

   ‘Speak roughly to your little boy,
    And beat him when he sneezes:
   He only does it to an-noy,
    Be-cause he knows it teases.’

         CHORUS.

 (In which the cook and the baby joined):--

       ‘Wow! wow! wow!’

While the Duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept toss-ing
the baby vi-ol-ently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that Alice could hardly hear the words:--

   ‘I speak severely to my boy,
    I beat him when he sneezes;
   For he can thor-oughly en-joy
    The pep-per when he pleases!’

         CHORUS.

       ‘Wow! wow! wow!’

‘Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!’ the Duchess said to Alice,
fling-ing the baby at her as she spoke. ‘I must go and get ready to play
cro-quet with the Queen,’ and she hur-ried out of the room. The cook threw
a fry-ing-pan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.

Alice caught the baby with some dif-fi-culty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all dir-ec-tions, ‘just
like a star-fish,’ thought Alice. The poor little thing was snort-ing
like a steam-en-gine when she caught it, and kept doub-ling it-self up and
straight-en-ing it-self out again, so that al-to-gether, for the first minute
or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.

As soon as she had made out the proper way of nurs-ing it, (which was to
twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right
ear and left foot, so as to pre-vent its un-do-ing it-self,) she car-ried
it out into the open air. ‘IF I don’t take this child away with me,’
thought Alice, ‘they’re sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldn’t it be
murder to leave it be-hind?’ She said the last words out loud, and the
little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneez-ing by this time).
‘Don’t grunt,’ said Alice; ‘that’s not at all a proper way of ex-press-ing
your-self.’

The baby grunted again, and Alice looked very anxiously into its face to
see what was the mat-ter with it. There could be no doubt that it had
a VERY turn-up nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its
eyes were get-ting ex-tremely small for a baby: al-to-gether Alice did not
like the look of the thing at all. ‘But per-haps it was only sob-bing,’
she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any
tears.

No, there were no tears. ‘If you’re go-ing to turn into a pig, my dear,’
said Alice, ser-i-ously, ‘I’ll have noth-ing more to do with you. Mind
now!’ The poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was im-possible
to say which), and they went on for some while in si-lence.

Alice was just be-gin-ning to think to her-self, ‘Now, what am I to do with
this creature when I get it home?’ when it grunted again, so vi-ol-ently,
that she looked down into its face in some alarm. This time there could
be NO mis-take about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and she
felt that it would be quite ab-surd for her to carry it fur-ther.

So she set the little creature down, and felt quite re-lieved to see
it trot away quietly into the wood. ‘If it had grown up,’ she said
to her-self, ‘it would have made a dread-fully ugly child: but it makes
rather a hand-some pig, I think.’ And she began think-ing over other
chil-dren she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just say-ing
to her-self, ‘if one only knew the right way to change them--’ when she
was a little startled by see-ing the Cheshire Cat sit-ting on a bough of a
tree a few yards off.

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It looked good-natured, she
thought: still it had VERY long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt that it ought to be treated with re-spect.

‘Cheshire Puss,’ she began, rather tim-idly, as she did not at all know
whether it would like the name: how-ever, it only grinned a little wider.
‘Come, it’s pleased so far,’ thought Alice, and she went on. ‘Would you
tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?’

‘That de-pends a good deal on where you want to get to,’ said the Cat.

‘I don’t much care where--’ said Alice.

‘Then it doesn’t mat-ter which way you go,’ said the Cat.

‘--so long as I get SOMEWHERE,’ Alice ad-ded as an ex-plan-a-tion.

‘Oh, you’re sure to do that,’ said the Cat, ‘if you only walk long
enough.’

Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried an-other ques-tion.
‘What sort of people live about here?’

‘In THAT dir-ec-tion,’ the Cat said, wav-ing its right paw round, ‘lives
a Hat-ter: and in THAT dir-ec-tion,’ wav-ing the other paw, ‘lives a March
Hare. Visit either you like: they’re both mad.’

‘But I don’t want to go among mad people,’ Alice re-marked.

‘Oh, you can’t help that,’ said the Cat: ‘we’re all mad here. I’m mad.
You’re mad.’

‘How do you know I’m mad?’ said Alice.

‘You must be,’ said the Cat, ‘or you wouldn’t have come here.’

Alice didn’t think that proved it at all; how-ever, she went on ‘And how
do you know that you’re mad?’

‘To be-gin with,’ said the Cat, ‘a dog’s not mad. You grant that?’

‘I sup-pose so,’ said Alice.

‘Well, then,’ the Cat went on, ‘you see, a dog growls when it’s angry,
and wags its tail when it’s pleased. Now I growl when I’m pleased, and
wag my tail when I’m angry. There-fore I’m mad.’

‘I call it purring, not growl-ing,’ said Alice.

‘Call it what you like,’ said the Cat. ‘Do you play cro-quet with the
Queen to-day?’

‘I should like it very much,’ said Alice, ‘but I haven’t been in-vited
yet.’

‘You’ll see me there,’ said the Cat, and van-ished.

Alice was not much sur-prised at this, she was get-ting so used to queer
things hap-pen-ing. While she was look-ing at the place where it had been,
it sud-denly ap-peared again.

‘By-the-bye, what be-came of the baby?’ said the Cat. ‘I’d nearly
for-got-ten to ask.’

‘It turned into a pig,’ Alice quietly said, just as if it had come back
in a nat-ural way.

‘I thought it would,’ said the Cat, and van-ished again.

Alice waited a little, half ex-pect-ing to see it again, but it did not
ap-pear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the dir-ec-tion in
which the March Hare was said to live. ‘I’ve seen hat-ters be-fore,’ she
said to her-self; ‘the March Hare will be much the most in-ter-est-ing, and
per-haps as this is May it won’t be rav-ing mad--at least not so mad as
it was in March.’ As she said this, she looked up, and there was the Cat
again, sit-ting on a branch of a tree.

‘Did you say pig, or fig?’ said the Cat.

‘I said pig,’ replied Alice; ‘and I wish you wouldn’t keep ap-pear-ing and
van-ish-ing so sud-denly: you make one quite giddy.’

‘All right,’ said the Cat; and this time it van-ished quite slowly,
be-gin-ning with the end of the tail, and end-ing with the grin, which
re-mained some time after the rest of it had gone.

‘Well! I’ve of-ten seen a cat without a grin,’ thought Alice; ‘but a grin
without a cat! It’s the most curi-ous thing I ever saw in my life!’

She had not gone much farther be-fore she came in sight of the house
of the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house, be-cause the
chim-neys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur. It
was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mush-room, and raised her-self to
about two feet high: even then she walked up to-wards it rather tim-idly,
say-ing to her-self ‘Sup-pose it should be rav-ing mad after all! I al-most
wish I’d gone to see the Hat-ter in-stead!’




CHAPTER VII. A Mad Tea-Party

There was a table set out un-der a tree in front of the house, and the
March Hare and the Hat-ter were hav-ing tea at it: a Dormouse was sit-ting
between them, fast asleep, and the other two were us-ing it as a
cush-ion, rest-ing their el-bows on it, and talk-ing over its head. ‘Very
un-com-fort-able for the Dormouse,’ thought Alice; ‘only, as it’s asleep, I
sup-pose it doesn’t mind.’

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded to-gether at
one corner of it: ‘No room! No room!’ they cried out when they saw Alice
com-ing. ‘There’s PLENTY of room!’ said Alice in-dig-nantly, and she sat
down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.

‘Have some wine,’ the March Hare said in an en-cour-aging tone.

Alice looked all round the table, but there was noth-ing on it but tea.
‘I don’t see any wine,’ she re-marked.

‘There isn’t any,’ said the March Hare.

‘Then it wasn’t very civil of you to of-fer it,’ said Alice an-grily.

‘It wasn’t very civil of you to sit down without be-ing in-vited,’ said
the March Hare.

‘I didn’t know it was YOUR table,’ said Alice; ‘it’s laid for a great
many more than three.’

‘Your hair wants cut-ting,’ said the Hat-ter. He had been look-ing at Alice
for some time with great curi-os-ity, and this was his first speech.

‘You should learn not to make per-sonal re-marks,’ Alice said with some
sever-ity; ‘it’s very rude.’

The Hat-ter opened his eyes very wide on hear-ing this; but all he SAID
was, ‘Why is a raven like a writ-ing-desk?’

‘Come, we shall have some fun now!’ thought Alice. ‘I’m glad they’ve
be-gun ask-ing riddles.--I be-lieve I can guess that,’ she ad-ded aloud.

‘Do you mean that you think you can find out the an-swer to it?’ said the
March Hare.

‘Ex-actly so,’ said Alice.

‘Then you should say what you mean,’ the March Hare went on.

‘I do,’ Alice hast-ily replied; ‘at least--at least I mean what I
say--that’s the same thing, you know.’

‘Not the same thing a bit!’ said the Hat-ter. ‘You might just as well say
that “I see what I eat” is the same thing as “I eat what I see”!’

‘You might just as well say,’ ad-ded the March Hare, ‘that “I like what I
get” is the same thing as “I get what I like”!’

‘You might just as well say,’ ad-ded the Dormouse, who seemed to be
talk-ing in his sleep, ‘that “I breathe when I sleep” is the same thing
as “I sleep when I breathe”!’

‘It IS the same thing with you,’ said the Hat-ter, and here the
con-ver-sa-tion dropped, and the party sat si-lent for a minute, while Alice
thought over all she could re-mem-ber about ravens and writ-ing-desks,
which wasn’t much.

The Hat-ter was the first to break the si-lence. ‘What day of the month
is it?’ he said, turn-ing to Alice: he had taken his watch out of his
pocket, and was look-ing at it un-eas-ily, shak-ing it every now and then,
and hold-ing it to his ear.

Alice con-sidered a little, and then said ‘The fourth.’

‘Two days wrong!’ sighed the Hat-ter. ‘I told you but-ter wouldn’t suit
the works!’ he ad-ded look-ing an-grily at the March Hare.

‘It was the BEST but-ter,’ the March Hare meekly replied.

‘Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well,’ the Hat-ter grumbled:
‘you shouldn’t have put it in with the bread-knife.’

The March Hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped
it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of
noth-ing bet-ter to say than his first re-mark, ‘It was the BEST but-ter,
you know.’

Alice had been look-ing over his shoulder with some curi-os-ity. ‘What a
funny watch!’ she re-marked. ‘It tells the day of the month, and doesn’t
tell what o’clock it is!’

‘Why should it?’ muttered the Hat-ter. ‘Does YOUR watch tell you what
year it is?’

‘Of course not,’ Alice replied very read-ily: ‘but that’s be-cause it
stays the same year for such a long time to-gether.’

‘Which is just the case with MINE,’ said the Hat-ter.

Alice felt dread-fully puzzled. The Hat-ter’s re-mark seemed to have no
sort of mean-ing in it, and yet it was cer-tainly Eng-lish. ‘I don’t quite
un-der-stand you,’ she said, as po-litely as she could.

‘The Dormouse is asleep again,’ said the Hat-ter, and he poured a little
hot tea upon its nose.

The Dormouse shook its head im-pa-tiently, and said, without open-ing its
eyes, ‘Of course, of course; just what I was go-ing to re-mark my-self.’

‘Have you guessed the riddle yet?’ the Hat-ter said, turn-ing to Alice
again.

‘No, I give it up,’ Alice replied: ‘what’s the an-swer?’

‘I haven’t the slight-est idea,’ said the Hat-ter.

‘Nor I,’ said the March Hare.

Alice sighed wear-ily. ‘I think you might do some-thing bet-ter with the
time,’ she said, ‘than waste it in ask-ing riddles that have no an-swers.’

‘If you knew Time as well as I do,’ said the Hat-ter, ‘you wouldn’t talk
about wast-ing IT. It’s HIM.’

‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Alice.

‘Of course you don’t!’ the Hat-ter said, toss-ing his head con-temp-tu-ously.
‘I dare say you never even spoke to Time!’

‘Per-haps not,’ Alice cau-tiously replied: ‘but I know I have to beat time
when I learn mu-sic.’

‘Ah! that ac-counts for it,’ said the Hat-ter. ‘He won’t stand beat-ing.
Now, if you only kept on good terms with him, he’d do al-most any-thing
you liked with the clock. For in-stance, sup-pose it were nine o’clock in
the morn-ing, just time to be-gin les-sons: you’d only have to whis-per a
hint to Time, and round goes the clock in a twink-ling! Half-past one,
time for din-ner!’

[‘I only wish it was,’ the March Hare said to it-self in a whis-per.)

‘That would be grand, cer-tainly,’ said Alice thought-fully: ‘but then--I
shouldn’t be hungry for it, you know.’

‘Not at first, per-haps,’ said the Hat-ter: ‘but you could keep it to
half-past one as long as you liked.’

‘Is that the way YOU man-age?’ Alice asked.

The Hat-ter shook his head mourn-fully. ‘Not I!’ he replied. ‘We
quar-relled last March--just be-fore HE went mad, you know--’ (point-ing
with his tea spoon at the March Hare,) ‘--it was at the great con-cert
given by the Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing

     “Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
     How I won-der what you’re at!”

You know the song, per-haps?’

‘I’ve heard some-thing like it,’ said Alice.

‘It goes on, you know,’ the Hat-ter con-tin-ued, ‘in this way:--

     “Up above the world you fly,
     Like a tea-tray in the sky.
         Twinkle, twinkle--“’

Here the Dormouse shook it-self, and began singing in its sleep ‘Twinkle,
twinkle, twinkle, twinkle--’ and went on so long that they had to pinch
it to make it stop.

‘Well, I’d hardly fin-ished the first verse,’ said the Hat-ter, ‘when the
Queen jumped up and bawled out, “He’s mur-der-ing the time! Off with his
head!”’

‘How dread-fully sav-age!’ ex-claimed Alice.

‘And ever since that,’ the Hat-ter went on in a mourn-ful tone, ‘he won’t
do a thing I ask! It’s al-ways six o’clock now.’

A bright idea came into Alice’s head. ‘Is that the reason so many
tea-things are put out here?’ she asked.

‘Yes, that’s it,’ said the Hat-ter with a sigh: ‘it’s al-ways tea-time,
and we’ve no time to wash the things between whiles.’

‘Then you keep mov-ing round, I sup-pose?’ said Alice.

‘Ex-actly so,’ said the Hat-ter: ‘as the things get used up.’

‘But what hap-pens when you come to the be-gin-ning again?’ Alice ven-tured
to ask.

‘Sup-pose we change the sub-ject,’ the March Hare in-ter-rup-ted, yawn-ing.
‘I’m get-ting tired of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story.’

‘I’m afraid I don’t know one,’ said Alice, rather alarmed at the
pro-posal.

‘Then the Dormouse shall!’ they both cried. ‘Wake up, Dormouse!’ And
they pinched it on both sides at once.

The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. ‘I wasn’t asleep,’ he said in a
hoarse, feeble voice: ‘I heard every word you fel-lows were say-ing.’

‘Tell us a story!’ said the March Hare.

‘Yes, please do!’ pleaded Alice.

‘And be quick about it,’ ad-ded the Hat-ter, ‘or you’ll be asleep again
be-fore it’s done.’

‘Once upon a time there were three little sis-ters,’ the Dormouse began
in a great hurry; ‘and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Til-lie; and
they lived at the bot-tom of a well--’

‘What did they live on?’ said Alice, who al-ways took a great in-terest in
ques-tions of eat-ing and drink-ing.

‘They lived on treacle,’ said the Dormouse, after think-ing a minute or
two.

‘They couldn’t have done that, you know,’ Alice gently re-marked; ‘they’d
have been ill.’

‘So they were,’ said the Dormouse; ‘VERY ill.’

Alice tried to fancy to her-self what such an ex-traordin-ary ways of
liv-ing would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: ‘But
why did they live at the bot-tom of a well?’

‘Take some more tea,’ the March Hare said to Alice, very earn-estly.

‘I’ve had noth-ing yet,’ Alice replied in an of-fen-ded tone, ‘so I can’t
take more.’

‘You mean you can’t take LESS,’ said the Hat-ter: ‘it’s very easy to take
MORE than noth-ing.’

‘Nobody asked YOUR opin-ion,’ said Alice.

‘Who’s mak-ing per-sonal re-marks now?’ the Hat-ter asked tri-umphantly.

Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped her-self
to some tea and bread-and-but-ter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and
re-peated her ques-tion. ‘Why did they live at the bot-tom of a well?’

The Dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then
said, ‘It was a treacle-well.’

‘There’s no such thing!’ Alice was be-gin-ning very an-grily, but the
Hat-ter and the March Hare went ‘Sh! sh!’ and the Dormouse sulkily
re-marked, ‘If you can’t be civil, you’d bet-ter fin-ish the story for
your-self.’

‘No, please go on!’ Alice said very humbly; ‘I won’t in-ter-rupt again. I
dare say there may be ONE.’

‘One, in-deed!’ said the Dormouse in-dig-nantly. However, he con-sen-ted to
go on. ‘And so these three little sis-ters--they were learn-ing to draw,
you know--’

‘What did they draw?’ said Alice, quite for-get-ting her prom-ise.

‘Treacle,’ said the Dormouse, without con-sid-er-ing at all this time.

‘I want a clean cup,’ in-ter-rup-ted the Hat-ter: ‘let’s all move one place
on.’

He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse fol-lowed him: the March Hare
moved into the Dormouse’s place, and Alice rather un-will-ingly took
the place of the March Hare. The Hat-ter was the only one who got any
ad-vant-age from the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off than
be-fore, as the March Hare had just up-set the milk-jug into his plate.

Alice did not wish to of-fend the Dormouse again, so she began very
cau-tiously: ‘But I don’t un-der-stand. Where did they draw the treacle
from?’

‘You can draw wa-ter out of a wa-ter-well,’ said the Hat-ter; ‘so I should
think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-well--eh, stu-pid?’

‘But they were IN the well,’ Alice said to the Dormouse, not choos-ing to
no-tice this last re-mark.

‘Of course they were’, said the Dormouse; ‘--well in.’

This an-swer so con-fused poor Alice, that she let the Dormouse go on for
some time without in-ter-rupt-ing it.

‘They were learn-ing to draw,’ the Dormouse went on, yawn-ing and rub-bing
its eyes, for it was get-ting very sleepy; ‘and they drew all man-ner of
things--everything that be-gins with an M--’

‘Why with an M?’ said Alice.

‘Why not?’ said the March Hare.

Alice was si-lent.

The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was go-ing off into
a doze; but, on be-ing pinched by the Hat-ter, it woke up again with
a little shriek, and went on: ‘--that be-gins with an M, such as
mouse-traps, and the moon, and memory, and much-ness--you know you say
things are “much of a much-ness”--did you ever see such a thing as a
draw-ing of a much-ness?’

‘Really, now you ask me,’ said Alice, very much con-fused, ‘I don’t
think--’

‘Then you shouldn’t talk,’ said the Hat-ter.

This piece of rude-ness was more than Alice could bear: she got up in
great dis-gust, and walked off; the Dormouse fell asleep in-stantly, and
neither of the oth-ers took the least no-tice of her go-ing, though she
looked back once or twice, half hop-ing that they would call after her:
the last time she saw them, they were try-ing to put the Dormouse into
the teapot.

‘At any rate I’ll never go THERE again!’ said Alice as she picked her
way through the wood. ‘It’s the stu-pid-est tea-party I ever was at in all
my life!’

Just as she said this, she no-ticed that one of the trees had a door
lead-ing right into it. ‘That’s very curi-ous!’ she thought. ‘But
everything’s curi-ous today. I think I may as well go in at once.’ And in
she went.

Once more she found her-self in the long hall, and close to the little
glass table. ‘Now, I’ll man-age bet-ter this time,’ she said to her-self,
and began by tak-ing the little golden key, and un-lock-ing the door that
led into the garden. Then she went to work nib-bling at the mush-room (she
had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high:
then she walked down the little pas-sage: and THEN--she found her-self at
last in the beau-ti-ful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cool
foun-tains.




CHAPTER VIII. The Queen’s Cro-quet-Ground

A large rose-tree stood near the en-trance of the garden: the roses
grow-ing on it were white, but there were three garden-ers at it, busily
paint-ing them red. Alice thought this a very curi-ous thing, and she went
nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of
them say, ‘Look out now, Five! Don’t go splash-ing paint over me like
that!’

‘I couldn’t help it,’ said Five, in a sulky tone; ‘Seven jogged my
el-bow.’

On which Seven looked up and said, ‘That’s right, Five! Al-ways lay the
blame on oth-ers!’

‘YOU’D bet-ter not talk!’ said Five. ‘I heard the Queen say only
yes-ter-day you de-served to be be-headed!’

‘What for?’ said the one who had spoken first.

‘That’s none of YOUR busi-ness, Two!’ said Seven.

‘Yes, it IS his busi-ness!’ said Five, ‘and I’ll tell him--it was for
bring-ing the cook tulip-roots in-stead of onions.’

Seven flung down his brush, and had just be-gun ‘Well, of all the un-just
things--’ when his eye chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watch-ing
them, and he checked him-self sud-denly: the oth-ers looked round also, and
all of them bowed low.

‘Would you tell me,’ said Alice, a little tim-idly, ‘why you are paint-ing
those roses?’

Five and Seven said noth-ing, but looked at Two. Two began in a low
voice, ‘Why the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a
RED rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mis-take; and if the Queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.
So you see, Miss, we’re do-ing our best, afore she comes, to--’ At this
mo-ment Five, who had been anxiously look-ing across the garden, called
out ‘The Queen! The Queen!’ and the three garden-ers in-stantly threw
them-selves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many foot-steps,
and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten sol-diers car-ry-ing clubs; these were all shaped like
the three garden-ers, ob-long and flat, with their hands and feet at the
corners: next the ten courtiers; these were or-na-men-ted all over with
dia-monds, and walked two and two, as the sol-diers did. After these came
the royal chil-dren; there were ten of them, and the little dears came
jump-ing mer-rily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all or-na-men-ted
with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and Queens, and among
them Alice re-cog-nised the White Rab-bit: it was talk-ing in a hur-ried
nervous man-ner, smil-ing at everything that was said, and went by without
no-ti-cing her. Then fol-lowed the Knave of Hearts, car-ry-ing the King’s
crown on a crim-son vel-vet cush-ion; and, last of all this grand
pro-ces-sion, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

Alice was rather doubt-ful whether she ought not to lie down on her face
like the three garden-ers, but she could not re-mem-ber ever hav-ing heard
of such a rule at pro-ces-sions; ‘and be-sides, what would be the use of
a pro-ces-sion,’ thought she, ‘if people had all to lie down upon their
faces, so that they couldn’t see it?’ So she stood still where she was,
and waited.

When the pro-ces-sion came op-pos-ite to Alice, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the Queen said severely ‘Who is this?’ She said it to the
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

‘Idiot!’ said the Queen, toss-ing her head im-pa-tiently; and, turn-ing to
Alice, she went on, ‘What’s your name, child?’

‘My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,’ said Alice very po-litely;
but she ad-ded, to her-self, ‘Why, they’re only a pack of cards, after
all. I needn’t be afraid of them!’

‘And who are THESE?’ said the Queen, point-ing to the three garden-ers who
were ly-ing round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were ly-ing on their
faces, and the pat-tern on their backs was the same as the rest of the
pack, she could not tell whether they were garden-ers, or sol-diers, or
courtiers, or three of her own chil-dren.

‘How should I know?’ said Alice, sur-prised at her own cour-age. ‘It’s no
busi-ness of MINE.’

The Queen turned crim-son with fury, and, after glar-ing at her for a
mo-ment like a wild beast, screamed ‘Off with her head! Off--’

‘Non-sense!’ said Alice, very loudly and de-cidedly, and the Queen was
si-lent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and tim-idly said ‘Con-sider, my
dear: she is only a child!’

The Queen turned an-grily away from him, and said to the Knave ‘Turn them
over!’

The Knave did so, very care-fully, with one foot.

‘Get up!’ said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three
garden-ers in-stantly jumped up, and began bow-ing to the King, the Queen,
the royal chil-dren, and every-body else.

‘Leave off that!’ screamed the Queen. ‘You make me giddy.’ And then,
turn-ing to the rose-tree, she went on, ‘What HAVE you been do-ing here?’

‘May it please your Majesty,’ said Two, in a very humble tone, go-ing
down on one knee as he spoke, ‘we were try-ing--’

‘I see!’ said the Queen, who had mean-while been ex-amin-ing the roses.
‘Off with their heads!’ and the pro-ces-sion moved on, three of the
sol-diers re-main-ing be-hind to ex-ecute the un-for-tu-nate garden-ers, who ran
to Alice for pro-tec-tion.

‘You shan’t be be-headed!’ said Alice, and she put them into a large
flower-pot that stood near. The three sol-diers wandered about for a
minute or two, look-ing for them, and then quietly marched off after the
oth-ers.

‘Are their heads off?’ shouted the Queen.

‘Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!’ the sol-diers shouted
in reply.

‘That’s right!’ shouted the Queen. ‘Can you play cro-quet?’

The sol-diers were si-lent, and looked at Alice, as the ques-tion was
evid-ently meant for her.

‘Yes!’ shouted Alice.

‘Come on, then!’ roared the Queen, and Alice joined the pro-ces-sion,
won-der-ing very much what would hap-pen next.

‘It’s--it’s a very fine day!’ said a timid voice at her side. She was
walk-ing by the White Rab-bit, who was peep-ing anxiously into her face.

‘Very,’ said Alice: ‘--where’s the Duchess?’

‘Hush! Hush!’ said the Rab-bit in a low, hur-ried tone. He looked
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised him-self upon
tip-toe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered ‘She’s un-der
sen-tence of ex-e-cu-tion.’

‘What for?’ said Alice.

‘Did you say “What a pity!”?’ the Rab-bit asked.

‘No, I didn’t,’ said Alice: ‘I don’t think it’s at all a pity. I said
“What for?”’

‘She boxed the Queen’s ears--’ the Rab-bit began. Alice gave a little
scream of laughter. ‘Oh, hush!’ the Rab-bit whispered in a frightened
tone. ‘The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the
Queen said--’

‘Get to your places!’ shouted the Queen in a voice of thun-der, and
people began run-ning about in all dir-ec-tions, tum-bling up against each
other; how-ever, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game
began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curi-ous cro-quet-ground in
her life; it was all ridges and fur-rows; the balls were live hedge-hogs,
the mal-lets live flamin-goes, and the sol-diers had to double them-selves
up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The chief dif-fi-culty Alice found at first was in man-aging her flamingo:
she suc-ceeded in get-ting its body tucked away, com-fort-ably enough, un-der
her arm, with its legs hanging down, but gen-er-ally, just as she had got
its neck nicely straightened out, and was go-ing to give the hedge-hog a
blow with its head, it WOULD twist it-self round and look up in her face,
with such a puzzled ex-pres-sion that she could not help burst-ing out
laugh-ing: and when she had got its head down, and was go-ing to be-gin
again, it was very pro-vok-ing to find that the hedge-hog had un-rolled
it-self, and was in the act of crawl-ing away: be-sides all this, there was
gen-er-ally a ridge or fur-row in the way wherever she wanted to send the
hedge-hog to, and, as the doubled-up sol-diers were al-ways get-ting up
and walk-ing off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the
con-clu-sion that it was a very dif-fi-cult game in-deed.

The play-ers all played at once without wait-ing for turns, quar-rel-ling
all the while, and fight-ing for the hedge-hogs; and in a very short
time the Queen was in a furi-ous pas-sion, and went stamp-ing about, and
shout-ing ‘Off with his head!’ or ‘Off with her head!’ about once in a
minute.

Alice began to feel very un-easy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
dis-pute with the Queen, but she knew that it might hap-pen any minute,
‘and then,’ thought she, ‘what would be-come of me? They’re dread-fully
fond of be-head-ing people here; the great won-der is, that there’s any one
left alive!’

She was look-ing about for some way of es-cape, and won-der-ing whether she
could get away without be-ing seen, when she no-ticed a curi-ous ap-pear-ance
in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watch-ing it
a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to her-self
‘It’s the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have some-body to talk to.’

‘How are you get-ting on?’ said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth
enough for it to speak with.

Alice waited till the eyes ap-peared, and then nod-ded. ‘It’s no use
speak-ing to it,’ she thought, ‘till its ears have come, or at least one
of them.’ In an-other minute the whole head ap-peared, and then Alice put
down her flamingo, and began an ac-count of the game, feel-ing very glad
she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there was
enough of it now in sight, and no more of it ap-peared.

‘I don’t think they play at all fairly,’ Alice began, in rather a
com-plain-ing tone, ‘and they all quar-rel so dread-fully one can’t hear
one-self speak--and they don’t seem to have any rules in par-tic-u-lar;
at least, if there are, nobody at-tends to them--and you’ve no idea how
con-fus-ing it is all the things be-ing alive; for in-stance, there’s the
arch I’ve got to go through next walk-ing about at the other end of the
ground--and I should have cro-queted the Queen’s hedge-hog just now, only
it ran away when it saw mine com-ing!’

‘How do you like the Queen?’ said the Cat in a low voice.

‘Not at all,’ said Alice: ‘she’s so ex-tremely--’ Just then she no-ticed
that the Queen was close be-hind her, listen-ing: so she went on,
‘--likely to win, that it’s hardly worth while fin-ish-ing the game.’

The Queen smiled and passed on.

‘Who ARE you talk-ing to?’ said the King, go-ing up to Alice, and look-ing
at the Cat’s head with great curi-os-ity.

‘It’s a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,’ said Alice: ‘al-low me to
in-tro-duce it.’

‘I don’t like the look of it at all,’ said the King: ‘how-ever, it may
kiss my hand if it likes.’

‘I’d rather not,’ the Cat re-marked.

‘Don’t be im-per-tin-ent,’ said the King, ‘and don’t look at me like that!’
He got be-hind Alice as he spoke.

‘A cat may look at a king,’ said Alice. ‘I’ve read that in some book,
but I don’t re-mem-ber where.’

‘Well, it must be re-moved,’ said the King very de-cidedly, and he called
the Queen, who was passing at the mo-ment, ‘My dear! I wish you would
have this cat re-moved!’

The Queen had only one way of set-tling all dif-fi-culties, great or small.
‘Off with his head!’ she said, without even look-ing round.

‘I’ll fetch the ex-e-cu-tioner my-self,’ said the King eagerly, and he
hur-ried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was go-ing
on, as she heard the Queen’s voice in the dis-tance, scream-ing with
pas-sion. She had already heard her sen-tence three of the play-ers to be
ex-ecuted for hav-ing missed their turns, and she did not like the look
of things at all, as the game was in such con-fu-sion that she never knew
whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedge-hog.

The hedge-hog was en-gaged in a fight with an-other hedge-hog, which seemed
to Alice an ex-cel-lent op-por-tun-ity for cro-quet-ing one of them with the
other: the only dif-fi-culty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the
other side of the garden, where Alice could see it try-ing in a help-less
sort of way to fly up into a tree.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight
was over, and both the hedge-hogs were out of sight: ‘but it doesn’t
mat-ter much,’ thought Alice, ‘as all the arches are gone from this side
of the ground.’ So she tucked it away un-der her arm, that it might not
es-cape again, and went back for a little more con-ver-sa-tion with her
friend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was sur-prised to find quite a
large crowd col-lec-ted round it: there was a dis-pute go-ing on between
the ex-e-cu-tioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talk-ing at once,
while all the rest were quite si-lent, and looked very un-com-fort-able.

The mo-ment Alice ap-peared, she was ap-pealed to by all three to settle
the ques-tion, and they re-peated their ar-gu-ments to her, though, as they
all spoke at once, she found it very hard in-deed to make out ex-actly
what they said.

The ex-e-cu-tioner’s ar-gu-ment was, that you couldn’t cut off a head un-less
there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a
thing be-fore, and he wasn’t go-ing to be-gin at HIS time of life.

The King’s ar-gu-ment was, that any-thing that had a head could be
be-headed, and that you weren’t to talk non-sense.

The Queen’s ar-gu-ment was, that if some-thing wasn’t done about it in less
than no time she’d have every-body ex-ecuted, all round. (It was this last
re-mark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)

Alice could think of noth-ing else to say but ‘It be-longs to the Duchess:
you’d bet-ter ask HER about it.’

‘She’s in prison,’ the Queen said to the ex-e-cu-tioner: ‘fetch her here.’
And the ex-e-cu-tioner went off like an ar-row.

 The Cat’s head began fad-ing away the mo-ment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had en-tirely
dis-ap-peared; so the King and the ex-e-cu-tioner ran wildly up and down
look-ing for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.




CHAPTER IX. The Mock Turtle’s St-ory

‘You can’t think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!’
said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm af-fec-tion-ately into Alice’s, and
they walked off to-gether.

Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleas-ant tem-per, and thought
to her-self that per-haps it was only the pep-per that had made her so
sav-age when they met in the kit-chen.

‘When I’M a Duchess,’ she said to her-self, (not in a very hope-ful tone
though), ‘I won’t have any pep-per in my kit-chen AT ALL. Soup does very
well without--Maybe it’s al-ways pep-per that makes people hot-tempered,’
she went on, very much pleased at hav-ing found out a new kind of
rule, ‘and vin-egar that makes them sour--and cam-o-mile that makes
them bit-ter--and--and bar-ley-sugar and such things that make chil-dren
sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew that: then they wouldn’t be so
stingy about it, you know--’

She had quite for-got-ten the Duchess by this time, and was a little
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. ‘You’re think-ing
about some-thing, my dear, and that makes you for-get to talk. I can’t
tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall re-mem-ber it in
a bit.’

‘Per-haps it hasn’t one,’ Alice ven-tured to re-mark.

‘Tut, tut, child!’ said the Duchess. ‘Everything’s got a moral, if only
you can find it.’ And she squeezed her-self up closer to Alice’s side as
she spoke.

Alice did not much like keep-ing so close to her: first, be-cause the
Duchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, be-cause she was ex-actly the
right height to rest her chin upon Alice’s shoulder, and it was an
un-com-fort-ably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she
bore it as well as she could.

‘The game’s go-ing on rather bet-ter now,’ she said, by way of keep-ing up
the con-ver-sa-tion a little.

‘’Tis so,’ said the Duchess: ‘and the moral of that is--“Oh, ‘tis love,
‘tis love, that makes the world go round!”’

‘Some-body said,’ Alice whispered, ‘that it’s done by every-body mind-ing
their own busi-ness!’

‘Ah, well! It means much the same thing,’ said the Duchess, dig-ging her
sharp little chin into Alice’s shoulder as she ad-ded, ‘and the moral
of THAT is--“Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of
them-selves.”’

‘How fond she is of find-ing mor-als in things!’ Alice thought to her-self.

‘I dare say you’re won-der-ing why I don’t put my arm round your waist,’
the Duchess said after a pause: ‘the reason is, that I’m doubt-ful about
the tem-per of your flamingo. Shall I try the ex-per-i-ment?’

‘HE might bite,’ Alice cau-tiously replied, not feel-ing at all anxious to
have the ex-per-i-ment tried.

‘Very true,’ said the Duchess: ‘flamin-goes and mus-tard both bite. And
the moral of that is--“Birds of a feather flock to-gether.”’

‘Only mus-tard isn’t a bird,’ Alice re-marked.

‘Right, as usual,’ said the Duchess: ‘what a clear way you have of
put-ting things!’

‘It’s a min-eral, I THINK,’ said Alice.

‘Of course it is,’ said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everything that Alice said; ‘there’s a large mus-tard-mine near here. And
the moral of that is--“The more there is of mine, the less there is of
yours.”’

‘Oh, I know!’ ex-claimed Alice, who had not at-ten-ded to this last re-mark,
‘it’s a ve-get-able. It doesn’t look like one, but it is.’

‘I quite agree with you,’ said the Duchess; ‘and the moral of that
is--“Be what you would seem to be”--or if you’d like it put more
simply--“Never ima-gine your-self not to be oth-er-wise than what it might
ap-pear to oth-ers that what you were or might have been was not oth-er-wise
than what you had been would have ap-peared to them to be oth-er-wise.”’

‘I think I should un-der-stand that bet-ter,’ Alice said very po-litely, ‘if
I had it writ-ten down: but I can’t quite fol-low it as you say it.’

‘That’s noth-ing to what I could say if I chose,’ the Duchess replied, in
a pleased tone.

‘Pray don’t trouble your-self to say it any longer than that,’ said
Alice.

‘Oh, don’t talk about trouble!’ said the Duchess. ‘I make you a present
of everything I’ve said as yet.’

‘A cheap sort of present!’ thought Alice. ‘I’m glad they don’t give
birth-day presents like that!’ But she did not ven-ture to say it out
loud.

‘Think-ing again?’ the Duchess asked, with an-other dig of her sharp
little chin.

‘I’ve a right to think,’ said Alice sharply, for she was be-gin-ning to
feel a little wor-ried.

‘Just about as much right,’ said the Duchess, ‘as pigs have to fly; and
the m--’

But here, to Alice’s great sur-prise, the Duchess’s voice died away, even
in the middle of her fa-vour-ite word ‘moral,’ and the arm that was linked
into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen
in front of them, with her arms fol-ded, frown-ing like a thun-der-storm.

‘A fine day, your Majesty!’ the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.

‘Now, I give you fair warn-ing,’ shouted the Queen, stamp-ing on the
ground as she spoke; ‘either you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time! Take your choice!’

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a mo-ment.

‘Let’s go on with the game,’ the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was
too much frightened to say a word, but slowly fol-lowed her back to the
cro-quet-ground.

The other guests had taken ad-vant-age of the Queen’s ab-sence, and were
rest-ing in the shade: how-ever, the mo-ment they saw her, they hur-ried
back to the game, the Queen merely re-mark-ing that a mo-ment’s delay would
cost them their lives.

All the time they were play-ing the Queen never left off quar-rel-ling with
the other play-ers, and shout-ing ‘Off with his head!’ or ‘Off with her
head!’ Those whom she sen-tenced were taken into cus-tody by the sol-diers,
who of course had to leave off be-ing arches to do this, so that by
the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the
play-ers, ex-cept the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in cus-tody and
un-der sen-tence of ex-e-cu-tion.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, ‘Have
you seen the Mock Turtle yet?’

‘No,’ said Alice. ‘I don’t even know what a Mock Turtle is.’

‘It’s the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,’ said the Queen.

‘I never saw one, or heard of one,’ said Alice.

‘Come on, then,’ said the Queen, ‘and he shall tell you his his-tory,’

As they walked off to-gether, Alice heard the King say in a low voice,
to the com-pany gen-er-ally, ‘You are all pardoned.’ ‘Come, THAT’S a good
thing!’ she said to her-self, for she had felt quite un-happy at the
num-ber of ex-e-cu-tions the Queen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, ly-ing fast asleep in the sun.
(IF you don’t know what a Gryphon is, look at the pic-ture.) ‘Up, lazy
thing!’ said the Queen, ‘and take this young lady to see the Mock
Turtle, and to hear his his-tory. I must go back and see after some
ex-e-cu-tions I have ordered’; and she walked off, leav-ing Alice alone with
the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on
the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go
after that sav-age Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till
she was out of sight: then it chuckled. ‘What fun!’ said the Gryphon,
half to it-self, half to Alice.

‘What IS the fun?’ said Alice.

‘Why, SHE,’ said the Gryphon. ‘It’s all her fancy, that: they never
ex-ecutes nobody, you know. Come on!’

‘Every-body says “come on!” here,’ thought Alice, as she went slowly
after it: ‘I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!’

They had not gone far be-fore they saw the Mock Turtle in the dis-tance,
sit-ting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came
nearer, Alice could hear him sigh-ing as if his heart would break. She
pit-ied him deeply. ‘What is his sor-row?’ she asked the Gryphon, and the
Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as be-fore, ‘It’s all his
fancy, that: he hasn’t got no sor-row, you know. Come on!’

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes
full of tears, but said noth-ing.

‘This here young lady,’ said the Gryphon, ‘she wants for to know your
his-tory, she do.’

‘I’ll tell it her,’ said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hol-low tone: ‘sit
down, both of you, and don’t speak a word till I’ve fin-ished.’

So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to
her-self, ‘I don’t see how he can EVEN fin-ish, if he doesn’t be-gin.’ But
she waited pa-tiently.

‘Once,’ said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, ‘I was a real
Turtle.’

These words were fol-lowed by a very long si-lence, broken only by an
oc-ca-sional ex-clam-a-tion of ‘Hjckrrh!’ from the Gryphon, and the con-stant
heavy sob-bing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly get-ting up and
say-ing, ‘Thank you, sir, for your in-ter-est-ing story,’ but she could
not help think-ing there MUST be more to come, so she sat still and said
noth-ing.

‘When we were little,’ the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sob-bing a little now and then, ‘we went to school in the
sea. The mas-ter was an old Turtle--we used to call him Tor-toise--’

‘Why did you call him Tor-toise, if he wasn’t one?’ Alice asked.

‘We called him Tor-toise be-cause he taught us,’ said the Mock Turtle
an-grily: ‘really you are very dull!’

‘You ought to be ashamed of your-self for ask-ing such a simple ques-tion,’
ad-ded the Gryphon; and then they both sat si-lent and looked at poor
Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said
to the Mock Turtle, ‘Drive on, old fel-low! Don’t be all day about it!’
and he went on in these words:

‘Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn’t be-lieve it--’

‘I never said I didn’t!’ in-ter-rup-ted Alice.

‘You did,’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘Hold your tongue!’ ad-ded the Gryphon, be-fore Alice could speak again.
The Mock Turtle went on.

‘We had the best of edu-ca-tions--in fact, we went to school every day--’

‘I’VE been to a day-school, too,’ said Alice; ‘you needn’t be so proud
as all that.’

‘With ex-tras?’ asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

‘Yes,’ said Alice, ‘we learned French and mu-sic.’

‘And wash-ing?’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘Cer-tainly not!’ said Alice in-dig-nantly.

‘Ah! then yours wasn’t a really good school,’ said the Mock Turtle in
a tone of great re-lief. ‘Now at OURS they had at the end of the bill,
“French, mu-sic, AND WASHING--ex-tra.”’

‘You couldn’t have wanted it much,’ said Alice; ‘liv-ing at the bot-tom of
the sea.’

‘I couldn’t af-ford to learn it.’ said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. ‘I
only took the reg-u-lar course.’

‘What was that?’ in-quired Alice.

‘Reel-ing and Writh-ing, of course, to be-gin with,’ the Mock Turtle
replied; ‘and then the dif-fer-ent branches of Arith-metic--Am-bi-tion,
Dis-trac-tion, Ugli-fic-a-tion, and Der-i-sion.’

‘I never heard of “Ugli-fic-a-tion,”’ Alice ven-tured to say. ‘What is it?’

The Gryphon lif-ted up both its paws in sur-prise. ‘What! Never heard of
ug-li-fy-ing!’ it ex-claimed. ‘You know what to beau-tify is, I sup-pose?’

‘Yes,’ said Alice doubt-fully: ‘it means--to--make--any-thing--pret-tier.’

‘Well, then,’ the Gryphon went on, ‘if you don’t know what to ug-lify is,
you ARE a sim-pleton.’

Alice did not feel en-cour-aged to ask any more ques-tions about it, so she
turned to the Mock Turtle, and said ‘What else had you to learn?’

‘Well, there was Mys-tery,’ the Mock Turtle replied, count-ing off
the sub-jects on his flap-pers, ‘--Mys-tery, an-cient and mod-ern, with
Seao-graphy: then Drawl-ing--the Drawl-ing-mas-ter was an old con-ger-eel,
that used to come once a week: HE taught us Drawl-ing, Stretch-ing, and
Faint-ing in Coils.’

‘What was THAT like?’ said Alice.

‘Well, I can’t show it you my-self,’ the Mock Turtle said: ‘I’m too
stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.’

‘Hadn’t time,’ said the Gryphon: ‘I went to the Clas-sics mas-ter, though.
He was an old crab, HE was.’

‘I never went to him,’ the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: ‘he taught
Laugh-ing and Grief, they used to say.’

‘So he did, so he did,’ said the Gryphon, sigh-ing in his turn; and both
creatures hid their faces in their paws.

‘And how many hours a day did you do les-sons?’ said Alice, in a hurry to
change the sub-ject.

‘Ten hours the first day,’ said the Mock Turtle: ‘nine the next, and so
on.’

‘What a curi-ous plan!’ ex-claimed Alice.

‘That’s the reason they’re called les-sons,’ the Gryphon re-marked:
‘be-cause they lessen from day to day.’

This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little
be-fore she made her next re-mark. ‘Then the el-ev-enth day must have been a
hol-i-day?’

‘Of course it was,’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘And how did you man-age on the twelfth?’ Alice went on eagerly.

‘That’s enough about les-sons,’ the Gryphon in-ter-rup-ted in a very de-cided
tone: ‘tell her some-thing about the games now.’




CHAPTER X. The Lob-ster Quad-rille

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flap-per across
his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or
two sobs choked his voice. ‘Same as if he had a bone in his throat,’
said the Gryphon: and it set to work shak-ing him and punch-ing him in
the back. At last the Mock Turtle re-covered his voice, and, with tears
run-ning down his cheeks, he went on again:--

‘You may not have lived much un-der the sea--’ [‘I haven’t,’ said
Alice)--‘and per-haps you were never even in-tro-duced to a lob-ster--’
(Alice began to say ‘I once tasted--’ but checked her-self hast-ily, and
said ‘No, never’) ‘--so you can have no idea what a de-light-ful thing a
Lob-ster Quad-rille is!’

‘No, in-deed,’ said Alice. ‘What sort of a dance is it?’

‘Why,’ said the Gryphon, ‘you first form into a line along the
sea-shore--’

‘Two lines!’ cried the Mock Turtle. ‘Seals, turtles, sal-mon, and so on;
then, when you’ve cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--’

‘THAT gen-er-ally takes some time,’ in-ter-rup-ted the Gryphon.

‘--you ad-vance twice--’

‘Each with a lob-ster as a part-ner!’ cried the Gryphon.

‘Of course,’ the Mock Turtle said: ‘ad-vance twice, set to part-ners--’

‘--change lob-sters, and re-tire in same or-der,’ con-tin-ued the Gryphon.

‘Then, you know,’ the Mock Turtle went on, ‘you throw the--’

‘The lob-sters!’ shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

‘--as far out to sea as you can--’

‘Swim after them!’ screamed the Gryphon.

‘Turn a somer-sault in the sea!’ cried the Mock Turtle, caper-ing wildly
about.

‘Change lob-sters again!’ yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

‘Back to land again, and that’s all the first fig-ure,’ said the Mock
Turtle, sud-denly drop-ping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been
jump-ing about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly
and quietly, and looked at Alice.

‘It must be a very pretty dance,’ said Alice tim-idly.

‘Would you like to see a little of it?’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘Very much in-deed,’ said Alice.

‘Come, let’s try the first fig-ure!’ said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon.
‘We can do without lob-sters, you know. Which shall sing?’

‘Oh, YOU sing,’ said the Gryphon. ‘I’ve for-got-ten the words.’

So they began sol-emnly dan-cing round and round Alice, every now and
then tread-ing on her toes when they passed too close, and wav-ing their
fore-paws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly
and sadly:--

 ‘“Will you walk a little faster?” said a whit-ing to a snail.
 “There’s a por-poise close be-hind us, and he’s tread-ing on my tail.

 See how eagerly the lob-sters and the turtles all ad-vance!
 They are wait-ing on the shingle--will you come and join the dance?

 Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
 Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?

 “You can really have no no-tion how de-light-ful it will be
 When they take us up and throw us, with the lob-sters, out to sea!”
  But the snail replied “Too far, too far!” and gave a look askance--
 Said he thanked the whit-ing kindly, but he would not join the dance.

 Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
 Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

 ‘“What mat-ters it how far we go?” his scaly friend replied.
 “There is an-other shore, you know, upon the other side.
 The fur-ther off from Eng-land the nearer is to France--
 Then turn not pale, be-loved snail, but come and join the dance.

 Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, will you join the dance?
 Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?”’

‘Thank you, it’s a very in-ter-est-ing dance to watch,’ said Alice, feel-ing
very glad that it was over at last: ‘and I do so like that curi-ous song
about the whit-ing!’

‘Oh, as to the whit-ing,’ said the Mock Turtle, ‘they--you’ve seen them,
of course?’

‘Yes,’ said Alice, ‘I’ve of-ten seen them at dinn--’ she checked her-self
hast-ily.

‘I don’t know where Dinn may be,’ said the Mock Turtle, ‘but if you’ve
seen them so of-ten, of course you know what they’re like.’

‘I be-lieve so,’ Alice replied thought-fully. ‘They have their tails in
their mouths--and they’re all over crumbs.’

‘You’re wrong about the crumbs,’ said the Mock Turtle: ‘crumbs would all
wash off in the sea. But they HAVE their tails in their mouths; and the
reason is--’ here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.--‘Tell her
about the reason and all that,’ he said to the Gryphon.

‘The reason is,’ said the Gryphon, ‘that they WOULD go with the lob-sters
to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long
way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldn’t get
them out again. That’s all.’

‘Thank you,’ said Alice, ‘it’s very in-ter-est-ing. I never knew so much
about a whit-ing be-fore.’

‘I can tell you more than that, if you like,’ said the Gryphon. ‘Do you
know why it’s called a whit-ing?’

‘I never thought about it,’ said Alice. ‘Why?’

‘IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.’ the Gryphon replied very sol-emnly.

Alice was thor-oughly puzzled. ‘Does the boots and shoes!’ she re-peated
in a won-der-ing tone.

‘Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?’ said the Gryphon. ‘I mean, what
makes them so shiny?’

Alice looked down at them, and con-sidered a little be-fore she gave her
an-swer. ‘They’re done with black-ing, I be-lieve.’

‘Boots and shoes un-der the sea,’ the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,
‘are done with a whit-ing. Now you know.’

‘And what are they made of?’ Alice asked in a tone of great curi-os-ity.

‘Soles and eels, of course,’ the Gryphon replied rather im-pa-tiently:
‘any shrimp could have told you that.’

‘If I’d been the whit-ing,’ said Alice, whose thoughts were still run-ning
on the song, ‘I’d have said to the por-poise, “Keep back, please: we
don’t want YOU with us!”’

‘They were ob-liged to have him with them,’ the Mock Turtle said: ‘no
wise fish would go any-where without a por-poise.’

‘Wouldn’t it really?’ said Alice in a tone of great sur-prise.

‘Of course not,’ said the Mock Turtle: ‘why, if a fish came to ME, and
told me he was go-ing a jour-ney, I should say “With what por-poise?”’

‘Don’t you mean “pur-pose”?’ said Alice.

‘I mean what I say,’ the Mock Turtle replied in an of-fen-ded tone. And
the Gryphon ad-ded ‘Come, let’s hear some of YOUR ad-ven-tures.’

‘I could tell you my ad-ven-tures--be-gin-ning from this morn-ing,’ said
Alice a little tim-idly: ‘but it’s no use go-ing back to yes-ter-day,
be-cause I was a dif-fer-ent per-son then.’

‘Ex-plain all that,’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘No, no! The ad-ven-tures first,’ said the Gryphon in an im-pa-tient tone:
‘ex-plan-a-tions take such a dread-ful time.’

So Alice began telling them her ad-ven-tures from the time when she first
saw the White Rab-bit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she gained cour-age as she went
on. Her listen-ers were per-fectly quiet till she got to the part about
her re-peat-ing ‘YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,’ to the Cater-pil-lar, and the
words all com-ing dif-fer-ent, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath,
and said ‘That’s very curi-ous.’

‘It’s all about as curi-ous as it can be,’ said the Gryphon.

‘It all came dif-fer-ent!’ the Mock Turtle re-peated thought-fully. ‘I
should like to hear her try and re-peat some-thing now. Tell her to
be-gin.’ He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of
au-thor-ity over Alice.

‘Stand up and re-peat “‘TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,”’ said the
Gryphon.

‘How the creatures or-der one about, and make one re-peat les-sons!’
thought Alice; ‘I might as well be at school at once.’ However, she
got up, and began to re-peat it, but her head was so full of the Lob-ster
Quad-rille, that she hardly knew what she was say-ing, and the words came
very queer in-deed:--

  ‘’Tis the voice of the Lob-ster; I heard him de-clare,
  “You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair.”
   As a duck with its eye-lids, so he with his nose
  Trims his belt and his but-tons, and turns out his toes.’

       [later edi-tions con-tin-ued as fol-lows
  When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
  And will talk in con-temp-tu-ous tones of the Shark,
  But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
  His voice has a timid and trem-u-lous sound.]

‘That’s dif-fer-ent from what I used to say when I was a child,’ said the
Gryphon.

‘Well, I never heard it be-fore,’ said the Mock Turtle; ‘but it sounds
un-com-mon non-sense.’

Alice said noth-ing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
won-der-ing if any-thing would EVER hap-pen in a nat-ural way again.

‘I should like to have it ex-plained,’ said the Mock Turtle.

‘She can’t ex-plain it,’ said the Gryphon hast-ily. ‘Go on with the next
verse.’

‘But about his toes?’ the Mock Turtle per-sisted. ‘How COULD he turn them
out with his nose, you know?’

‘It’s the first po-s-i-tion in dan-cing.’ Alice said; but was dread-fully
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the sub-ject.

‘Go on with the next verse,’ the Gryphon re-peated im-pa-tiently: ‘it
be-gins “I passed by his garden.”’

Alice did not dare to dis-obey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trem-bling voice:--

  ‘I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
  How the Owl and the Pan-ther were shar-ing a pie--’

    [later edi-tions con-tin-ued as fol-lows
  The Pan-ther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
  While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
  When the pie was all fin-ished, the Owl, as a boon,
  Was kindly per-mit-ted to pocket the spoon:
  While the Pan-ther re-ceived knife and fork with a growl,
  And con-cluded the ban-quet--]

‘What IS the use of re-peat-ing all that stuff,’ the Mock Turtle
in-ter-rup-ted, ‘if you don’t ex-plain it as you go on? It’s by far the most
con-fus-ing thing I ever heard!’

‘Yes, I think you’d bet-ter leave off,’ said the Gryphon: and Alice was
only too glad to do so.

‘Shall we try an-other fig-ure of the Lob-ster Quad-rille?’ the Gryphon went
on. ‘Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?’

‘Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,’ Alice
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather of-fen-ded tone,
‘Hm! No ac-count-ing for tastes! Sing her “Turtle Soup,” will you, old
fel-low?’

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice some-times choked
with sobs, to sing this:--

   ‘Beau-ti-ful Soup, so rich and green,
   Wait-ing in a hot tur-een!
   Who for such dain-ties would not stoop?
   Soup of the even-ing, beau-ti-ful Soup!
   Soup of the even-ing, beau-ti-ful Soup!
     Beau--ooti-ful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ooti-ful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of the e--e--even-ing,
     Beau-ti-ful, beau-ti-ful Soup!

   ‘Beau-ti-ful Soup! Who cares for fish,
   Game, or any other dish?
   Who would not give all else for two
   Penny-worth only of beau-ti-ful Soup?
   Penny-worth only of beau-ti-ful Soup?
     Beau--ooti-ful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ooti-ful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of the e--e--even-ing,
     Beau-ti-ful, beauti--FUL SOUP!’

‘Chorus again!’ cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just be-gun
to re-peat it, when a cry of ‘The trial’s be-gin-ning!’ was heard in the
dis-tance.

‘Come on!’ cried the Gryphon, and, tak-ing Alice by the hand, it hur-ried
off, without wait-ing for the end of the song.

‘What trial is it?’ Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only
answered ‘Come on!’ and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, car-ried on the breeze that fol-lowed them, the mel-an-choly words:--

   ‘Soo--oop of the e--e--even-ing,
     Beau-ti-ful, beau-ti-ful Soup!’




CHAPTER XI. Who Stole the Tarts?

The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they
ar-rived, with a great crowd as-sembled about them--all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was
stand-ing be-fore them, in chains, with a sol-dier on each side to guard
him; and near the King was the White Rab-bit, with a trum-pet in one hand,
and a scroll of parch-ment in the other. In the very middle of the court
was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good,
that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them--‘I wish they’d get the
trial done,’ she thought, ‘and hand round the re-fresh-ments!’ But there
seemed to be no chance of this, so she began look-ing at everything about
her, to pass away the time.

Alice had never been in a court of justice be-fore, but she had read
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. ‘That’s the judge,’ she said to
her-self, ‘be-cause of his great wig.’

The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the
wig, (look at the frontis-piece if you want to see how he did it,) he did
not look at all com-fort-able, and it was cer-tainly not be-com-ing.

‘And that’s the jury-box,’ thought Alice, ‘and those twelve creatures,’
(she was ob-liged to say ‘creatures,’ you see, be-cause some of them were
an-im-als, and some were birds,) ‘I sup-pose they are the jur-ors.’ She said
this last word two or three times over to her-self, be-ing rather proud of
it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her
age knew the mean-ing of it at all. However, ‘jury-men’ would have done
just as well.

The twelve jur-ors were all writ-ing very busily on slates. ‘What are they
do-ing?’ Alice whispered to the Gryphon. ‘They can’t have any-thing to put
down yet, be-fore the trial’s be-gun.’

‘They’re put-ting down their names,’ the Gryphon whispered in reply, ‘for
fear they should for-get them be-fore the end of the trial.’

‘Stu-pid things!’ Alice began in a loud, in-dig-nant voice, but she stopped
hast-ily, for the White Rab-bit cried out, ‘Si-lence in the court!’ and the
King put on his spec-tacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who
was talk-ing.

Alice could see, as well as if she were look-ing over their shoulders,
that all the jur-ors were writ-ing down ‘stu-pid things!’ on their slates,
and she could even make out that one of them didn’t know how to spell
‘stu-pid,’ and that he had to ask his neigh-bour to tell him. ‘A nice
muddle their slates’ll be in be-fore the trial’s over!’ thought Alice.

One of the jur-ors had a pen-cil that squeaked. This of course, Alice
could not stand, and she went round the court and got be-hind him, and
very soon found an op-por-tun-ity of tak-ing it away. She did it so quickly
that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Liz-ard) could not make out
at all what had be-come of it; so, after hunt-ing all about for it, he was
ob-liged to write with one fin-ger for the rest of the day; and this was
of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

‘Her-ald, read the ac-cus-a-tion!’ said the King.

On this the White Rab-bit blew three blasts on the trum-pet, and then
un-rolled the parch-ment scroll, and read as fol-lows:--

   ‘The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
      All on a sum-mer day:
    The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
      And took them quite away!’

‘Con-sider your ver-dict,’ the King said to the jury.

‘Not yet, not yet!’ the Rab-bit hast-ily in-ter-rup-ted. ‘There’s a great
deal to come be-fore that!’

‘Call the first wit-ness,’ said the King; and the White Rab-bit blew three
blasts on the trum-pet, and called out, ‘First wit-ness!’

The first wit-ness was the Hat-ter. He came in with a tea-cup in one
hand and a piece of bread-and-but-ter in the other. ‘I beg par-don, your
Majesty,’ he began, ‘for bring-ing these in: but I hadn’t quite fin-ished
my tea when I was sent for.’

‘You ought to have fin-ished,’ said the King. ‘When did you be-gin?’

The Hat-ter looked at the March Hare, who had fol-lowed him into the
court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. ‘Four-teenth of March, I think it
was,’ he said.

‘Fif-teenth,’ said the March Hare.

‘Six-teenth,’ ad-ded the Dormouse.

‘Write that down,’ the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly
wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then ad-ded them up, and
re-duced the an-swer to shil-lings and pence.

‘Take off your hat,’ the King said to the Hat-ter.

‘It isn’t mine,’ said the Hat-ter.

‘Stolen!’ the King ex-claimed, turn-ing to the jury, who in-stantly made a
memor-andum of the fact.

‘I keep them to sell,’ the Hat-ter ad-ded as an ex-plan-a-tion; ‘I’ve none of
my own. I’m a hat-ter.’

Here the Queen put on her spec-tacles, and began star-ing at the Hat-ter,
who turned pale and fid-geted.

‘Give your evid-ence,’ said the King; ‘and don’t be nervous, or I’ll have
you ex-ecuted on the spot.’

This did not seem to en-cour-age the wit-ness at all: he kept shift-ing
from one foot to the other, look-ing un-eas-ily at the Queen, and in
his con-fu-sion he bit a large piece out of his tea-cup in-stead of the
bread-and-but-ter.

Just at this mo-ment Alice felt a very curi-ous sen-sa-tion, which puzzled
her a good deal un-til she made out what it was: she was be-gin-ning to
grow lar-ger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave
the court; but on second thoughts she de-cided to re-main where she was as
long as there was room for her.

‘I wish you wouldn’t squeeze so.’ said the Dormouse, who was sit-ting
next to her. ‘I can hardly breathe.’

‘I can’t help it,’ said Alice very meekly: ‘I’m grow-ing.’

‘You’ve no right to grow here,’ said the Dormouse.

‘Don’t talk non-sense,’ said Alice more boldly: ‘you know you’re grow-ing
too.’

‘Yes, but I grow at a reas-on-able pace,’ said the Dormouse: ‘not in that
ri-dicu-lous fash-ion.’ And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the
other side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off star-ing at the Hat-ter, and,
just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the of-ficers
of the court, ‘Bring me the list of the sing-ers in the last con-cert!’ on
which the wretched Hat-ter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

‘Give your evid-ence,’ the King re-peated an-grily, ‘or I’ll have you
ex-ecuted, whether you’re nervous or not.’

‘I’m a poor man, your Majesty,’ the Hat-ter began, in a trem-bling voice,
‘--and I hadn’t be-gun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with the
bread-and-but-ter get-ting so thin--and the twink-ling of the tea--’

‘The twink-ling of the what?’ said the King.

‘It began with the tea,’ the Hat-ter replied.

‘Of course twink-ling be-gins with a T!’ said the King sharply. ‘Do you
take me for a dunce? Go on!’

‘I’m a poor man,’ the Hat-ter went on, ‘and most things twinkled after
that--only the March Hare said--’

‘I didn’t!’ the March Hare in-ter-rup-ted in a great hurry.

‘You did!’ said the Hat-ter.

‘I deny it!’ said the March Hare.

‘He denies it,’ said the King: ‘leave out that part.’

‘Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said--’ the Hat-ter went on, look-ing
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied
noth-ing, be-ing fast asleep.

‘After that,’ con-tin-ued the Hat-ter, ‘I cut some more bread-and-but-ter--’

‘But what did the Dormouse say?’ one of the jury asked.

‘That I can’t re-mem-ber,’ said the Hat-ter.

‘You MUST re-mem-ber,’ re-marked the King, ‘or I’ll have you ex-ecuted.’

The miser-able Hat-ter dropped his tea-cup and bread-and-but-ter, and went
down on one knee. ‘I’m a poor man, your Majesty,’ he began.

‘You’re a very poor speaker,’ said the King.

Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was im-me-di-ately sup-pressed by
the of-ficers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just
ex-plain to you how it was done. They had a large can-vas bag, which tied
up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,
head first, and then sat upon it.)

‘I’m glad I’ve seen that done,’ thought Alice. ‘I’ve so of-ten read
in the news-pa-pers, at the end of tri-als, “There was some at-tempts
at ap-plause, which was im-me-di-ately sup-pressed by the of-ficers of the
court,” and I never un-der-stood what it meant till now.’

‘If that’s all you know about it, you may stand down,’ con-tin-ued the
King.

‘I can’t go no lower,’ said the Hat-ter: ‘I’m on the floor, as it is.’

‘Then you may SIT down,’ the King replied.

Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was sup-pressed.

‘Come, that fin-ished the guinea-pigs!’ thought Alice. ‘Now we shall get
on bet-ter.’

‘I’d rather fin-ish my tea,’ said the Hat-ter, with an anxious look at the
Queen, who was read-ing the list of sing-ers.

‘You may go,’ said the King, and the Hat-ter hur-riedly left the court,
without even wait-ing to put his shoes on.

‘--and just take his head off out-side,’ the Queen ad-ded to one of the
of-ficers: but the Hat-ter was out of sight be-fore the of-ficer could get
to the door.

‘Call the next wit-ness!’ said the King.

The next wit-ness was the Duchess’s cook. She car-ried the pep-per-box in
her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even be-fore she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneez-ing all at once.

‘Give your evid-ence,’ said the King.

‘Shan’t,’ said the cook.

The King looked anxiously at the White Rab-bit, who said in a low voice,
‘Your Majesty must cross-ex-am-ine THIS wit-ness.’

‘Well, if I must, I must,’ the King said, with a mel-an-choly air, and,
after fold-ing his arms and frown-ing at the cook till his eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, ‘What are tarts made of?’

‘Pep-per, mostly,’ said the cook.

‘Treacle,’ said a sleepy voice be-hind her.

‘Col-lar that Dormouse,’ the Queen shrieked out. ‘Be-head that Dormouse!
Turn that Dormouse out of court! Sup-press him! Pinch him! Off with his
whiskers!’

For some minutes the whole court was in con-fu-sion, get-ting the Dormouse
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
dis-ap-peared.

‘Never mind!’ said the King, with an air of great re-lief. ‘Call the next
wit-ness.’ And he ad-ded in an un-der-tone to the Queen, ‘Really, my dear,
YOU must cross-ex-am-ine the next wit-ness. It quite makes my fore-head
ache!’

Alice watched the White Rab-bit as he fumbled over the list, feel-ing very
curi-ous to see what the next wit-ness would be like, ‘--for they haven’t
got much evid-ence YET,’ she said to her-self. Ima-gine her sur-prise, when
the White Rab-bit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the
name ‘Alice!’




CHAPTER XII. Alice’s Evid-ence


‘Here!’ cried Alice, quite for-get-ting in the flurry of the mo-ment how
large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such
a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt,
up-set-ting all the jury-men on to the heads of the crowd be-low, and there
they lay sprawl-ing about, re-mind-ing her very much of a globe of gold-fish
she had ac-ci-dent-ally up-set the week be-fore.

‘Oh, I BEG your par-don!’ she ex-claimed in a tone of great dis-may, and
began pick-ing them up again as quickly as she could, for the ac-ci-dent of
the gold-fish kept run-ning in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea
that they must be col-lec-ted at once and put back into the jury-box, or
they would die.

‘The trial can-not pro-ceed,’ said the King in a very grave voice, ‘un-til
all the jury-men are back in their proper places--ALL,’ he re-peated with
great em-phasis, look-ing hard at Alice as he said do.

Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put
the Liz-ard in head down-wards, and the poor little thing was wav-ing its
tail about in a mel-an-choly way, be-ing quite un-able to move. She soon got
it out again, and put it right; ‘not that it sig-ni-fies much,’ she said
to her-self; ‘I should think it would be QUITE as much use in the trial
one way up as the other.’

As soon as the jury had a little re-covered from the shock of be-ing
up-set, and their slates and pen-cils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very di-li-gently to write out a his-tory of the
ac-ci-dent, all ex-cept the Liz-ard, who seemed too much over-come to do
any-thing but sit with its mouth open, gaz-ing up into the roof of the
court.

‘What do you know about this busi-ness?’ the King said to Alice.

‘Noth-ing,’ said Alice.

‘Noth-ing WHATEVER?’ per-sisted the King.

‘Noth-ing whatever,’ said Alice.

‘That’s very im-port-ant,’ the King said, turn-ing to the jury. They were
just be-gin-ning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rab-bit
in-ter-rup-ted: ‘UNim-port-ant, your Majesty means, of course,’ he said in a
very re-spect-ful tone, but frown-ing and mak-ing faces at him as he spoke.

‘UNim-port-ant, of course, I meant,’ the King hast-ily said, and went on
to him-self in an un-der-tone,

‘im-port-ant--un-im-port-ant--un-im-port-ant--im-port-ant--’ as if he were try-ing
which word soun-ded best.

Some of the jury wrote it down ‘im-port-ant,’ and some ‘un-im-port-ant.’
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;
‘but it doesn’t mat-ter a bit,’ she thought to her-self.

At this mo-ment the King, who had been for some time busily writ-ing in
his note-book, cackled out ‘Si-lence!’ and read out from his book, ‘Rule
Forty-two. ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.’

Every-body looked at Alice.

‘I’M not a mile high,’ said Alice.

‘You are,’ said the King.

‘Nearly two miles high,’ ad-ded the Queen.

‘Well, I shan’t go, at any rate,’ said Alice: ‘be-sides, that’s not a
reg-u-lar rule: you in-ven-ted it just now.’

‘It’s the old-est rule in the book,’ said the King.

‘Then it ought to be Num-ber One,’ said Alice.

The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hast-ily. ‘Con-sider your
ver-dict,’ he said to the jury, in a low, trem-bling voice.

‘There’s more evid-ence to come yet, please your Majesty,’ said the White
Rab-bit, jump-ing up in a great hurry; ‘this pa-per has just been picked
up.’

‘What’s in it?’ said the Queen.

‘I haven’t opened it yet,’ said the White Rab-bit, ‘but it seems to be a
let-ter, writ-ten by the pris-oner to--to some-body.’

‘It must have been that,’ said the King, ‘un-less it was writ-ten to
nobody, which isn’t usual, you know.’

‘Who is it dir-ec-ted to?’ said one of the jury-men.

‘It isn’t dir-ec-ted at all,’ said the White Rab-bit; ‘in fact, there’s
noth-ing writ-ten on the OUTSIDE.’ He un-fol-ded the pa-per as he spoke, and
ad-ded ‘It isn’t a let-ter, after all: it’s a set of verses.’

‘Are they in the pris-oner’s hand-writ-ing?’ asked an-other of the jury-men.

‘No, they’re not,’ said the White Rab-bit, ‘and that’s the queerest thing
about it.’ (The jury all looked puzzled.)

‘He must have im-it-ated some-body else’s hand,’ said the King. (The jury
all brightened up again.)

‘Please your Majesty,’ said the Knave, ‘I didn’t write it, and they
can’t prove I did: there’s no name signed at the end.’

‘If you didn’t sign it,’ said the King, ‘that only makes the mat-ter
worse. You MUST have meant some mis-chief, or else you’d have signed your
name like an hon-est man.’

There was a gen-eral clap-ping of hands at this: it was the first really
clever thing the King had said that day.

‘That PROVES his guilt,’ said the Queen.

‘It proves noth-ing of the sort!’ said Alice. ‘Why, you don’t even know
what they’re about!’

‘Read them,’ said the King.

The White Rab-bit put on his spec-tacles. ‘Where shall I be-gin, please
your Majesty?’ he asked.

‘Be-gin at the be-gin-ning,’ the King said gravely, ‘and go on till you
come to the end: then stop.’

These were the verses the White Rab-bit read:--

   ‘They told me you had been to her,
    And men-tioned me to him:
   She gave me a good char-ac-ter,
    But said I could not swim.

   He sent them word I had not gone
    (We know it to be true):
   If she should push the mat-ter on,
    What would be-come of you?

   I gave her one, they gave him two,
    You gave us three or more;
   They all re-turned from him to you,
    Though they were mine be-fore.

   If I or she should chance to be
    In-volved in this af-fair,
   He trusts to you to set them free,
    Ex-actly as we were.

   My no-tion was that you had been
    (Be-fore she had this fit)
   An obstacle that came between
    Him, and ourselves, and it.

   Don’t let him know she liked them best,
    For this must ever be
   A secret, kept from all the rest,
    Between your-self and me.’

‘That’s the most im-port-ant piece of evid-ence we’ve heard yet,’ said the
King, rub-bing his hands; ‘so now let the jury--’

‘If any one of them can ex-plain it,’ said Alice, (she had grown so large
in the last few minutes that she wasn’t a bit afraid of in-ter-rupt-ing
him,) ‘I’ll give him six-pence. _I_ don’t be-lieve there’s an atom of
mean-ing in it.’

The jury all wrote down on their slates, ‘SHE doesn’t be-lieve there’s an
atom of mean-ing in it,’ but none of them at-temp-ted to ex-plain the pa-per.

‘If there’s no mean-ing in it,’ said the King, ‘that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn’t try to find any. And yet I don’t know,’
he went on, spread-ing out the verses on his knee, and look-ing at them
with one eye; ‘I seem to see some mean-ing in them, after all. “--SAID
I COULD NOT SWIM--” you can’t swim, can you?’ he ad-ded, turn-ing to the
Knave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. ‘Do I look like it?’ he said. (Which he
cer-tainly did NOT, be-ing made en-tirely of card-board.)

‘All right, so far,’ said the King, and he went on mut-ter-ing over
the verses to him-self: ‘“WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE--” that’s the jury, of
course--“I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO--” why, that must be what he
did with the tarts, you know--’

‘But, it goes on “THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,”’ said Alice.

‘Why, there they are!’ said the King tri-umphantly, point-ing to the tarts
on the table. ‘Noth-ing can be clearer than THAT. Then again--“BEFORE SHE
HAD THIS FIT--” you never had fits, my dear, I think?’ he said to the
Queen.

‘Never!’ said the Queen furi-ously, throw-ing an ink-stand at the Liz-ard
as she spoke. (The un-for-tu-nate little Bill had left off writ-ing on his
slate with one fin-ger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hast-ily
began again, us-ing the ink, that was trick-ling down his face, as long as
it las-ted.)

‘Then the words don’t FIT you,’ said the King, look-ing round the court
with a smile. There was a dead si-lence.

‘It’s a pun!’ the King ad-ded in an of-fen-ded tone, and every-body laughed,
‘Let the jury con-sider their ver-dict,’ the King said, for about the
twen-ti-eth time that day.

‘No, no!’ said the Queen. ‘Sen-tence first--ver-dict af-ter-wards.’

‘Stuff and non-sense!’ said Alice loudly. ‘The idea of hav-ing the
sen-tence first!’

‘Hold your tongue!’ said the Queen, turn-ing purple.

‘I won’t!’ said Alice.

‘Off with her head!’ the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody
moved.

‘Who cares for you?’ said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this
time.) ‘You’re noth-ing but a pack of cards!’

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came fly-ing down upon
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of an-ger, and
tried to beat them off, and found her-self ly-ing on the bank, with her
head in the lap of her sis-ter, who was gently brush-ing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

‘Wake up, Alice dear!’ said her sis-ter; ‘Why, what a long sleep you’ve
had!’

‘Oh, I’ve had such a curi-ous dream!’ said Alice, and she told her
sis-ter, as well as she could re-mem-ber them, all these strange Ad-ven-tures
of hers that you have just been read-ing about; and when she had
fin-ished, her sis-ter kissed her, and said, ‘It WAS a curi-ous dream,
dear, cer-tainly: but now run in to your tea; it’s get-ting late.’ So
Alice got up and ran off, think-ing while she ran, as well she might,
what a won-der-ful dream it had been.

But her sis-ter sat still just as she left her, lean-ing her head on her
hand, watch-ing the set-ting sun, and think-ing of little Alice and all her
won-der-ful Ad-ven-tures, till she too began dream-ing after a fash-ion, and
this was her dream:--

First, she dreamed of little Alice her-self, and once again the tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were look-ing
up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that
queer little toss of her head to keep back the wan-der-ing hair that
WOULD al-ways get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or seemed to
listen, the whole place around her be-came alive with the strange creatures
of her little sis-ter’s dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rab-bit hur-ried by--the
frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neigh-bour-ing pool--she
could hear the rattle of the tea-cups as the March Hare and his friends
shared their never-end-ing meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen
or-der-ing off her un-for-tu-nate guests to ex-e-cu-tion--once more the pig-baby
was sneez-ing on the Duchess’s knee, while plates and dishes crashed
around it--once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeak-ing of the
Liz-ard’s slate-pen-cil, and the chok-ing of the sup-pressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the dis-tant sobs of the miser-able Mock
Turtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half be-lieved her-self in
Won-der-land, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all
would change to dull real-ity--the grass would be only rust-ling in the
wind, and the pool rip-pling to the wav-ing of the reeds--the rat-tling
tea-cups would change to tink-ling sheep-bells, and the Queen’s shrill
cries to the voice of the shep-herd boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the
shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she
knew) to the con-fused clam-our of the busy farm-yard--while the low-ing
of the cattle in the dis-tance would take the place of the Mock Turtle’s
heavy sobs.

Lastly, she pic-tured to her-self how this same little sis-ter of hers
would, in the after-time, be her-self a grown wo-man; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and lov-ing heart of her
child-hood: and how she would gather about her other little chil-dren, and
make THEIR eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, per-haps even
with the dream of Won-der-land of long ago: and how she would feel with
all their simple sor-rows, and find a pleas-ure in all their simple joys,
re-mem-ber-ing her own child-life, and the happy sum-mer days.

              THE END
